 
1
A CITY IS NOT A TREE 
 
 
CHRISTOPHER ALEXANDER 
The tree of my title is not a green tree with leaves. It is the name of an abstract 
structure. I shall contrast it with another, more complex abstract structure 
called a semilattice. In order to relate these abstract structures to the nature of 
the city, I must first make a simple distinction.  
I want to call those cities which have arisen more or less spontaneously over 
many, many years natural cities. And I shall call those cities and parts of cities 
which have been deliberately created by designers and planners artificial cities. 
Siena, Liverpool, Kyoto, Manhattan are examples of natural cities. Levittown, 
Chandigarh and the British New Towns are examples of artificial cities.  
It is more and more widely recognized today that there is some essential 
ingredient missing from artificial cities. When compared with ancient cities that 
have acquired the patina of life, our modern attempts to create cities artificially 
are, from a human point of view, entirely unsuccessful.  
Both the tree and the semilattice are ways of thinking about how a large 
collection of many small systems goes to make up a large and complex system. 
More generally, they are both names for structures of sets.  
In order to define such structures, let me first define the concept of a set. A set 
is a collection of elements which for some reason we think of as belonging 
together. Since, as designers, we are concerned with the physical living city 
and its physical backbone, we must naturally restrict ourselves to considering 
sets which are collections of material elements such as people, blades of 
grass, cars, molecules, houses, gardens, water pipes, the water molecules in 
them etc.  
 
2
When the elements of a set belong together because they co-operate or work 
together somehow, we call the set of elements a system.  
For example, in Berkeley at the corner of Hearst and Euclid, there is a 
drugstore, and outside the drugstore a traffic light. In the entrance to the 
drugstore there is a newsrack where the day's papers are displayed. When the 
light is red, people who are waiting to cross the street stand idly by the light; 
and since they have nothing to do, they look at the papers displayed on the 
newsrack which they can see from where they stand. Some of them just read 
the headlines, others actually buy a paper while they wait.  
This effect makes the newsrack and the traffic light interactive; the newsrack, 
the newspapers on it, the money going from people's pockets to the dime slot, 
the people who stop at the light and read papers, the traffic light, the electric 
impulses which make the lights change, and the sidewalk which the people 
stand on form a system - they all work together.  
From the designer's point of view, the physically unchanging part of this 
system is of special interest. The newsrack, the traffic light and the sidewalk 
between them, related as they are, form the fixed part of the system. It is the 
unchanging receptacle in which the changing parts of the system - people, 
newspapers, money and electrical impulses - can work together. I define this 
fixed part as a unit of the city. It derives its coherence as a unit both from the 
forces which hold its own elements together and from the dynamic coherence 
of the larger living system which includes it as a fixed invariant part.  
Of the many, many fixed concrete subsets of the city which are the receptacles 
for its systems and can therefore be thought of as significant physical units, we 
usually single out a few for special consideration. In fact, I claim that whatever 
picture of the city someone has is defined precisely by the subsets he sees as 
units.  
Now, a collection of subsets which goes to make up such a picture is not 
merely an amorphous collection. Automatically, merely because relationships 
are established among the subsets once the subsets are chosen, the 
collection has a definite structure.  
To understand this structure, let us think abstractly for a moment, using 
numbers as symbols. Instead of talking about the real sets of millions of real 
particles which occur in the city, let us consider a simpler structure made of 
 
3
just half a dozen elements. Label these elements 1,2,3,4,5,6. Not including the 
full set [1,2,3,4,5,6], the empty set [-], and the one-element sets 
[1],[2],[3],C4],[5], [6], there are 56 different subsets we can pick from six 
elements.  
Suppose we now pick out certain of these 56 sets (just as we pick out certain 
sets and call them units when we form our picture of the city). Let us say, for 
example, that we pick the following subsets: [123], [34], [45], [234], [345], 
[12345], [3456].  
What are the possible relationships among these sets? Some sets will be 
entirely part of larger sets, as [34] is part of [345] and [3456]. Some of the sets 
will overlap, like [123] and [234]. Some of the sets will be disjoint - that is, 
contain no elements in common like [123] and [45].  
 
We can see these relationships 
displayed in two ways. In diagram A 
each set chosen to be a unit has a line 
drawn round it. In diagram B the chosen 
sets are arranged in order of ascending 
magnitude, so that whenever one set 
contains another (as [345] contains [34], 
there is a vertical path leading from one 
to the other. For the sake of clarity and 
visual economy, it is usual to draw lines 
only between sets which have no further 
sets and lines between them; thus the 
line between [34] and [345] and the line 
between [345] and [3456] make it 
unnecessary to draw a line between [34] 
and [3456].  
 
Diagrams A & B redrawn by Nikos Salingaros  
As we see from these two representations, the choice of subsets alone 
endows the collection of subsets as a whole with an overall structure. This is 
the structure which we are concerned with here. When the structure meets 
 
4
certain conditions it is called a semilattice. When it meets other more restrictive 
conditions, it is called a tree.  
The semilattice axiom goes like this: A collection of sets forms a semilattice if 
and only if, when two overlapping sets belong to the collection, the set of 
elements common to both also belongs to the collection.  
The structure illustrated in diagrams A and B is a semilattice. It satisfies the 
axiom since, for instance, [234] and [345] both belong to the collection and 
their common part, [34], also belongs to it. (As far as the city is concerned, this 
axiom states merely that wherever two units overlap, the area of overlap is 
itself a recognizable entity and hence a unit also. In the case of the drugstore 
example, one unit consists of newsrack, sidewalk and traffic light. Another unit 
consists of the drugstore itself, with its entry and the newsrack. The two units 
overlap in the newsrack. Clearly this area of overlap is itself a recognizable unit 
and so satisfies the axiom above which defines the characteristics of a 
semilattice.) The tree axiom states: A collection of sets forms a tree if and only 
if, for any two sets that belong to the collection either one is wholly contained in 
the other, or else they are wholly disjoint.  
 
The structure illustrated in diagrams C and 
D is a tree. Since this axiom excludes the 
possibility of overlapping sets, there is no 
way in which the semilattice axiom can be 
violated, so that every tree is a trivially 
simple semilattice.  
 
Diagrams A & B redrawn by Nikos Salingaros 
 
5
However, in this chapter we are not so much concerned with the fact that a 
tree happens to be a semilattice, but with the difference between trees and 
those more general semilattices which are not trees because they do contain 
overlapping units. We are concerned with the difference between structures in 
which no overlap occurs, and those structures in which overlap does occur.  
It is not merely the overlap which makes the distinction between the two 
important. Still more important is the fact that the semilattice is potentially a 
much more complex and subtle structure than a tree. We may see just how 
much more complex a semilattice can be than a tree in the following fact: a 
tree based on 20 elements can contain at most 19 further subsets of the 20, 
while a semilattice based on the same 20 elements can contain more than 
1,000,000 different subsets.  
This enormously greater variety is an index of the great structural complexity a 
semilattice can have when compared with the structural simplicity of a tree. It is 
this lack of structural complexity, characteristic of trees, which is crippling our 
conceptions of the city.  
To demonstrate, let us look at some modern conceptions of the city, each of 
which I shall show to be essentially a tree.  
Figure 1. Columbia, Maryland, Community 
Research and Development, Inc.: 
Neighbourhoods,in clusters of five, form 
'villages'. Transportation joins the villages into 
a new town. The organization is a tree.  
 
6
Figure 2. Greenbelt, Maryland, Clarence 
Stein: This 'garden city' has been broken 
down into superblocks. Each superblock 
contains schools, parks and a number of 
subsidiary groups of houses built around 
parking lots. The organization is a tree.  
Figure 3. Greater London plan (1943), 
Abercrombie and Forshaw: The drawing 
depicts the structure conceived by 
Abercrombie for London. It is made of a large 
number of communities, each sharply 
separated from all adjacent communities. 
Abercrombie writes, 'The proposal is to 
emphasize the identity of the existing 
communities, to increase their degree of 
segregation, and where necessary to 
recognize them as separate and definite 
entities.' And again, 'The communities 
themselves consist of a series of sub-units, 
generally with their own shops and schools, 
corresponding to the neighbourhood units.' 
The city is conceived as a tree with two 
principal levels. The communities are the 
larger units of the structure; the smaller 
sub-units are neighbourhoods. There are no 
overlapping units. The structure is a tree. 
 
7
Figure 4. Mesa City, Paolo Soleri: The 
organic shapes of Mesa City lead us, at a 
careless glance, to believe that it is a richer 
structure than our more obviously rigid 
examples. But when we look at it in detail we 
find precisely the same principle of 
organization. Take, particularly, the university 
centre. Here we find the centre of the city 
divided into a university and a residential 
quarter, which is itself divided into a number 
of villages (actually apartment towers) for 
4000 inhabitants, each again subdivided 
further and surrounded by groups of still 
smaller dwelling units. 
Figure 5. Tokyo plan, Kenzo Tange: This is a 
beautiful example. The plan consists of a 
series of loops stretched across Tokyo Bay. 
There are four major loops, each of which 
contains three medium loops. In the second 
major loop, one medium loop is the railway 
station and another is the port. Otherwise, 
each medium loop contains three minor loops 
which are residential neighbourhoods, except 
in the third major loop where one contains 
government offices and another industrial 
offices. 
Figure 6. Chandigarh (1951), Le Corbusier: 
The whole city is served by a commercial 
centre in the middle, linked to the 
administrative centre at the head. Two 
subsidiary elongated commercial cores are 
strung out along the maior arterial roads, 
running north-south. Subsidiary to these are 
further administrative, community and 
commercial centres, one for each of the city's 
 
8
20 sectors. 
Figure 7. Brasilia, Lucio Costa: The entire 
form pivots about the central axis, and each of 
the two halves is served by a single main 
artery. This main artery is in turn fed by 
subsidiary arteries parallel to it. Finally, these 
are fed by the roads which surround the 
superbiocks themselves. The structure is a 
tree. 
Figure 8. Communitas, Percival and Paul 
Goodman: Communitas is explicitly organized 
as a tree: it is first divided into four concentric 
major zones, the innermost being a 
commercial centre, the next a university, the 
third residential and medical, and the fourth 
open country. Each of these is further 
subdivided: the commercial centre is 
represented as a great cylindrical skyscraper, 
containing five layers: airport, administration, 
light manufacture, shopping and amusement; 
and, at the bottom, railroads, buses and 
mechanical services. The university is divided 
into eight sectors comprising natural history, 
zoos and aquariums, planetarium, science 
laboratories, plastic arts, music and drama. 
The third concentric ring is divided into 
neighbourhoods of 4000 people each, not 
consisting of individual houses, but of 
apartment blocks, each of these containing 
individual dwelling units. Finally, the open 
country is divided into three segments: forest 
preserves, agriculture and vacation lands. 
The overall organization is a tree. 
 
9
Figure 9.The most beautiful example of all I 
have kept until last, because it symbolizes the 
problem perfectly. It appears in Hilberseimer's 
book The Nature of Cities. He describes the 
fact that certain Roman towns had their origin 
as military camps, and then shows a picture 
of a modern military encampment as a kind of 
archetypal form for the city. It is not possible 
to have a structure which is a clearer tree. 
The symbol is apt, for, of course, the 
organization of the army was designed 
precisely in order to create discipline and 
rigidity. The photograph on the [left] is 
Hilberseimer's own scheme for the 
commercial area of a city based on the army 
camp archetype. 
Each of these structures, then, is a tree. Each unit in each tree that I have 
described, moreover, is the fixed, unchanging residue of some system in the 
living city (just as a house is the residue of the interactions between the 
members of a family, their emotions and their belongings; and a freeway is the 
residue of movement and commercial exchange).  
However, in every city there are thousands, even millions, of times as many 
more systems at work whose physical residue does not appear as a unit in 
these tree structures. In the worst cases, the units which do appear fail to 
correspond to any living reality; and the real systems, whose existence actually 
makes the city live, have been provided with no physical receptacle.  
Neither the Columbia plan nor the Stein plan for example, corresponds to 
social realities. The physical layout of the plans, and the way they function 
suggests a hierarchy of stronger and stronger closed social groups, ranging 
from the whole city down to the family, each formed by associational ties of 
different strength.  
 
10
In a traditional society, if we ask a man to 
name his best friends and then ask each of 
these in turn to name their best friends, they 
will all name each other so that they form a 
closed group. A village is made up of a 
number of separate closed groups of this 
kind.  
But today's social structure is utterly different. 
If we ask a man to name his friends and then 
ask them in turn to name their friends, they 
will all name different people, very likely 
unknown to the first person; these people 
would again name others, and so on 
outwards. There are virtually no closed 
groups of people in modern society. The 
reality of today's social structure is thick with 
overlap - the systems of friends and 
acquaintances form a semilattice, not a tree 
(Figure 10). 
In the natural city, even the house on a long street (not in some little cluster) is 
a more accurate acknowledgement of the fact that your friends live not next 
door, but far away, and can only be reached by bus or car. In this respect 
Manhattan has more overlap in it than Greenbelt. And though one can argue 
that in Greenbelt, too, friends are only minutes away by car, one must then ask: 
since certain groups have been emphasized by the physical units of the 
physical structure, why are just these the most irrelevant ones?  
The units of which an artificial city is made up are always organized to form a 
tree. So that we get a really clear understanding of what this means, and shall 
better see its implications, let us define a tree once again. Whenever we have 
a tree structure, it means that within this structure no piece of any unit is ever 
connected to other units, except through the medium of that unit as a whole.  
The enormity of this restriction is difficult to grasp. It is a little as though the 
members of a family were not free to make friends outside the family, except 
when the family as a whole made a friendship.  
 
11
In simplicity of structure the tree is comparable to the compulsive desire for 
neatness and order that insists the candlesticks on a mantelpiece be perfectly 
straight and perfectly symmetrical about the centre. The semilattice, by 
comparison, is the structure of a complex fabric; it is the structure of living 
things, of great paintings and symphonies.  
It must be emphasized, lest the orderly mind shrink in horror from anything that 
is not clearly articulated and categorized in tree form, that the idea of overlap, 
ambiguity, multiplicity of aspect and the semilattice are not less orderly than 
the rigid tree, but more so. They represent a thicker, tougher, more subtle and 
more complex view of structure.  
Let us now look at the ways in which the natural, when unconstrained by 
artificial conceptions, shows itself to be a semilattice.  
A major aspect of the city's social structure which a tree can never mirror 
properly is illustrated by Ruth Glass's redevelopment plan for Middlesbrough, 
England, a city of 200,000 which she recommends be broken down into 29 
separate neighbourhoods. After picking her 29 neighbourhoods by determining 
where the sharpest discontinuities of building type, income and job type occur, 
she asks herself the question: 'If we examine some of the social systems 
which actually exist for the people in such a neighbourhood, do the physical 
units defined by these various social systems all define the same spatial 
neighbourhood?' Her own answer to this question is no. Each of the social 
systems she examines is a nodal system. It is made of some sort of central 
node, plus the people who use this centre. Specifically she takes elementary 
schools, secondary schools, youth clubs, adult clubs, post offices, 
greengrocers and grocers selling sugar. Each of these centres draws its users 
from a certain spatial area or spatial unit. This spatial unit is the physical 
residue of the social system as a whole, and is therefore a unit in the terms of 
this discussion. The units corresponding to different kinds of centres for the 
single neighbourhood of Waterloo Road are shown in Figure 11.  
 
12
The hard outline is the boundary of the 
so-called neighbourhood itself. The white 
circle stands for the youth club, and the small 
solid rings stand for areas where its 
members live. The ringed spot is the adult 
club, and the homes of its members form the 
unit marked by dashed boundaries. The 
white square is the post office, and the dotted 
line marks the unit which contains its users. 
The secondary school is marked by the spot 
with a white triangle in it. Together with its 
pupils, it forms the system marked by the 
dot-dashed line. 
As you can see at once, the different units do 
not coincide. Yet neither are they disjoint. 
They overlap. 
We cannot get an adequate picture of what Middlesbrough is, or of what it 
ought to be, in terms of 29 large and conveniently integral Chunks called 
neighbourhoods. When we describe the city in terms of neighbourhoods, we 
implicitly assume that the smaller elements within any one of these 
neighbourhoods belong together so tightly that they only interact with elements 
in other neighbourhoods through the medium of the neighbourhoods to which 
they themselves belong. Ruth Glass herself shows clearly that this is not the 
case.  
Next to Figure 11 are two representations of 
the Waterloo neighbourhood. For the sake of 
argument I have broken it into a number of 
small areas. Figure 12 shows how these 
pieces stick together in fact, and Figure 13 
shows how the redevelopment plan pretends 
they stick together.  
There is nothing in the nature of the various centres which says that their 
catchment areas should be the same. Their natures are different. Therefore 
 
13
the units they define are different. The natural city of Middlesbrough was 
faithful to the semilattice structure of the units. Only in the artificial-tree 
conception of the city are their natural, proper and necessary overlaps 
destroyed.  
Consider the separation of pedestrians from 
moving vehicles, a tree concept proposed by 
Le Corbusier, Louis Kahn and many others. 
At a very crude level of thought this is 
obviously a good idea. Yet the urban taxi can 
function only because pedestrians and 
vehicles are not strictly separated. The 
cruising taxi needs a fast stream of traffic so 
that it can cover a large area to be sure of 
finding a passenger. The pedestrian needs to 
be able to hail the taxi from any point in the 
pedestrian world, and to be able to get out to 
any part of the pedestrian world to which he 
wants to go. The system which contains the 
taxicabs needs to overlap both the fast 
vehicular traffic system and the system of 
pedestrian circulation. In Manhattan 
pedestrians and vehicles do share certain 
parts of the city, and the necessary overlap is 
guaranteed (Figure 14).  
Another·favourite concept of the CIAM theorists and others is the separation of 
recreation from everything else. This has crystallized in our real cities in the 
form of playgrounds. The playground, asphalted and fenced in, is nothing but a 
pictorial acknowledgment of the fact that 'play' exists as an isolated concept in 
our minds. It has nothing to do with the life of play itself. Few self-respecting 
children will even play in a playground.  
Play itself, the play that children practise, goes on somewhere different every 
day. One day it may be indoors, another day in a friendly gas station, another 
day down by the river, another day in a derelict building, another day on a 
construction site which has been abandoned for the weekend. Each of these 
play activities, and the objects it requires, forms a system. It is not true that 
 
14
these systems exist in isolation, cut off from the other systems of the city. The 
different systems overlap one another, and they overlap many other systems 
besides. The units, the physical places recognized as play places, must do the 
same.  
In a natural city this is what happens. Play takes place in a thousand places it 
fills the interstices of adult life. As they play, children become full of their 
surroundings. How can children become filled with their surroundings in a 
fenced enclosure! They cannot.  
A similar kind of mistake occurs in trees like that of Goodman's Communitas or 
Soleri's Mesa City, which separate the university from the rest of the city. 
Again, this has actually been realized in the common American form of the 
isolated campus.  
What is the reason for drawing a line in the city so that everything within the 
boundary is university, and everything outside is nonuniversity? It is 
conceptually clear. But does it correspond to the realities of university life? 
Certainly it is not the structure which occurs in nonartificial university cities.  
There are always many systems of activity 
where university life and city life overlap: 
pub-crawling, coffee-drinking, the movies, 
walking from place to place. In some cases 
whole departments may be actively involved 
in the life of the city's inhabitants (the 
hospital-cum-medical school is an example). 
In Cambridge, a natural city where university 
and city have grown together gradually, the 
physical units overlap because they are the 
physical residues of city systems and 
university systems which overlap (Figure 15). 
Let us look next at the hierarchy of urban cores realized in Brasilia, Chandigarh, 
the MARS plan for London and, most recently, in the Manhattan Lincoln 
Center, where various performing arts serving the population of greater New 
York have been gathered together to form just one core.  
 
15
Does a concert hall ask to be next to an opera house? Can the two feed on 
one another? Will anybody ever visit them both, gluttonously, in a single 
evening, or even buy tickets from one after going to a performance in the other? 
In Vienna, London, Paris, each of the performing arts has found its own place, 
because all are not mixed randomly. Each has created its own familiar section 
of the city. In Manhattan itself, Carnegie Hall and the Metropolitan Opera 
House were not built side by side. Each found its own place, and now creates 
its own atmosphere. The influence of each overlaps the parts of the city which 
have been made unique to it.  
The only reason that these functions have all been brought together in Lincoln 
Center is that the concept of performing art links them to one another.  
But this tree, and the idea of a single hierarchy of urban cores which is its 
parent, do not illuminate the relations between art and city life. They are merely 
born of the mania every simple-minded person has for putting things with the 
same name into the same basket.  
The total separation of work from housing, started by Tony Garnier in his 
industrial city, then incorporated in the 1929 Athens Charter, is now found in 
every artificial city and accepted everywhere where zoning is enforced. Is this 
a sound principle? It is easy to see how bad conditions at the beginning of the 
century prompted planners to try to get the dirty factories out of residential 
areas. But the separation misses a variety of systems which require, for their 
sustenance, little parts of both.  
Finally, let us examine the subdivision of the city into isolated communities. As 
we have seen in the Abercrombie plan for London, this is itself a tree structure. 
The individual community in a greater city has no reality as a functioning unit. 
In London, as in any great city, almost no one manages to find work which 
suits him near his home. People in one community work in a factory which is 
very likely to be in another community.  
There are therefore many hundreds of thousands of worker-workplace 
systems, each consisting of individuals plus the factory they work in, which cut 
across the boundaries defined by Abercrombie's tree. The existence of these 
units, and their overlapping nature, indicates that the living systems of London 
form a semilattice. Only in the planner's mind has it become a tree.  
 
16
The fact that we have so far failed to give this any physical expression has a 
vital consequence. As things are, whenever the worker and his workplace 
belong to separately administered municipalities, the community which 
contains the workplace collects huge taxes and has relatively little on which to 
spend the tax revenue. The community where the worker lives, if it is mainly 
residential, collects only little in the way of taxes and yet has great additional 
burdens on its purse in the form of schools, hospitals, etc. Clearly, to resolve 
this inequity, the worker-workplace systems must be anchored in physically 
recognizable units of the city which can then be taxed.  
It might be argued that, even though the individual communities of a great city 
have no functional significance in the lives of their inhabitants, they are still the 
most convenient administrative units, and should therefore be left in their 
present tree organization. However, in the political complexity of a modern city, 
even this is suspect.  
Edward Banfield, in his book Political Influence, gives a detailed account of the 
patterns of influence and control that have actually led to decisions in Chicago. 
He shows that, although the lines of administrative and executive control have 
a formal structure which is a tree, these formal chains of influence and 
authority are entirely overshadowed by the ad hoc lines of control which arise 
naturally as each new city problem presents itself. These ad hoc lines depend 
on who is interested in the matter, who has what at stake, who has what 
favours to trade with whom.  
This second structure, which is informal, working within the framework of the 
first, is what really controls public action. It varies from week to week, even 
from hour to hour, as one problem replaces another. Nobody's sphere of 
influence is entirely under the control of any one superior; each person is 
under different influences as the problems change. Although the organization 
chart in the Mayor's office is a tree, the actual control and exercise of authority 
is semilattice-like.  
Now, why is it that so many designers have conceived cities as trees when the 
natural structure is in every case a semilattice? Have they done so deliberately, 
in the belief that a tree structure will serve the people of the city better? Or 
have they done it because they cannot help it, because they are trapped by a 
mental habit, perhaps even trapped by the way the mind works - because they 
cannot encompass the complexity of a semilattice in any convenient mental 
 
17
form, because the mind has an overwhelming predisposition to see trees 
wherever it looks and cannot escape the tree conception?  
I shall try to convince you that it is for this second reason that trees are being 
proposed and built as cities - that is, because designers, limited as they must 
be by the capacity of the mind to form intuitively accessible structures, cannot 
achieve the complexity of the semilattice in a single mental act.  
Let me begin with an example. Suppose I ask you to remember the following 
four objects: an orange, a watermelon, a football and a tennis ball. How will 
you keep them in your mind, in your mind's eye? However you do it, you will do 
it by grouping them. Some of you will take the two fruits together, the orange 
and the watermelon, and the two sports balls together, the football and the 
tennis ball. Those of you who tend to think in terms of physical shape may 
group them differently, taking the two small spheres together - the orange and 
the tennis ball and the two large and more egg-shaped objects - the 
watermelon and the football. Some of you will be aware of both.  
Let us make a diagram of these 
groupings (Figure 16). Either grouping 
taken by itself is a tree structure. The 
two together are a semilattice. Now let 
us try and visualize these groupings in 
the mind's eye. I think you will find that 
you cannot visualize all four sets 
simultaneously - because they 
overlap. You can visualize one pair of 
sets and then the other, and you can 
alternate between the two pairs 
extremely fast, so that you may 
deceive yourself into thinking you can 
visualize them all together. But in truth, 
you cannot conceive all four sets at 
once in a single mental act. You 
cannot bring the semilattice structure 
into a visualizable form for a single 
mental act. In a single mental act you 
can only visualize a tree.  
 
18
This is the problem we face as designers. While we are not, perhaps, 
necessarily occupied with the problem of total visualization in a single mental 
act, the principle is still the same. The tree is accessible mentally and easy to 
deal with. The semilattice is hard to keep before the mind's eye and therefore 
hard to deal with.  
It is known today that grouping and categorization are among the most 
primitive psychological processes. Modern psychology treats thought as a 
process of fitting new situations into existing slots and pigeonholes in the mind. 
Just as you cannot put a physical thing into more than one physical pigeonhole 
at once, so, by analogy, the processes of thought prevent you from putting a 
mental construct into more than one mental category at once. Study of the 
origin of these processes suggests that they stem essentially from the 
organism's need to reduce the complexity of its environment by establishing 
barriers between the different events that it encounters.  
It is for this reason - because the mind's first function is to reduce the ambiguity 
and overlap in a confusing situation and because, to this end, it is endowed 
with a basic intolerance for ambiguity - that structures like the city, which do 
require overlapping sets within them, are nevertheless persistently conceived 
as trees.  
The same rigidity dogs even perception of physical patterns. In experiments by 
Huggins and myself at Harvard, we showed people patterns whose internal 
units overlapped, and found that they almost always invent a way of seeing the 
patterns as a tree - even when the semilattice view of the patterns would have 
helped them perform the task of experimentation which was before them.  
The most startling proof that people 
tend to conceive even physical 
patterns as trees is found in some 
experiments of Sir Frederick Bartlett. 
He showed people a pattern for about 
a quarter of a second and then asked 
them to draw what they had seen. 
Many people, unable to grasp the full 
complexity of the pattern they had 
seen, simplified the patterns by cutting 
 
19
out the overlap. In Figure 17, the 
original is shown on the left, with two 
fairly typical redrawn versions to the 
right of it. In the redrawn versions the 
circles are separated from the rest; the 
overlap between triangles and circles 
disappears.  
These experiments suggest strongly that people have an underlying tendency, 
when faced by a complex organization, to reorganize it mentally in terms of 
non-overlapping units. The complexity of the semilattice is replaced by the 
simpler and more easily grasped tree form.  
You are no doubt wondering by now what a city looks like which is a 
semilattice, but not a tree. I must confess that I cannot yet show you plans or 
sketches. It is not enough merely to make a demonstration of overlap - the 
overlap must be the right overlap. This is doubly important because it is so 
tempting to make plans in which overlap occurs for its own sake. This is 
essentially what the high- density 'life-filled' city plans of recent years do. But 
overlap alone does not give structure. It can also give chaos. A garbage can is 
full of overlap. To have structure, you must have the right overlap, and this is 
for us almost certainly different from the old overlap which we observe in 
historic cities. As the relationships between functions change, so the systems 
which need to overlap in order to receive these relationships must also change. 
The recreation of old kinds of overlap will be inappropriate, and chaotic instead 
of structured.  
 
20
One can perhaps make the physical 
consequences of overlap more 
comprehensible by means of an image. The 
painting illustrated is a work by Simon 
Nicholson (Figure 18). The fascination of this 
painting lies in the fact that, although 
constructed of rather few simple triangular 
elements, these elements unite in many 
different ways to form the large units of the 
painting - in such a way indeed that, if we 
make a complete inventory of the perceived 
units in the painting, we find that each triangle 
enters into four or five completely different 
kinds of unit, none contained in the others, yet 
all overlapping in that triangle.  
Thus, if we number the triangles and pick out 
the sets of triangles which appear as strong 
visual units, we get the semilattice shown in 
Figure 19.  
Three and 5 form a unit because they work 
together as a rectangle; 2 and 4 because they 
form a parallelogram; 5 and 6 because they 
are both dark and pointing the same way; 6 
and 7 because one is the ghost of the other 
shifted sideways; 4 and 7 because they are 
symmetrical with one another; 4 and 6 
because they form another rectangle; 4 and 5 
because they form a sort of Z; 2 and 3 
because they form a rather thinner kind of Z; 
1 and 7 because they are at opposite corners; 
1 and 2 because they are a rectangle; 3 and 4 
because they point the same way as 5 and 6, 
and form a sort of off-centre reflection; 3 and 
6 because they enclose 4 and 5; 1 and S 
because they enclose 2, 3 and 4. I have only 
 
21
listed the units of two triangles. The larger 
units are even more complex. The white is 
more complex still and is not even included in 
the diagram because it is harder to be sure of 
its elementary pieces.  
The painting is significant, not so much because it has overlap in it (many 
paintings have overlap in them), but rather because this painting has nothing 
else in it except overlap. It is only the fact of the overlap, and the resulting 
multiplicity of aspects which the forms present, that makes the painting 
fascinating. It seems almost as though the painter had made an explicit 
attempt, as I have done, to single out overlap as a vital generator of structure.  
All the artificial cities I have described have the structure of a tree rather than 
the semilattice structure of the Nicholson painting. Yet it is the painting, and 
other images like it, which must be our vehicles for thought. And when we wish 
to be precise, the semilattice, being part of a large branch of modern 
mathematics, is a powerfu1 way of exploring the structure of these images. It is 
the semilattice we must look for, not the tree.  
When we think in terms of trees we are trading the humanity and richness of 
the living city for a conceptual simplicity which benefits only designers, 
planners, administrators and developers. Every time a piece of a city is torn out, 
and a tree made to replace the semilattice that was there before, the city takes 
a further step toward dissociation.  
In any organized object, extreme compartmentalization and the dissociation of 
internal elements are the first signs of coming destruction. In a society, 
dissociation is anarchy. In a Person, dissociation is the mark of schizophrenia 
and impending suicide. An ominous example of city-wide dissociation is the 
separation of retired people from the rest of urban life, caused by the growth of 
desert cities for the old like Sun City, Arizona. This separation isonly possible 
under the influence of treelike thought.  
It not only takes from the young the company of those who have lived long, but 
worse, it causes the same rift inside each individual life. As you pass into Sun 
City, and into old age, your ties with your own past will be unacknowledged, 
lost and therefore broken. Your youth will no longer be alive in your old age - 
the two will be dissociated; your own life will be cut in two.  
 
22
For the human mind, the tree is the easiest vehicle for complex thoughts. But 
the city is not, cannot and must not be a tree. The city is a receptacle for life. If 
the receptacle severs the overlap of the strands of life within it, because it is a 
tree, it will be like a bowl full of razor blades on edge, ready to cut up whatever 
is entrusted to it. In such a receptacle life will be cut to pieces. If we make cities 
which are trees, they will cut our life within to pieces.  
 
 
 
 
