Powerful Ideas in the
Classroom
Using Squeak to Enhance
Math and Science Learning
B.J. Allen-Conn & Kim Rose
Afterword by Alan Kay
Many of the designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as
trademarks or registered trademarks. In all instances where the authors are aware of a claim, the
product names appear in italics. Readers, however, should contact the appropriate companies for
more complete information regarding trademarks, registration and product details.
!
BE CAREFUL! The activities and projects in this work were designed with safety and success
in mind. But even the simplest activity or the most common materials could be harmful
when mishandled or misused. Use common sense whenever you’re exploring or experimenting.
Copyright c⃝2003 by B.J. Allen-Conn, Kim Rose and Viewpoints Research Institute, Inc.
All rights reserved.
Cover art by Peter Maguire.
This book was prepared using the LATEX document preparation system and reproduced by Typecraft Wood &
Jones from ﬁnal PDF ﬁles supplied by the authors.
www.typecraft.com
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by Viewpoints Research Institute, Inc., Glendale, California.
www.viewpointsresearch.org
The publication of this book was funded in part by the National Science Foundation under
Grant No. 0228806. Opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect
those of the Foundation.
ISBN 0–9743131–0–6
11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Contents
Preface
v
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum
1
Project 1: Etoy Basics and Painting the Car
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
An Excursion: Saving Your Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Project 2: Playing with the Car . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
Project 3: Controlling the Car with a Steering Wheel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Project 4: Creating a “Smart” Car that Drives Itself Along a Road . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Project 5: Racing Two Cars with Variable Speeds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Project 6: More Fun with Racing Cars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
Project 7: The Great Race
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
An Excursion: Creating Animations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
An Excursion: Measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Project 8: Thinking About “Speed”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
Project 9: From Cars to Balls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Learning About Gravity
55
An Excursion: Gravity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Project 10: Another Look at Falling Balls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
Project 11: “Measuring” the Distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
An Excursion: Creating Movies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Project 12: A Simulated Ball Drop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Afterword
73
Glossary
80
Further Reading
84
Acknowledgements
85
iii
Preface
“What is a powerful idea?” “To what domain of life or learning are you referring?” We were
confronted with these questions by a colleague upon her review of an early draft of this project
book.
To begin a discussion of “powerful ideas” we need to give a deep and humble bow to both
Seymour Papert and Alan Kay. Papert — a renowned educator, mathematician, computer scientist
and creator of the Logo programming language — ﬁrst discussed “powerful ideas” in his book
Mindstorms: Children, Computers and Powerful Ideas. What did Seymour mean by a “powerful
idea?” He deﬁned a “powerful idea” as an “intellectual tool.” Seymour believed that exploring
powerful ideas through the use of computers, as well as oﬀ-computer activities, could give children
a way to confront their intuitions. He believed that computers could help children by allowing
them to externalize their intuitive expectations, and by using computational materials such as
simulations and models they might be able to reconsider or remodel their intuitive knowledge.
Alan Kay — our friend, mentor, leader and driving force behind Squeak — was deeply inﬂu-
enced by Seymour and his ideas. It was Seymour’s ideas that provoked and drew the idea of the
“Dynabook” from Alan, and began a quest to create dynamic tools for children to amplify their
learning that has now spanned over 30 years. Alan has guided us over the last several years and
together we have developed this sequence of projects which sits upon a foundation of Seymour’s
and Alan’s ideas.
In our work with children we have found many cases where their intuitive belief systems are in
direct conﬂict with how something really works — simple things like balls being dropped from the
classroom roof, for example. A child’s intuitive belief is often that a twelve pound shotput will hit
the ground before a foam ball. After experiencing a number of outdoor activities, including watching
various balls drop and even timing them, some children learn this is not the case; others hold strong
and steadfast to their initial beliefs. After further investigation with the aid of computer models
and simulations that the children create themselves, children can see conﬂict with their intuitions
and in the end are rewarded with a great “aha!” — a powerful idea about how their world works
that they can now internalize and deeply understand.
This book was written to share several project ideas that can be used inside or outside the
classroom. It will investigate a number of powerful ideas through projects that children create in
Squeak and via tangential activities we call “excursions.” Excursions either introduce powerful
ideas that can be explored within Squeak or they illustrate key concepts from another perspective,
through non-computer-based, hands-on activities. This book is intended to be a starting point for
understanding how Squeak projects can be created to amplify learning experiences and activities.
The projects in this book explore powerful ideas in mathematics and science such as zero,
positive and negative numbers, x and y coordinates, ratio, feedback, acceleration and gravity. A
variable can be considered a powerful idea in the area of computer programming. Powerful teaching
methodologies include collaborative working, mentoring and articulating student understanding
through a variety of media.
The basis for exploring these ideas is a series of projects starting with making your own car. We
know that every kid wants to “drive a car.” The projects build on each other and on the concepts
they introduce. It is assumed that mathematics instruction will be given prior to, or in conjunction
with, the projects in this book. In addition, we believe that using multiple media (books, the
Internet, video, etc.) helps learners gain understanding and multiple points of view.
Squeak is much more than a word processor — it is an idea processor. It is a language, a
tool and a media authoring environment. If you don’t already have Squeak, you can download it
from the Squeakland web site (http://www.squeakland.org). Squeak is free (really!) and runs
v
Preface
on all major computer platforms. It is the result of an open source eﬀort under the umbrella of
Viewpoints Research Institute, Inc., a non-proﬁt organization (http://www.viewpointsresearch.
org/about.html).
Ideally, before using this book, you should install Squeak on your computer and complete the in-
troductory online tutorials which can be found on the Squeakland site at http://www.squeakland.
org/author/etoys.html.
Squeak is a “deep” system and has diﬀerent entry points for diﬀerent kinds of users.
The
projects in this book are all based in the entry-level “Etoy” component of Squeak. This can be
found and downloaded from the Squeakland.org website. “Etoys” (“Electronic,” “Educational,”
“Exciting,” “Exploratory”) are models, simulations and games constructed by assembling tiles into
scripts which send commands to painted objects intended to give a learner insight into an area
of investigation. Later, as users become more adept at creating such scripts, they can move into
other areas of Squeak’s interface more suitable for their learning level. Expert users of Squeak
(professional computer programmers and media developers) would not use the Etoy component for
their creations, but a more expert level oﬀering a diﬀerent “look and feel” and extended facilities.
We invite you to join the Squeakland community online by subscribing to the mailing list
(http://www.squeakland.org/join). We encourage you to share your project ideas and examples.
The projects contained in this book are based on a few powerful ideas. It is our dream to initiate
the creation of “a thousand pieces of content” and have them shared via the Internet, CD-ROMs
and books. We hope you will add to this body of knowledge and help us to develop both Squeak
and its accompanying curricula.
We hope that you will have fun with these projects and that they will unlock some powerful
ideas for you and your children. Finally, we give our profound thanks to Alan and Seymour for their
ideas and passion, and for the inspiration they have given us to continue exploring how computers
can help children understand powerful ideas.
BJ Allen-Conn,
Los Angeles, California
Kim Rose
July 2003
vi
Project 1
Etoy Basics
and
Painting the Car
The ﬁrst part of this project is presented as narrative and is intended
to teach some fundamentals of the Etoy system. Etoys are created in a
“World.” The unit saved — or “published” — is a “Project.” Painted
sketches, when kept, become “objects.”
The second part of Project 1 asks learners to paint their ﬁrst object,
a car. Through painting the car learners will become familiar with the
Etoy paint tools. Painting the car as seen from above is important to
the understanding of the next several projects.
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 1
About the Book’s Format
At the beginning of each project
this column will introduce:
Project Prerequisites: Squeak
• The speciﬁc tools or parts of the
Etoy system needed to complete
the project.
Related Math Concepts
• Any speciﬁc math or science
concepts the project illustrates.
These concepts will often corre-
spond to the national guidelines
and state frameworks.
Curricular Objectives
• The intended goals and out-
comes for the learner.
Open Squeak’s Etoy component by clicking on the Squeak
shortcut (or alias) that was created on your desktop after you
downloaded it from the Internet.
You will see a blank screen containing two ﬂaps — Navigator
and Supplies.
This screen is a “World” in which to create, explore and learn!
It is within this “World” that you will construct the projects
in this book.
Projects created within the World can be assembled using
a variety of media types such as paintings and drawings,
text, video and photographs (jpegs or bmps). The projects
in this book primarily use paintings (or “sketches”) created
with Squeak’s paint tools. The paint tools can be revealed
by clicking the “brush” button found in the orange Navigator
ﬂap at the bottom of the screen.
The paint tools are used to create sketches that, once kept,
will be transformed into objects. These objects can be scripted
to behave as you desire.
It is projects that are saved, or “published,” in Squeak.
Projects can be published to your local hard disk, to a class-
room or home server, or to the Internet. The commands for
Publishing can be found in the Navigator ﬂap. If you hold
down the Publish It! button on the Navigator you will see
the options for saving projects. When ﬁrst selecting a pub-
lishing option, you will be prompted to give the project a
name. Once published the project will be saved on your local
disk in the “My Squeak” folder, as a ﬁle ending with “.pr”
(indicating that the ﬁle is a Squeak project).
2
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 1
This project is the ﬁrst of several that will feature a
small car. Open Squeak. Bring up the paint tools by
opening the Navigator ﬂap and then click on the brush.
Select a nice color and use the largest paint brush
size to paint an oval. This will be the car’s body.
Select a smaller brush size and paint the tires.
Select the color white and paint a small windshield.
Finally, paint the car’s headlights.
Use a diﬀerent
color than the one used to paint the car.
When you are happy with the painting, click the
Keep button. This will transform the painting into
an object and hide the paint tools.
Place the cursor over the center of the car and wait a
moment for its handles (object “controls”) to appear.
Clicking on any single handle will reveal them fully.
(Alt-click on Windows, or Command-click on Macs, will also
fully reveal any object’s handles.)
The green arrow positioned in the center of the object indi-
cates the direction in which it will move forward. To change
the direction, click on the arrow and drag it in the direction
you want the car to move forward.
To name the car, click on the word “sketch” to highlight it
and type a new name. Click on return (or enter) to accept the
name change. The next step is to save the car as a completed
project.
This column on project pages will
introduce:
Challenges
• Suggested challenges that are in-
tended to extend thinking and
the use of the concepts and ob-
jectives for the project.
Notes
• Related notes that are intended
for a teacher, parent or mentor.
3
Saving Your Work: An Excursion
When you downloaded Squeak onto your computer, a folder was created on the desktop
called MySqueak. This is where saved projects will be stored. To get a project into this
folder, click on the Navigator ﬂap and MouseDown on the Publish It! button. The
dialog box to the right will appear.
Name the project. Once you have named it, click on
the OK button found in the box. When the blue publish
window appears, click on MySqueak to highlight it and
then click on Save.
Your project will be saved in the
MySqueak folder located on your computer’s desktop.
Now that the project is saved you can quit Squeak by clicking the QUIT button on the Navigator.
Loading Projects
When you want to load a project back into Squeak,
open the Navigator ﬂap and click the Find button.
When the blue window appears,
select MySqueak. All of your saved
projects will appear in the window
on the right. Select the project you
want to open by clicking and high-
lighting it, then click the OK but-
ton. This will load the selected project into Squeak.
5
Project 2
Playing with
the Car
In this project learners will explore the manipulation and change of
characteristics or behaviors of their object (the car) by changing its
values and settings in the world and in its viewer.
The painted object presents the learner with an iconic representation.
The object’s viewer reveals the object’s characteristics (its location in
the world, heading, size and color) through a symbolic representation
(by showing numeric values). The “Montessori game” here is for chil-
dren to get their pay-oﬀplaying in the hand-eye arena, while gradually
and subliminally gaining ﬂuency in and an appreciation for the power
of symbols.
For children to realize that their car’s “heading” is a number is a pow-
erful idea. To see the car’s location in the world also as numbers is
powerful. Through exploration and play they will see how each value
can be postive, negative, or zero.
Exploration can be extended by using the “PenDown” feature of an
object. Geometric shapes can be made by an object’s pen by creating
scripts with just the “forward by” and “turn by” tiles.
This initial exploration is critical to set the foundation for further play
and for the creation of subsequent Etoy projects.
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 2
Project Prerequisites: Squeak
• Painting.
• Naming objects.
• Setting the forward direction of
an object.
• Revealing an object’s viewer.
• Saving a project.
Related Math Concepts
• The concept of “x” and “y”
coordinates.
• The concept of positive and neg-
ative numbers.
• Headings as angles and the num-
ber of degrees in a circle.
Curricular Objectives
• Understanding coordinate sys-
tems.
• Providing a foundation for the
understanding of simple geomet-
ric shapes and angles.
In this project you will explore your painted car as an object.
If you have saved your car as a project you should load that
project now. If you didn’t save your car you need to paint a
new car for this project.
MouseOver the car or click on the object while selecting the
Command (Mac) or Alt (Windows) key to reveal its handles.
If you let the mouse linger over any handle for a moment, you
will see it is equipped with balloon help to remind you of its
purpose. The ﬁgure below shows the car with all its handles
and a description of what each handle does.
Pick Up
Menu
Duplicate
Delete
Collapse
Open a Viewer
Make a Tile
Rotate
Repaint
Change Color
Resize
Move
Click on the turquoise “eyeball” handle to reveal the object’s
viewer. The viewer below shows the “basic” category. Addi-
tional categories can be revealed by clicking on the category
name or by clicking on the up or down arrowhead to the left
of any category name.
8
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 2
MouseDown on the blue “rotation” handle of the car and
move it to the left and right. Notice the value changing in the
“car’s heading” tiles in the viewer.
Pick up the car and move it around the world. Notice the
changes in the “car’s x” and “car’s y” value tiles.
Look at the tiles in the basic category pane. You’ll see two
types of tile; some are preceded by a yellow exclamation point
and others are not.
The tiles following an exclamation
point are action tiles.
Clicking on an exclamation point will “ﬁre” the action once.
Holding down an exclamation point will “run” the action re-
peatedly. Try driving the car “around the world” using the
exclamation points.
Numeric values of the tiles can be changed by either clicking
on the up or down arrowhead to the left of the value, or
by selecting the current value, typing in a new number and
hitting return (or enter). Play around with these numbers
and use the exclamation point to continue to explore.
What happens to your object if you make the value of the
“forward by” tile a negative number and then click or hold
down the exclamation point? Explore and experiment!
Tiles which are not followed by an exclamation point are
“value” tiles. Each of these is followed by a green arrow that
assigns or sets that value (a placeholder for any number) as
the current value for the particular attribute or property of
that object at a given time. Change the values of these tiles
and notice what happens to the car.
9
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 2
Scripts are created for objects by assembling tiles. To get a
Scriptor (a “script editor”) drag the “Car emptyScript” tiles
(or “Sketch” if you haven’t named your car) from the scripts
category onto the World. If the scripts category is not visible
in your object’s viewer, reveal it now (as explained earlier).
Scriptor
To create a script, add the “Car forward by 5” tiles to the
scriptor by dragging and dropping them into the empty scrip-
tor. When a script is ready to “accept” tiles, a bright green
rectangle will appear indicating it is okay to add tiles to the
scriptor.
Note: The cursor must be in the scriptor for it to accept
tiles. If the tile graphic is in the scriptor, but the cursor is
not, the tiles will not be accepted into the script.
Script
Any string of action tiles (those preceeded by an exclama-
tion point) will create their own scriptor when dragged and
dropped onto the World. Value tiles must be added to a scrip-
tor or to a string of tiles already in a scriptor. They will not
create their own scriptor when dragged and dropped onto the
world.
Misplaced tiles can be deleted in two ways: by dragging them
into the trash (found in the Supplies ﬂap) or by bringing up
their handles and clicking on the “delete”
handle. Once
tiles have been joined they cannot be disconnected. If you
accidentally make a string of tiles or if you ﬁnd you have tiles
you no longer need, throw them in the trash.
Trash
10
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 2
Scripts can be run (or “activated”) by clicking on the small
clock in the scriptor or by selecting the “normal” button and
changing its setting to “ticking.” To ﬁre (or “step”) a script,
click on the exclamation point.
Clock
What can you add to this script that will make the car go
forward and turn simultaneously?
Pen trails can be set for any object so that its movement in
the world can be visualized. Reveal the pen use category in
the car’s viewer. Change the car’s “penDown” value to “true”
and set the script to “ticking.” Notice the trail left by the car.
The pen size can be changed by increasing its numeric value.
The pen color can also be changed.
Once a project contains multiple scripts it is wise to get a set
of “stop step go” buttons from the Supplies ﬂap and place it
on the World. Clicking go will set all of your project’s scripts
ticking. Clicking stop will pause all scripts.
Challenge
• Explore to discover how many
geometric shapes can be created
by making simple scripts for the
car.
11
Project 3
Controlling the Car
with a
Steering Wheel
In this project learners will create two objects and make them interact.
Prior to this they’ve been manipulating a single object with an accom-
panying script. In this project learners will have to take tiles from one
object (the steering wheel) and add them to another object’s (the car’s)
script. This requires an escalation in the learner’s thinking and may
take a little more time for some.
This project requires creating an Etoy with multiple objects, as well
as creating scripts for those objects. Some scripts will contain proper-
ties from two objects. This project also requires the learner to switch
from one object’s viewer to another and to think about multiple viewers
within a project.
Once this project is completed learners can be challenged to create other
projects using multiple objects with similar scripts. At this point chil-
dren often change their objects from cars to animals, airplanes or other
small ﬁgures as they discover that Squeak’s capabilities are as broad as
their imaginations.
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 3
Project Prerequisites: Squeak
• Painting.
• Naming objects.
• Setting an object’s forward di-
rection.
• Creating scripts.
Related Math Concepts
• The concept of positive and neg-
ative numbers.
• The concept of heading.
Curricular Objectives
• Understanding how the turn of
the car relates to the heading of
the steering wheel.
• Understanding
how
numeric
feedback
from
the
steering
wheel’s heading can help steer
the car.
• Understanding how textual tiles
are representations of values.
• Forming hypotheses based on
ﬁndings to make predictions.
In this project you will learn how to drive the car with a
steering wheel.
Paint a car and a steering wheel.
These objects must be
painted separately. An example of each is shown above. Name
both the car and the wheel.
The goal of the lesson is to use the concept of positive and
negative numbers (as on a number line) to help steer the car.
To do this you will need to connect the car and the steering
wheel together. The car will be the scripted object.
Open the car’s viewer to reveal its tiles and drag the “forward
by” tiles onto the world. Drag the “turn by” tiles and place
them below the “forward by” tiles in the same script.
Bring up the handles for the steering wheel and reveal its tiles
by clicking on the turquoise “eyeball”
handle. Click and
hold the blue “rotation” handle of the steering wheel to turn
the wheel to the right and to the left. Look at the viewer and
notice what is happening to the numeric value of the steering
wheel’s heading as you rotate the wheel.
Blue Rotation Handle
It is important to understand that once the two objects are
connected together and the heading of the steering wheel is
indicating zero, the car will go straight. When the heading
of the steering wheel indicates a negative number, the car
will turn to the left; when the heading of the steering wheel
indicates a positive number, the car will turn to the right.
14
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 3
The next step is to connect the turn of the car to the heading
of the steering wheel. This is done by dragging the “heading”
tiles of the steering wheel and placing them on the value of
the “turn by” tiles of the car.
When the script is created, you are ready to drive the car.
In the steering wheel’s basic category, set the value of the
steering wheel’s “heading” to 0. Start the script and quickly
bring up the handles of the steering wheel. MouseDown on
the blue “rotation” handle and begin steering the car.
Once the two objects are connected and you move the steering
wheel to the right and to the left using its blue “rotation”
handle, the car will respond and turn in the same direction.
If you are having diﬃculty with the car’s directional turns,
visualize yourself as the driver inside the car. You may need
to slow down the car by changing the value of the “forward
by” tiles. A detailed watcher is another tool in Squeak that
can help. To get a detailed watcher, click on the tiny menu
found to the left of the “wheel’s heading” tiles.
Select “detailed watcher”. Place
the watcher on the world. Now,
as you steer the car, use the
watcher’s changing value as a
guide.
Remember, a zero value
for the heading means the car will
go straight. Have fun driving!!!
Blue Rotation Handle
Challenge
• Build an obstacle course.
Suc-
cesfully steer the car through the
course without touching any of
the obstacles. Use pen trails to
mark the car’s path.
• Earn yourself a “Squeak Driver’s
License.”
15
Project 4
Creating a
‘‘Smart’’ Car that
Drives Itself
Along a Road
In this project learners will create a robotic car scripted to drive along a
single-colored road using a painted sensor. This introduces the powerful
idea of feedback and the use of conditional statements.
As in Project 3, learners must think about the car’s heading and direc-
tion and the use of positive and negative numbers to control the car’s
turn. The car will follow a script using a conditional (if/then) statement
“testing” what color the car “sees” using its painted sensor.
Sounds can be added to these projects providing another dimension of
feedback. Sounds might indicate when the vehicle has driven oﬀthe
road or when it has encountered an obstacle.
Exploring feedback is a great way to bridge the mechanical world and the
world of biology. A variety of Etoys can be created based on this model
of feedback for the exploration of ant, ﬁsh or other animal behaviors.
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 4
Project Prerequisites: Squeak
• Using test (Yes/No) tiles.
• Category in Viewer: tests.
Related Math Concepts
• Simple conditional statements.
• Using
positive
and
negative
numbers to control directional-
ity.
Curricular Objectives
• Understanding how the turn of
the road relates to the turn of
the car.
• Using feedback from a sensor to
keep the car following the road.
The aim of this project is to “program” a car to sense the
road and steer itself along the road without using a steering
wheel.
The object of the lesson is to use a single-colored sensor to
create feedback. This example uses a yellow sensor placed at
the front of the car.
Sensor
Feedback will be used to determine the direction in which the
car will need to turn in order to correct its heading and follow
the road. This project requires a transfer of learning from the
previous projects about positive and negative numbers. When
the car veers to the left it will need to correct its turn by using
a positive number, and if it veers to the right it will need to
correct its turn by using a negative number.
18
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 4
This behavior is created by introducing a test tile (or “con-
ditional statement”) into the car’s script. To ﬁnd a test tile,
click on the small beige icon found at the top of the scriptor.
Clicking on this icon will tear oﬀa “Test/Yes/No” tile that
can be added into the script. The next step is to give the
sensor its instructions.
Find the tests category in the car’s viewer. Select the “color
sees” tiles from this category.
Drag these tiles into the script and place them next to the
word “Test”.
19
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 4
We want the color of the car’s sensor to “see” the color of
the road. Click on the ﬁrst color rectangle and drag the eye-
dropper over the sensor and MouseDown. The rectangle will
change to the exact color of the sensor. Click on the second
rectangle following the word “sees” and drag the eyedropper
over the road to select its color.
To complete the test we must determine which direction the
car will need to turn in order to follow the road. The car’s
turn depends on whether it has been placed to the right of
the road or to its left.
In this example the car was placed just to the left of the road.
20
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 4
Start the script by clicking on the clock or by setting the
paused button to “ticking.” Is the car following the road? If
not, play with the values in the “turn by” tiles until it does.
There is more than one way to solve this problem. There are
other ways to do a “color sees” test that can involve diﬀerent
parts of the car being used as sensors. Can you think of other
ways to make a robotic car?
Boy!
This takes some
real thinking!!!
Challenges
• Using what you have learned,
script a car or some other object
so it can successfully navigate a
maze.
• Paint a second car. Place both
cars on a road with two lanes of
diﬀerent colors. Can you make
them travel side-by-side along
the road and stay in their own
lane?
You may have to make your road
a bit larger or make your cars
smaller.
Both of these can be
done by using the object’s yellow
“resize” handle.
What else will you need to think
about in order to meet this chal-
lenge?
21
Project 5
Racing Two Cars
with
Variable Speeds
This is the ﬁrst project in which variables are created and used. The
concept of “random” is introduced and random values are assigned to
each car’s speed.
As learners create multiple cars and assign random values to their speeds
they can begin to think about a particular car’s average speed, the mode
speed and the median value as they simulate races between their cars
and graph or plot the results.
This project sets a foundation for deeper thinking about this thing called
“speed.” In addition it introduces the concepts of constant versus ac-
celerated motion, rate and the rate of change.
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 5
Project Prerequisites: Squeak
• Use of “test” tiles.
• Use of “color sees” tiles.
• Category in viewer: scripting.
• Naming scripts.
• Using a “detailed watcher”.
Related Math Concepts
• Understanding
variables
and
how to create and use them.
• Understanding the concept of
“random” as it applies to num-
bers.
• Understanding the concepts of
“mean,”
“mode,”
and
“me-
dian.”
• Using a line plot.
Curricular Objectives
• Creating a variable whose value
is a random number.
• Using line plots to record the
speed of a car.
• Using the information recorded
on a line plot to determine the
mean and mode of a car’s speed.
• Forming hypotheses based on
ﬁndings to make predictions.
What is a variable? A variable is something that has no ﬁxed
value and can assume any set of values. Variables can aﬀect
the outcome of an event. An object’s speed is a variable, as
is its length and its x or y coordinate in the World. In order
to create a variable you need to create an object.
Start by painting a car and naming it.
To create a variable for the car, click on the “v” button found
in the object’s
viewer next to
the
name
of
the object.
Name the variable “speed”
and click the Accept but-
ton.
This will create the
variable and add it to your
object’s viewer
Drag the green assignment arrow onto the World. This will
create a script for the car’s variable “speed” tile.
When the script is created, click on the
name of your object. The menu shown
to the right will appear. Select “hand
me a random number tile”. A random
number tile can also be found in the
Supplies ﬂap.
24
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 5
Replace the value of “speed” in the script with the “random”
tile. Change the random number to a number less than 20.
To make the car go forward by its speed, drag the “car’s
speed” tiles and replace the value of the car’s “forward by”
tile with the speed tiles.
With each tick of the clock, the car will go forward any num-
ber of pixels from 1 to the maximum of your random number.
To watch this as it changes, get a “detailed watcher.” The
watcher will show the number of pixels the car is moving for-
ward with each tick of the clock.
Next to the “speed” variable in the variables category is an
icon that looks like a tiny menu. Click on it and select “de-
tailed watcher” from the menu. Place this watcher anywhere
on the World.
Click on the exclamation point
in the script to ﬁre it once.
What does the detailed watcher report as the car’s speed? Do
this several times.
Note
• The remaining Etoy projects in
this book will use variables.
25
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 5
Hey! Can I
enter my mouse
in a race?
Continue by painting another car. Both cars should be drawn
so that the direction they will go forward is up. This means
that the heading of the cars will be set to zero. Name each
car after its color.
Paint a straight line using the paint tools. This will be the
starting line for the race. Place it at the bottom of the project.
Paint another line and place it above the ﬁrst one. This will
be the ﬁnish line.
Bring up the tiles for each car and add a new variable to
them. Name the variable “speed.” Set the speed of each car
to a random number. For this project, make the maximum
value of the random number the same for both cars.
Come on — I want to win this race!!!
26
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 5
Create scripts for both cars that will tell the car to go forward
by its variable speed, as shown earlier in this project.
From each of the cars’ speed tiles, get a detailed watcher.
When the scripts are made, click on the normal button at
the top of the scriptor and select “paused” from the menu.
Drag out a set of stop step go buttons from the Supplies
ﬂap.
Click on the step button. Watch as the numbers in the de-
tailed watchers change to represent the random number that
is generated by the variable “speed.” Click on the go button.
Does the same car always reach the ﬁnish line ﬁrst? If so,
why? If not, why not?
How about having some races?
I’ll be the starter!
27
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 5
Using the concepts of mean and mode you can plot out the
speed at which each car moves with each tick of the clock. In
this way it is possible to ﬁnd the average speed of each car.
Line plots can be used to determine the mean and the mode
of each car’s speed.
The numbers plotted on the grid will
be determined by the random number that is generated each
time the step button is pressed.
Blue Car
Red Car
The test should be run at least ten times and the results
shown on the line plot. Then the average speed should be
determined as well as the mode of each of the cars.
At this point you can predict, based on your ﬁndings, which
car you think would win if the two cars were to race. You
would also want to explain why you come to this conclusion,
and prove it with your data.
To add another dimension to this project you can challenge
the participants to have the cars stop themselves when they
reach the ﬁnish line. The following modiﬁcations can be made
to solve this challenge.
Remove the starting line from the
project. Leave the ﬁnish line.
There are two cars in the project and each car has a script.
It is good practice to name the scripts. This will also help as
the projects become more challenging.
Click on the word “script” at the top of each scriptor to name
it. In the following example the script is named “racing.”
Add a “Test” tile to the script of each car.
28
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 5
Add “color sees” tiles to each of the scripts.
To ﬁnd the
tile that is needed to stop the cars as they cross the ﬁnish
line, select the scripting category. Since the script has been
named, all the tiles in this category will have the name of the
script as part of their tiles. Select the “pause script” tiles and
place them next to “Yes” in the test. Change the location
of the “speed” and “forward by” tiles into the “No” position
of the tests. (See the examples
below.) Remember to start the
race: click the go button which
will start all scripts.
As each car crosses the ﬁn-
ish line it will stop itself.
In order to get the cars to
stop each other once one
of them has crossed the
ﬁnish line requires just one more set of tiles. These tiles are
found in the scripting category of each of the cars. Choose
the “pause script” tiles for each of the cars and place them
below each of the other pause scripts in the “Yes” portion of
the test.
There are other ways to solve this problem.
The method
described above is just one of them.
Challenges
• Line the cars up to race each
other. How can you get the cars
to stop themselves when they
reach the ﬁnish line?
• How many other ways can you
think of to make both cars stop
when one of them crosses the ﬁn-
ish line?
• Create a clock or timer that will
keep time and show you how
long it takes the winning car to
cross the ﬁnish line.
• Create a starter for the race.
(An object that starts all the
cars at the same time.)
• How would you create a “reset
button” that would return the
cars to their original positions
when the race is over?
29
Project 6
More Fun
with
Racing Cars
This project gives learners an opportunity to think more about the
concepts which have been presented in previous projects.
The learners will have the chance to create a new variable (called time)
and will continue to use and combine many of the Etoy tools such as
buttons, reset scripts and conditional statements.
This project extends learning by setting up a new series of challenges
based on two racing cars. It also reinforces understanding of the projects
the learners have already completed.
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 6
I’ve got an idea that will solve
the
clock
challenge
and maybe
they’ll
let
me be the
starter.
Project Prerequisites: Squeak
• Making buttons.
• Changing the label of a button.
• Changing the way in which a
script will run.
Related Math Concepts
• The power of addition: “increase
by.”
The Timer
Here is one way to solve the “timer challenge.”
Draw a
simple clock and name it.
Create a variable in the clock
called “time”, then
create a script that
tells “time” to “in-
crease by” 1.
MouseDown on the clock within
the script and change the “tick
time” so that the clock ticks once
per second.
Get a detailed watcher for this script.
To use the timer to show how long it takes the winning car
to cross the ﬁnish line requires only the addition of one set of
tiles to both cars’ scripts. In the “Yes” portion of the test, add
the tiles shown on the left to
the script of each car.
Here is an example of one of those scripts:
One way to solve the “starter challenge” is to use a button
from the Supplies ﬂap. Bring up the handles of the
button. Click on the red “menu” handle of the button.
32
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 6
Change the label of the button to
“starter.”
Create a script for this button that
will start all of the other scripts. For
example:
MouseDown on the paused button at the top of the script.
Select “mouseUp” so that the script will run each time you
release the mouse over the button.
Finally, make a button that will reset all of the scripts so that
the race can run many times. You need to know the x and y
coordinates of each car at the start of the race so that we can
return them to this starting location. The reset button will
return the cars to the start location and will reset the clock
to zero.
Notes
• There are many solutions to
these challenges; those presented
here are just one way in which
the problems can be solved.
• It is good practice to create reset
routines (scripts).
33
Project 7
The Great Race
The Great Race is the culmination of all the preceding projects.
It
allows the learners to use the concepts they’ve acquired up to this point
and for the ﬁrst time take an individually-created and scripted object
and bring it into a shared project.
Students can strategize how they might script their car to win a race on
a muticolored, multiple-lane track. This encourages thinking about the
total length of each lane and whether a car racing in one lane might have
an advantage over another. Learners can be challenged to determine the
length of each lane in order to set a fair starting point for each car in
its lane.
This project also promotes group interaction and peer support as indi-
vidual cars compete in each race.
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 7
I’m ready for
The Great Race!
Project Prerequisites: Squeak
• Drawing objects.
• Use of “test” tiles.
• Use of “color sees” tiles.
• Use of “random” tiles.
• Category in viewer: scripting.
• Naming scripts.
Related Math Concepts
• “Feedback” controlling the be-
havior of an object.
• Staggered starting points that
equalize distances travelled on
diﬀerent lanes.
Curricular Objectives
• Synthesize the concepts learned
earlier to create a car that will
compete with others on a multi-
lane track.
The Great
Race
In this project several cars will race against each other on a
multi-lane track.
For this activity, each of the participants are challenged to
paint the most creative car they can imagine. The only re-
quirement for the car is that it have headlights. The head-
lights will act as the car’s sensors.
The participants are challenged to write a script for
their car that uses the “color sees” tiles, a variable
called “speed” and a random number. They will
ﬁrst need to practice on their own track to ﬁnd how
best to adjust the random speed and the steering
controls of the car to maneuver as quickly as possible while
remaining safely within their lane on the track.
The cars will then be “imported” into a single project that
contains one large race track. The track will have four lanes,
each lane a diﬀerent color.
36
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 7
As each car is completed, its project can be opened on a net-
worked computer and a copy of the car added to the Supplies
ﬂap of the shared “Great Race” project. Each of the race en-
trants can draw a number indicating the lane in which their
car will race.
Some discussion should take place. Should all cars start at the
same place? Does any particular lane have an advantage over
the others? A decision should be made and the cars placed on
the track and in their lane at an appropriate starting place.
The rules of the race need to be explained to all of the par-
ticipants. As the lane assignments are given, each participant
should be given time to modify their scripts so that their car
will run correctly on the new track with the new colors. They
should be given time to test the random speed of their car on
the new track to see if they want to change its upper limit. No
car may interfere with any other car during the race and must
stay within its own lane throughout the race. Any interfer-
ence of one car with another is an automatic disqualiﬁcation.
The ﬁrst car to cross the ﬁnish line is declared the winner.
Notes
• Prepare yourself for an exciting
session!
The participants will
enthusiastically cheer on their
car and the cars of the other par-
ticipants.
• To add a special feature to the
race, winners from each heat
can compete against each other
to determine the fastest car in
the entire group. Prizes can be
awarded, too.
And the winner is. . .
37
Creating Animations: An Excursion
Creating animations is one use of “increase by.” The following is a simple way that objects can be
transformed and brought to life using this powerful idea. It is also a time that you can break away
from the “Drive-a-Car” curriculum and have fun creating a variety of animated objects.
Start a new project. Bring up the paint tools and use the largest circle (brush size) to
paint a ball. Paint a highlight on the ball. Paint an ellipse a short distance beneath the
ball; this will represent the ball’s shadow.
Using this ﬁrst painting as your guide, bring up the paint tools again.
Paint a second shadow on top of the ﬁrst one. Paint a second ball; this
time paint the ball slightly lower than the original one.
Repeat this sequence until you have as many balls that you want in your
sequence. These sequences are called inbetweens.
Make the last ball in the sequence ﬂatter than the others. Exaggeration is
often used in animation; the way that you paint your objects can reinforce
the way they appear to move.
Here is an example of my 4 frames.
All of your ball paintings in the sequence must have the same reference point. There needs to
be one thing in each of them that remains exactly the same and in the same place. As the ball
is dropping the shadow beneath it should not move. In this example, the shadow is the reference
point.
39
Creating Animations: An Excursion
MouseOver your ﬁrst painting and bring up its handles. Then MouseDown on the
blue “rotation” handle. Turn it to the right or left.
This symbol will appear in the center of your painting. It indicates the center of rotation of
the object and the reference point for animation. Imagine a circle drawn around the painting.
The ball and the shadow are both rotating around the center point of the circle.
In order for our animation to run smoothly, the center of rotation must be set to the same
location in each of our paintings. If we move the center of rotation symbol below the ball’s shadow,
we change its center of rotation.
In order to change the center of rotation, hold down the shift key while dragging the center of
rotation symbol to its new position. In this example, the center of rotation was moved from the
center to just below the ball’s shadow in every painting of the ball.
Old center of rotation
New center of rotation
Get a Holder from the Supplies ﬂap. Bring it on to the
World. MouseDown on the yellow “change size” handle and
stretch the holder to lengthen it.
40
Creating Animations: An Excursion
Bring up the handles of your ﬁrst ball painting. MouseDown on the green “duplicate” handle
to make a copy of this painting. Drag it into the holder. Make sure that your cursor is in the
holder before you MouseUp.
Drag each of the remaining original paintings into the holder. Once all of the paintings are
in the holder, make a duplicate of each of them and place them as shown in the example. This
sequence will make the ball bounce animation ﬂow smoothly. The ball will bounce to its shadow
and then bounce back up again.
The black rectangle around the ﬁrst ball represents the cursor.
Bring up the viewer for the ball. From the ball’s graphics category, drag
out the tiles “ball look like dot” and drop them into the World.
Bring up the viewer for the “Holder”. From the category menu select “play-
ﬁeld”. From the tiles that appear, select the tiles “Holder’s playerAtCursor”
and drop them over the word “dot” in your script.
From the holder’s basic category select the tiles “Holder’s cursor”. Drag these
tiles out by the green assignment arrow.
←−
Place these tiles in your script.
41
Creating Animations: An Excursion
Click on the up arrow found to the right of the word
“cursor.”
Continue clicking until you have changed the tile to
read “increase by”.
Click on the small clock at the top of your scriptor to start your animation.
Try reversing the order of the tiles in the script. What happens?
42
Measurement: An Excursion
At this stage of the curriculum it is important to emphasize the role of oﬀ-computer activities to
the participant’s understanding of the ideas and concepts conveyed through the computer-based
projects.
People are often sidetracked trying to ﬁnd an exact answer to a problem. The important idea
here is to get the learners to understand the larger concept rather than trying to ﬁnd an exact
answer. Science makes maps of the universe. As Einstein pointed out, the more mathematics refers
to reality the less it is certain, and the more it is certain the less it refers to reality.
Part of this curriculum entails asking the participants to think about the distance between dots
or trails left behind by their objects. The point is that they see an increase in distance from dot
to dot; it is not important that they know by exactly how much that distance increases. This oﬀ-
computer measuring activity can help participants understand how diﬃcult accurate measurement
can be, how our measurements may vary when using diﬀerent measuring devices and that each
answer may not necessarily be an exact answer — but rather an approximation. It is important to
get the students to think about how much error is “allowable” and reasonable, and when it may
be time to take another measurement entirely.
The following is an oﬀ-computer “excursion” that can help achieve a better understanding of
this concept.
Materials:
• bicycle tires (all the same type and size);
• centimeter cubes;
• ribbon;
• yarn;
• click wheels;
• measuring tapes.
The participants can be divided into groups.
Each
group is given a diﬀerent set of tools for measuring the
circumference of a bicycle tire:
Group 1
Centimeter cubes.
Group 2
Ribbon and click wheel.
Group 3
Yarn and measuring tape.
43
Measurement: An Excursion
Everyone in the group is given the task of measuring the circumference of the tire using their
assigned measuring device. After completing the task they should compare their results with the
results of the other members of their group. They should also compare their results with the other
groups that used diﬀerent measuring devices to measure their tires.
Since all of the tires appear to be the same, a rich discussion should take place as to how it is
possible for everyone to measure the same object and yet obtain a variety of answers. What are the
variables that come into play when performing this measuring task? How much room is there for
error? Is an exact measurement important? Can we make an approximation of the circumference
based on all of the measurements that were taken?
Another discussion may evolve around whether the tires are in fact the exact same size. They
may all be stamped with the same measurments, but are they really the same size? What is the
margin of error (technically known as tolerance) that the manufacturer allows? Is it important for
the tire to be exactly a certain size?
It is important for the participants to walk away with an understanding that the world is not
exact and there cannot be an exact answer to many questions. An approximation can be a valid
answer. There are many variables that have an eﬀect on the outcome of an event. When creating
simulations, we cannot recreate every variable that might have an aﬀect on the outcome of an
experiment. It is important to conclude that an approximation is a valid answer to draw from
experimentation.
My tire is this big. . .
44
Project 8
Thinking About
‘‘Speed’’
In this project learners will paint a car from a side view. The side view
will help to visualize the car’s speed.
This project provides another example which makes use of the powerful
idea “increase by.” The car will be scripted to move along its x axis
(instead of moving “forward by”). In this example both the “car’s x”
will increase and the “car’s speed” will increase by either a constant or
a changing number.
Adding the use of a pen trail, drawn in a “dots style” in this project,
learners can see patterns made by their car as it moves. They can be
asked to think about the pattern of the dots and how it might diﬀer
when the car’s speed is constant and when it increases, allowing for the
further exploration of motion and acceleration.
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 8
Project Prerequisites: Squeak
• Making buttons.
• Changing the labels of buttons.
• Making scripts for buttons.
• Changing the way in which a
script will run.
• Renaming playﬁelds.
Related Math Concepts
• The diﬀerence between a num-
ber that is constant and one that
is constantly increasing.
• The concept of cumulative.
• Movement along the x axis.
• Using “increase by” to create ac-
celeration.
• Measurement.
• Using variables.
Curricular Objectives
• Use “increase by” to show accel-
eration.
• Use tools other than rulers as
measuring devices.
• Use visual information to form a
hypothesis.
For this project, a new car must be painted. This time the
car should be painted from its side view, rather than the top
view that we have used in the previous projects.
After the car has been painted, drag a play-
ﬁeld out of the Supplies ﬂap and name it
home. Place the car into this playﬁeld.
Drag another playﬁeld out of the supplies ﬂap and name it
TestArea.
Bring up the tiles for the car. From the cat-
egory pen use, change the following tiles:
• Change “pen down” to “true”;
• Change “pen size” to “3”;
• Change “trailStyle” to “dots.”
For example:
The home playﬁeld will act as a place to which the car will
return after we have run each of our tests in the TestArea.
Bring up the tiles for the playﬁeld home. From the collec-
tions category select the tiles “home include” and place them
in the world. Bring up the tiles for the TestArea. From the
category pen use, select the tiles “TestArea” and “clear all
pen trails” and drop them into the script.
46
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 8
Bring up the handles for the car.
Click on the orange
handle to get a tile that represents the car. Place it next to
the “home” and “include” tiles in the script.
Each time the exclamation point of this script is clicked, the
car will return to home and all the dots in the TestArea
will be cleared. This is a valuable way to set the project back
to its original state.
Bring up the scripting tiles for the car. Here are the following
things that need to be created in the script:
• The car needs a variable called “speed”.
• Speed should be set to a number.
• The car’s “x” should increase by the “car’s speed”.
Instead of the car simply moving forward, it is now moving
along its x axis by its speed.
Place the car in the TestArea.
Drag the stop step go
buttons from the Supplies ﬂap. Click on the
button.
Notice that the dots left behind as the car moves forward are
the same distance apart.
The next step is to get the car to accelerate rather than main-
taining a constant speed. To do this it is only necessary to
change one tile in the car’s script. Change the “car’s speed”
in the script to increase by. It is a good idea to begin with
a small number, like 5.
47
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 8
Let’s go faster!!!
At this point we want to add a tile to the home script. Be-
cause “increase by” has been added to the “speed” variable,
the value of “speed” will increase each time the script is activ-
itated. It is cumulative. The ﬁrst time the script is activated
the value of “speed” will become 5, but the next time it will
become 10 and then 15 and 20, and so on. It is important to
make sure that each time the simulation is started, the value
of the variable “speed” is set back to 0.
Here is another way of creating a button that will activate this
script. Click on the word “home” at the top of the scriptor
window. When the menu appears, select “button to ﬁre this
script”.
Once the button is created, dismiss the script by
clicking on the tan circle.
Button to ﬁre the script.
Place the car back in the TestArea.
48
The Drive-a-Car Curriculum: Project 8
Click on the
button and observe what happens. Discuss
the diﬀerence between the line of dots laid down by the car
this time and the line of dots laid down by the car the ﬁrst
time.
Speed is increasing (the car is accelerating).
Speed is constant (no acceleration).
It might help the discussion if a watcher is used to observe the
variable “speed”. It is important to relate what is happening
to the value of speed and the eﬀect it has on the car’s “x” and
then relate this to the fact that the dots left behind by the car
are getting farther apart. Note that the “speed” of the car is
increasing by 5 each time the script is ﬁred, causing the car
to increase the distance it travels along the x axis with each
step. The car is going faster with each ﬁring of the script.
The car is accelerating.
The watcher reports the car’s speed with each ﬁring of the
script.
I can hardly
keep up with
this guy!
Note
• You might consider having the
participants put their thoughts
and observations right into the
Squeak project.
This can be
done by dragging a Book out of
the Supplies ﬂap and dropping
it onto the World. Then drag a
Text from the Supplies ﬂap and
drop it onto the book.
49
Project 9
From Cars
to Balls
This project serves as a model to provoke transfer of learning as we
transition from cars to the realm of falling balls and the exploration of
gravity. It should reinforce each learner’s understanding of the concepts
of constant, random and increasing speed.
Most learners will easily make the transition in thinking about their
object, previously as “car” now as “ball,” seeing it as an abstract object
wearing a “costume.” Others may need reminding that this “ball” is
nothing new and that creating the same scripts they made for their car
will work just as well with this object called “ball.”
Asking students to create scripts for the examples provided and then
to write about each example can serve as a form of assessment for
the teacher to determine the level of understanding of these concepts
reached by each student.
From Cars to Balls: Project 9
Project Prerequisites: Squeak
• Creating and naming scripts.
• Creating variables.
• Using random tiles.
• Making buttons.
• Creating reset scripts.
• Creating animation.
• Using and renaming playﬁelds.
• Creating dot trails.
Related Math Concepts
• Understanding the diﬀerence be-
tween numbers that are:
– constants;
– increasing by a ﬁxed
amount;
– changing randomly.
Curricular Objectives
• Give the participants the oppor-
tunity to use and articulate what
they have learned in order to
identify, solve and recreate the
problems presented in this small
quiz.
This project can be prepared in advance to challenge students
to demonstrate what they’ve learned and understood about
the concepts presented in the previous projects. Once pre-
pared, the project can be downloaded to each student’s local
computer.
Begin by creating ten playﬁelds. The ﬁve ﬁelds on the left, as
shown in the example above, act as “test areas” for the action
to take place. The ﬁve ﬁelds on the right act as “home ﬁelds”
to which the ball returns after being removed from the test
area by means of a “reset” script.
The buttons above are examples of the buttons that were
created and placed below each of the test areas.
The ﬁre
buttons will cause a particular action to take place in the test
area above it. Each time the button is clicked, the ball will
move along its x axis according to the rules created in the
script. The removeAll buttons will remove the ball and all
dots from the ﬁeld and place the original ball back in its home
ﬁeld.
52
From Cars to Balls: Project 9
The balls move along the x axis. The ﬁrst ball moves along
the x axis and accelerates, the second moves randomly and the
last one moves by a constant amount. The dots left behind
are a visual clue to help determine what is happening in each
simulation.
The participants can be asked to look at each example and
to recreate any two of the three actions that take place in
the playﬁelds. They need to create the buttons that will ﬁre
each of their scripts and the buttons that will reset them.
They create their own simulations in the two playﬁelds at the
bottom of the project. As the ﬁnal step, the participants can
drag a Book from the Supplies ﬂap and use it to articulate
their solutions to the problems. (Don’t forget to drop a Text
into the book too.) They can then share their solutions with
other participants.
Book
Possible Solution Examples
RemoveAll button and script:
BallFire button and scripts:
Acceleration
Random
Constant
53
Learning About Gravity: An Excursion
Children love participating in all aspects of this excursion.
Materials Needed:
• A shotput.
• An apple.
• A sponge ball.
• A croquet ball.
• A drilled out shotput.
• Stop watches.
• A video camera.
• A way of digitizing the video
footage and storing it on a
computer.
• An outdoor area with a roof
at least 8 feet high from which
the balls can be dropped.
Before starting this excursion, which will be videotaped, all of the balls and the apple should
be passed around the group so that everyone can touch them and get a sense of the weight of each
object. A typical shotput ball might weigh 12 lbs. Its weight surprises participants and they might
ﬁnd it diﬃcult to hold in one hand.
Once all participants have
had the chance to hold each
of the objects, predictions can
be made about which object
(if any), when dropped from
a roof, will fall to the ground
the fastest.
For example, in
our classroom the participants
ranked each object from one
to ﬁve.
If they felt that any
two of the objects might hit the
ground at the same time, they
gave them the same ranking.
They wrote up their predic-
tions and explained the ratio-
nale behind their thinking.
55
Learning About Gravity: An Excursion
Now go outside and drop each of the objects oﬀthe roof, while videotaping
the event. The participants should have stop watches so that they can record
how long it takes each object to hit the ground.
Later the objects can be dropped in pairs to test hypotheses as to which might fall to the ground
the fastest. The importance of using stop watches is for the participants to realize that it takes
approximately the same amount of time for each object to hit the ground regardless of its weight.
After all the objects have been dropped and videotaped (it is wise to do this several times) you
can use the footage in a number of ways. You might choose to have the participants watch the
footage immediately after the outdoor activity. This can generate a rich discussion about what they
believed they saw and what actually happened. Careful observation of the video will demonstrate
how a variety of variables may have aﬀected the outcome of each drop.
This excursion also takes advantage of Squeak’s multimedia capabilities. Squeak allows you to
bring video frames into a project and then animate these frames to create movies (or manipulate
the images in other ways). This is a critical part of the ball-dropping experiment and obviously
this method can be used in a variety of contexts.
56
Learning About Gravity: An Excursion
You’ll need to bring the video into the computer as a set of still “jpeg” images. Both iMovie
and Windows Movie Maker can save a video sequence as a series of jpeg images.
Since it will only take each ball about a second to hit the ground, the movie will be about
30 frames of jpeg images in length. To bring the jpegs into Squeak, go to the Navigator ﬂap and
MouseDown for a few seconds on the Find button. Select “ﬁnd any ﬁle” from the options. Load
the jpeg images into your Squeak project. Bringing every sixth frame (or jpeg image) into your
project will result in something that looks like this:
That’s all for this excursion, but the learners will be using these frames in the next several
projects as they continue to explore gravity and acceleration.
57
Project 10
Another Look at
Falling Balls
This Etoy project follows on from the excursions described previously.
Ideally, learners should have already engaged in a variety of measure-
ment activities to understand how diﬃcult it is to ﬁnd an “exact” num-
ber or answer to any given problem, and to practice the art of estimation
and approximation.
Students also should have had the concrete experience of watching a
variety of objects dropped from a roof after having theorized what would
happen. Sometimes what we insist we have “seen with our own eyes” is
merely what we believe we saw, based upon misconception rather than
what really happened.
This project allows students to take another look at what happened
when the balls were dropped and provides a way to enable both the de-
construction and reconstruction of the event. The project also provides
a way to “stop time.” What we can see when time is stopped might
look quite diﬀerent from what we thought we saw in a ﬂeeting moment
of “real time.”
Bringing individual video frames into the project allows students to
manipulate a visualization of the event. Providing a view not possible
in the real world oﬀers learners additional opportunities to understand
the phenomenon.
Learning About Gravity: Project 10
Project Prerequisites: Squeak
• Using repainting tools.
Related Math Concepts
• Movement along the y axis.
Curricular Objectives
• Give the participants the oppor-
tunity to use what they have
learned about acceleration in the
drive-a-car project and apply it
to what they are seeing in the
gravity project.
I’m falling!
Begin this project by loading the video frames into a new
project, or reloading your previously-saved project.
Upon seeing these frames, some learners will get an immediate
“aha!” and see a pattern. Others may have a harder time
with this representation.
To recreate what was seen when
the experiment was performed outside, and to get the ball to
appear to fall in a straight line, the jpeg frames can be cut
and stacked.
Bring up the handles of the second frame. Select the “repaint”
handle. Leaving the ball in the frame, erase everything above
it. Do that for each of the remaining frames.
When you are ﬁnished, the
frames should look like this.
60
Learning About Gravity: Project 10
Once the frames have all been “trimmed,” the next step is to
stack them neatly one on top of the other.
Starting with the second frame,
move it on top of the ﬁrst
frame. Use the bottom of each
frame as a guide for placing the
frames on top of each other.
When all the frames are stacked on top of each
other, your picture will look like this. At this
stage, participants can see that the speed of
the falling object is increasing.
Note:
At this time the participants in our
class were eager to share what they
thought they were seeing.
Many
students immediately saw that the
ball appeared to be accelerating as
it fell to the ground.
The distance between the balls ap-
peared to be increasing. Some stu-
dents even returned to their car
project and rotated it so that they
could compare the two. A transfer
of learning had occured.
61
Project 11
‘‘Measuring’’ the
Distance
This project allows for the continued manipulation and examination of
the “cut and stacked” video frames.
It is intended to help students
gain a deeper understanding of the meaning of the pattern made by the
falling ball.
For some students, seeing the pattern discovered in Project 10 is not
enough to “prove” that the ball was accelerating as it fell. Using trans-
parent “sticky notes” as measuring devices to investigate the distance
between successive “snapshots” of the ball provides another visualiza-
tion of its behavior.
After using the “sticky notes” to measure, students can stack them to
make a graph — creating yet another visualization to see that each
ball’s speed was indeed constantly increasing as it fell to the ground.
Learning About Gravity: Project 11
Project Prerequisites: Squeak
• Using rectangles as measuring
devices.
• Using
simple
and
detailed
watchers.
Related Math Concepts
• Movement along the y axis.
• Understanding the power of “in-
crease by” using negative num-
bers.
Science Concept
• Looking at how acceleration be-
comes a key factor to under-
standing the force of gravity on
a falling object.
The stacked video frames created in Project 10 are the start-
ing point for this project. Now that the falling ball is aligned
in a straight column, rectangular sticky notes torn oﬀthe
Sticky Pad (found in the Supplies ﬂap) can be used to mea-
sure the distance between each ball. Each rectangle will be a
diﬀerent color.
The measurement should be done from
the bottom of the ﬁrst ball to the bottom
of the next ball, or as closely to that as
possible. Some participants may chose to
use a magniﬁer (from the Object Catalog
in the Supplies ﬂap) for accuracy.
It is important for the learners to under-
stand what is happening to the distance
between each ball. Our students found
a variety of ways to articulate what they
thought they were seeing.
Before proceeding,
the students may
need to be reminded of the earlier
measuring activity where they learned
the importance of approximation.
64
Learning About Gravity: Project 11
Some students aligned their rectangles to form various bar
graphs to visualize the acceleration. Some of them chose to
use watchers to get a numeric value for the height or length
of each rectangle. The increasing number conﬁrmed the rate
of change in the ball’s speed.
detailed watchers
simple watchers
49
78
108
136
+29
+30
+28
Recalling the previous measurement excursion (and remind-
ing the students what they learned about approximation and
tolerance) may help them to see that the length of each bar
(measured in pixels) is not only increasing but appears to be
increasing at very close to a constant rate — in other words,
a constant acceleration.
Some students chose to do the arithmetic that would tell them
if the ball was accelerating as it fell and, if so, by how much.
They subtracted the height of one rectangle from the height
of the next to determine an approximate acceleration.
At
that point they could see the ball was indeed accelerating at
a constant rate.
Finding the Magniﬁer
Drag the Object Catalog out of the
Supplies ﬂap.
Select alphabetic from the cata-
log.
Select the letter m.
Select the Magniﬁer
and drag it into the
project.
This tool will magnify anything it
passes over.
65
Creating Movies: An Excursion
In this excursion, an animation will be created from the jpegs of the ball drop sequence.
Reload the jpeg sequence into a new Squeak project. Name the ﬁrst frame of the sequence
dropMovie. Next drag a Holder out of the Supplies ﬂap and resize it to ﬁt all of the frames of
the ball drop sequence.
Drag a copy of the ﬁrst frame into the holder. Next drag all of the remaining frames
directly into the holder.
We’re making a movie!!
Bring up the scripting tiles for the frame called dropMovie. Create a script. Name the script
runMovie.
This script will create an ani-
mated movie of the ball falling oﬀ
the roof.
67
Creating Movies: An Excursion
Once you have created the script, make a button
that will ﬁre the script.
Rename the button step-
Movie.
If you start the script it will run continuously, but if
you click on the button the script will only ﬁre once.
With each additional click of the button, the script will
step through the sequence of frames and animate the ball
dropping.
Once the button is made, be sure to save this project.
We’ll need it again later.
We are ready to move on to the ﬁnal project: a simulation of gravity using a painted ball. The
ultimate challenge will be to make a painted ball “fall” at the same rate of acceleration as the ball
in the movie. We want the painted ball and the ball in the movie to reach the bottom at the same
time.
Boy, this is going to take some
real thought. This is a good
challenge!
68
Project 12
A Simulated
Ball Drop
This is the culminating project in this series exploring acceleration and
gravity. In this project learners will be challenged to paint a simulated
ball and script it so that it models the acceleration of real-world objects
caused by gravity.
The animated movie of the ball drop will then be brought into the
project so that students can compare the drop of their ball with that of
the ball in the video.
Creating this simulation requires learners to think about many of the
concepts they’ve used in the previous projects — the creation of vari-
ables, the use of “increase by” and what it means to “increase by” a
negative number.
Perhaps most importantly, it encourages students to think about creat-
ing and testing theories, to perform many tests to assess their hypothe-
ses against these theories and to make models that simulate real-world
phenomena.
Learning About Gravity: Project 12
Project Prerequisites: Squeak
• Creating and naming scripts.
• Creating variables.
• Creating reset scripts.
• Creating animations.
• Creating buttons.
• Creating and using watchers.
Related Math Concepts
• Understanding variables.
• Understanding the power of “in-
crease by” using negative num-
bers.
• Movement along the y axis.
• Understanding the concept of
acceleration.
Related Science Concepts
• Forming a hypothesis.
• Looking at how acceleration be-
comes a key factor to under-
standing the force of gravity on
a falling object.
• Simulating the force of gravity
on a falling object, using a model
as a guide.
Begin a new Squeak project. Paint a ball and name it.
Bring up the scripting tiles for the ball. Create a variable and
name it “speed”.
Create a script in the ball called drop. This script will in-
crease the “ball’s speed” by a negative number, one yet to be
determined. The example below will test what happens when
the speed is increased by −10. The second line of the drop
script will increase the “ball’s y” by its speed.
At this point you have a model of a constantly accelerating
falling ball!
Next create a script to reset the “ball’s speed” and the “ball’s
y” to their initial values. Name the script reset. Create a
button that will ﬁre this script. Get a detailed watcher for
the variable “speed”. The reset script will make it easier to
set the ball and its speed back to their original values and
locations.
Experiment and play with the number by which the speed is
increasing. What happens? What happens if the ball’s “y”
does not increase by its speed?
Next open the project in which you saved the “ball drop”
movie. Paint a new ball and place it alongside the ball in the
dropMovie frame.
70
Learning About Gravity: Project 12
Run the animation continuously by setting the script to “tick-
ing.” Clicking on the stepMovie button will step through
the animation.
The ﬁnal challenge is to script the painted ball
to drop at the same rate as the ball in the an-
imation.
Using what you’ve previously learned
recreate the scripts for the painted ball to fall and
to reset. Note: When creating a reset button re-
member that since the movie begins with the ball
in motion, its starting speed cannot be zero.
Next create a script in the dropMovie frames
that will reset the animation back to the ﬁrst
frame. Name the script reset. Create a button
that will ﬁre this script.
Finally create a script in the ball that makes the ball drop and
the movie run at the same time. Name this script dropTo-
gether. When you create a button that will ﬁre this script,
change the name of the button to balls drop together.
When the dropTogether script is run, there will be a need
to test and retest and change the value of speed until the ball
falls at the same rate as the ball in the animation.
In our classroom, when the learners succeeded, we heard the
cries of success throughout the room.
Not only had they
successfully completed the challenge, but they had a far better
understanding of the concept of gravity than they would have
gained from reading a book.
Challenge
• In this book we’ve used Squeak
to create both animations and
simulations.
Think about the
diﬀerences between them. Why
aren’t they the same thing?
Some Final Notes
The projects in this book are just
the beginning of what can be cre-
ated with this powerful tool.
Our solutions are only suggestions,
since there may be many ways to
solve these interesting problems.
Squeak, as a tool for the teaching
of math and science, has unlimited
possiblilites!
See you in
Squeakland!!
71
Afterword
Our Human Condition “From Space”
Alan Kay
My favorite examples of early science, and a wonderful general metaphor for what science does, are
the attempts at highly accurate map-making started by the Greeks, then lost for a thousand years,
and then taken up again starting in the 15th century. By the end of the 1700s, people delighted in
being able to buy a pocket globe of “The World As Seen From Space”. 200 years later, we went
out into space, looked back at the world, took pictures of it, and saw just what the 18th century
map makers had already found out.
All scientiﬁc processes and knowledge have this character: they are attempts to “see” and
represent things very accurately from vantage points that are not part of our normal commonsense
guesses about the world — to “make the invisible somewhat visible”. For most of human history
our theories about ourselves and the world we lived on were mainly in terms of unsubstantiated
beliefs rendered as comforting stories. A few hundred years ago we learned a new kind of seeing
that allowed us to perceive the physical world as if “from space” with far fewer prejudices in the
way. In the 21st century we need to not only do this for the physical world, but also to understand
our whole human condition as if “from space”, without the comforting stories, but with deeper
understanding of how to deal with our natures and nurtures.
73
Afterword
Maps, as with all of our representations for ideas, are quite arbitrary and don’t automatically
have any intrinsic claims to accuracy. For example, here are 3 maps. The ﬁrst is a map from the
Middle Ages, the second is a map from Tolkein’s “Lord of the Rings”, and the third is a map of
the Mojave Desert. The medieval “T–O” map shows the world as they thought “it had to be”,
and includes the Garden of Eden (to the Far East at the top). The Mediterranean (the middle of
the world) is the vertical of the “T”, Jerusalem is at the center of the world at the joining of the
“T”, and the boot of Italy is just a bulge. The Tolkein map was made up in careful detail to help
readers (and probably the author) to visualize the ﬁctitious world of the Hobbit and Lord of the
Rings. The map of the Mojave Desert was made last year using both advanced surveying methods
and satellite imagery to guide the placement of features.
It is important to realize that from the standpoint of traditional logic, none of these maps is
“true”, in that none of them are in exact one-to-one correspondence with all the details of what
they are trying to map. In other words each of these maps is a kind of story that is written mostly
in images rather than words. Within a map we can do perfect logic — so for example, if Rome is
north of Alexandria, and Paris is north of Rome then Paris is north of Alexandria. This internal
logic works perfectly for all three maps. Mathematics is also a kind of mapping system that is set
up to be completely consistent within itself — in fact, it includes the making of maps like these
(“Earth Measuring” in Greek is “Geometry”). It’s when we try to relate the maps to what they are
74
Afterword
supposed to represent “outside” that we run into diﬃculty and ﬁnd that none of them are “true”
in the sense of the truth that can obtain inside a map. But if you were dropped into the Mojave
Desert, which “not-true” map would you choose to take with you? Many useful ﬂavors of “false”
really makes a diﬀerence in modern thinking!
From our standpoint, the reason to teach “the new thinking” that has ﬂowered in the last 400
years is not to provide more technical jobs, or to “keep our country strong”, or even to make better
citizens. These are all good results that are byproducts of the new thinking, but the real reasons
have to do with sanity and civilization. If the maps in our heads are unlike “what’s out there” then
we are at best what Alfred Korzybski termed “unsane”. Our deﬁnition for actual insanity is simply
when the maps in our heads, for whatever reasons, become so unlike “what’s out there” (including
what’s in other people’s maps) that it is noticeable and sometimes dangerous. Since we can’t get
maps to be exactly true, we are always somewhat unsane with respect to the physical world. Since
our actual internal maps are not directly sharable, we are even more unsane in relation to each
other’s mappings of the world (including us). Because we think in terms of our internal maps —
a kind of theatrical presentation of our beliefs back to ourselves — it is not too far a stretch to
say that we live not in reality, but in a waking delusional hallucinatory dream that we like to call
“reality”. We deﬁnitely want to construct the “least false” version of this that we can!
Civilization is not a state of being that can be reached, nor the journey, but it is a manner of
traveling. To me the most interesting and remarkable — even amazing — thing about science is
that it is done by us even though we are creatures who only have stories of various kinds inside our
heads and are much more set up to be interested in charging sabretoothed tigers than in centuries
long climate changes. But the process of scientiﬁc thinking is able to deal with many of our own
inabilities to think and other ﬂaws in a strong enough manner to still come up with ever more
accurate mappings of more and more complex parts of our universe. This is why we need to help
all children in the world learn how to do it.
But why then are science and its mapping language — mathematics — deemed to be hard to
learn? I believe that it is not because they are so intrinsically complicated, but rather they are
amazingly simple yet very very diﬀerent from normal human commonsense ways of thinking about
things. It is gaining this quite unusual point of view about “what’s out there?” and what it means
to ﬁnd and claim knowledge about it that is the main process of learning science. One way to look
at this is that part of what has to be learned is a new kind of commonsense — Alan Cromer calls
it “uncommonsense”.
And, just as it doesn’t require more than a normal mind to learn these ideas, it also doesn’t
require any major outlay of funds, though many people like to give the excuse that “science teaching
isn’t happening because we don’t have computers, scientiﬁc equipment, books, etc.”. Science is
about 400 years old now, and we’ve had commercial personal computers for a little more than 20
years, so there were about 380 years in which science and math were learned without high tech.
Some of the most important discoveries were done before the industrial revolution with very little
equipment.
I think what is mainly lacking are adults who understand science who want to work with children
and teachers regardless of the funding. Shame on my own profession! Most of us stay in the labs
and away from children, parents, teachers and schools.
How can we learn science with “no money”? First and foremost, we have to learn how to observe
and be interested in phenomena in a noncategorical way, i.e. we don’t want to dismiss things after
we’ve merely learned their names — there’s a sense in which most things become almost invisible
after we can recognize them and recall their names. So we have to ﬁnd ways “to make the invisible
75
Afterword
visible”, to avoid “premature recognition”. Science is all around us and much can be revealed just
by being more careful about what we think we are seeing.
One of the ways to do this is by learning how to draw. As Betty Edwards (of “Drawing on the
Right Side of the Brain” fame) points out, learning to draw is mostly learning to see (as opposed
to learning to recognize). For many things we need to ﬁnd ways to postpone quick recognition
in favor of slower noticing. Typical “before and after” self-portraits by Edwards’ students show a
remarkable improvement.
This is somewhat diﬀerent than the “art part” of the visual arts in that we are trying to mostly
express the visual details of “what’s there” rather than what we feel about it, but they are not at
all exclusive. As my grandfather once remarked in an article he wrote for the Saturday Evening
Post in 1904 about whether photography could be art: “Art enters in when we labor thoughtfully
with some goal in mind; that is, when we cut loose from actions that are merely mechanical”. Our
feelings will appear in any of our carefully made creations.
Another good example of “high-noticing low-cost” is the measuring of the circumference of the
bicycle tire excursion on page 43. Much of the philosophical gold in science is to be found in this
noticing activity.
The students used diﬀerent materials and got diﬀerent answers, but were quite sure that there
was an exact answer in centimeters (partly because schooling encourages them to get exact rather
than real answers). One of the teachers also thought this because on the side of the tire it said it
was 20 inches in diameter. The teacher “knew” that the circumference was π × diameter, that “π
is 3.14”, and “inches times 2.54 converts to ‘centimeters’ ”, etc., and multiplied it out to get the
“exact circumference” of the tire = 159.512 cm. I suggested that they measure the diameter and
they found it was actually more like 19 and 3/4 inches (it was uninﬂated)! This was a shock, since
they were all set up to believe pretty much anything that was written down, and the idea of doing
an independent test on something written down had not occurred to them.
76
Afterword
That led to questions of inﬂating to diﬀerent pressures, etc. But still most thought that there
was an exact circumference. Then one of us contacted the tire manufacturer (who happened to
be Korean) and there were many interesting and entertaining exchanges of email until an engineer
was found who wrote back that “We don’t actually know the circumference or diameter of the tire.
We extrude them and cut them to a length that is 159.6 cm ± 1 millimeter tolerance!
This really shocked and impressed the children — the maker of the tire doesn’t even know its
diameter or circumference! — and it got them thinking much more powerful thoughts. Maybe
you can’t measure things exactly. Aren’t there “atoms” down there? Don’t they jiggle? Aren’t
atoms made of stuﬀthat jiggles? And so forth. The analogy to “how long is a shoreline?” is a
good one. The answer is partly due to the scale and tolerance of measurement. As Mandelbrot
and others interested in fractals have shown, the length of a mathematical shoreline can be inﬁnite,
and physics shows us that the physical measurement could be “almost” as long (that is very long).
There are many ways to make use of the powerful idea of “tolerance”. For example, when
the children do their gravity project and come up with a model for what gravity does to objects
near the surface of the earth, it is very important for them to realize that they can only measure
to within one pixel on their computer screens and that they can also make little slips. A totally
literal take on the measurements can cause them to miss seeing that uniform acceleration is what’s
going on. So they need to be tolerant of very small errors. On the other hand, they need to be
quite vigilant about discrepancies that are outside of typical measuring errors. Historically, it was
important for Galileo not to be able to measure really accurately how the balls rolled down the
inclined plane, and for Newton not to know what the planet Mercury’s orbit actually does when
looked at closely.
Next year (2004) is the 400th anniversary of the ﬁrst time in history that a good model was
made of what happens when a body falls near the surface of the earth under the inﬂuence of gravity.
Galileo didn’t have home video cameras and computers and Squeak to come up with the model.
He did his discovery “with no money” by being very diligent about observation and noticing until
he found a way to pin down what was happening crisply enough to map it with mathematics.
How did he do it? There doesn’t seem to be an absolutely deﬁnitive answer to this, but there are
many stories about it which have been pieced together from Galileo’s notes and writings. Galileo’s
father was a professional musician and Galileo had an excellent reputation as a musical amateur
on a number of instruments including the ﬂute and the lute.
He had been doing many experiments with inclined planes using uniformly sized balls made from
diﬀerent materials and having diﬀerent weights. He discovered that same sized balls of diﬀerent
77
Afterword
weights appeared to go down the inclined plane at the same rate of increase of speed regardless of
angle.
One day he may have for fun idly rolled a ball or two down the neck of his lute. You can see
that the frets of lutes and guitars are not evenly spaced. At some point he noticed that the clicks
of the ball on the frets were almost regular and realized that the wider spacing of the frets was
compensating for the increase in speed of the ball. Now a wonderful thing about lutes is that,
unlike guitars, their frets are made of the same gut that is used from the strings and are simply
tied on. So Galileo could move them. He started to move them until he could hear an absolutely
regular sequence of clicks (at some point he probably started to tie the fret material across his
inclined plane). When he got perfectly regular clicks, he measured the distances and found that
the increase of speed (the acceleration) was constant!
One of the important conclusions here is that there are many interesting real science probes
that can be done with materials at hand if the teacher understands the real science. This is one way
to do this investigation “with no money”, and rolling a toy truck down the inclined plane carrying
a baggie of ink with a pinhole, is another.
Don’t let the lack of a computer or equipment slow you down. Science and math are all around
us. The world we live in is a vast lab full of equipment, if it can be noticed. There are free public
libraries even in the most disadvantaged parts of the US that contain books about how to do all of
this: the knowledge doesn’t cost money, but it does cost time and interest and focus.
You are reading this book because you are interested in all these issues — perhaps you found
it in a free public library — whether or not you can aﬀord a computer today. If you can’t, there is
78
Afterword
still much you can do, just as there is so much real music that can be done with children without
formal instruments. If you can aﬀord the instrument — musical or computer — then you’ve just
gotten wonderful ampliﬁers for your musical and mathematical and scientiﬁc impulses.
The computer quite naturally turns the math back into phenomena, thus providing a more
complete full circle of “putting together” added to the “taking apart” nature of science. This is
one of the most important uses of computers in adult science and engineering and thus the children
and adults are strongly joined in the same art and sport, just as children’s music is real music, and
children’s baseball and tennis are real versions of the sports.
A further insight is that the range and depth of constructions that the children can carry
through are vastly extended by using a suitable computer environment. Many researchers have
found that children are capable of deeper thoughts than they can easily build: for example, they
can think very deeply about how robots and animals can make their way in the world and create
truly subtle and profound programs on the computer that bring ideas to life in a way that is far
beyond their abilities to construct physical versions of the ideas at their age.
In a few years the computers themselves will be almost free and will be part of a truly global
communications network. So all the ideas described in this book are almost within reach of every
child on the planet. But we still have to ﬁnd ways to remember what is really important here.
The most critical distinction we have to keep in mind is that between “doing real science” and
“learning about what scientists have done”. This is similar to the distinction between “Music” and
“Music Appreciation”. The latter are worthwhile in both cases, but both quite need the learning
of the real process in order to understand what the “Appreciation Knowledge” really means. For
example, there are no important diﬀerences between being given a “holy book” full of assertions and
being asked to memorize and believe them, and being given a “science book” full of assertions and
being asked to memorize and believe them. As with the diﬀerence between two values of logic (true
and false) and the many valued logic of science (lots of worthwhile falses) the diﬀerence between
what science means when it says “we know that . . . ” and what previous knowledge systems mean
by this could hardly be larger. When science makes a claim about “knowing”, it is so diﬀerent from
previous uses that it should not have tried to reuse “know” as the word for this, because what is
meant is: “We have an excellent map-model for this that works thus and so with this amount of
tolerance and doesn’t map as well as we’d like here and there, and by the way, here’s how you can
help check this out and make your own criticisms, etc.”
I hope that the projects presented in this book and what you’ve read so far will convince you
that these activities are not only “math and science”, but deep, real, and important aspects of
mathematics and science. What if more issues than those of the physical world were thought about
in this slower, suspended-perception, skeptical, careful, powerful, and map-and-model building
manner? If you think that things would be vastly diﬀerent and improved for the beneﬁt of all
humans, then please help children learn to think much better than most adults do today.
79
A Glossary of Squeak Vocabulary
Can you speak “Squeak?”
Assignment Arrow
The green arrow on purple background found in an object’s
viewer. Using this arrow in a script will assign a value to a
speciﬁc property of that object.
Etoy
A Squeak-based, “electronic” or “educational” project which
might be a simulation, model, story or game created by a
child or adult. An Etoy might help illustrate or give insight
into a concept or powerful idea.
Flap
Navigational commands, supplies, and scripting tiles are all
contained in ﬂaps. Flaps are partially transparent and can be
used to “store” additional items the user might like to keep
handy for frequent use. The Squeak plug-in comes with two
visible ﬂaps as the default: Navigator and Supplies.
Halo
When any object is selected (Alt-click or Command-click) a
“halo” of “handles” will appear.
Handles
The colored icons surrounding an object. Each of these al-
low for diﬀerent manipulation of and change to that object.
See the “Handles Tutorial” on www.squeakland.org/etoys/
tutorials to learn what each handle does. Each handle is
also supplied with balloon help to inform you of its function.
Navigator
The orange ﬂap found at the bottom-left of the World. When
opened it contains options for navigating, collaborating, pub-
lishing (saving), painting and creating new projects.
Object
The unit of creation in Squeak. Everything is an object in
Squeak! By sending messages (commands or scripts) to ob-
jects we can communicate with them and invoke behaviors.
80
A Glossary of Squeak Vocabulary
Object Catalog
The Object Catalog is found in the Supplies ﬂap.
It is a
searchable tool that lets you browse a variety of Squeak ob-
jects. It contains several categories as well as an alphabetic
listing of all objects.
Pane
A section or category in an object’s viewer. One can choose
to have between one and four viewable “panes” in an object’s
viewer by clicking on the “mini-viewer” on the top left. Panes
in the viewer are eliminated by clicking on its remove button.
Pens
As in Logo, any object can leave pen trails as it moves. Pens
can be found in their own category Pen Use in an object’s
viewer.
Setting “pen down” to “true” will leave a marked
trail on the World. Note: Pen trails can only be left on the
“World” or on a playﬁeld, not on a painted background.
Playﬁeld
A playﬁeld is a type of object that can be found in the Sup-
plies ﬂap. Playﬁelds can be the basis of a “sub project” or
illustration within another project. Many playﬁelds can be
placed on a “World” and become part of a project.
Plug-In
A plug-in is a piece of software that is used to expand the func-
tionality of an existing program during its runtime. Once the
Squeak plug-in is installed on your computer, Squeak projects
become fully interactive. Plug-ins do not need to be loaded
or unloaded when used, they will execute themselves when
called upon to do so by the parent program or project. There
are many plug-ins that provide both form and functionality
(for example: QuickTime, Shockwave and Flash players, and
so on).
Project
A project is the “hyper-document” in Squeak.
Projects
are created, published (saved), shared and exchanged.
In
word processing, we create documents; in Squeak we create
projects.
81
A Glossary of Squeak Vocabulary
Publishing
Saving in Squeak is known as publishing. A project can be
published to your computer’s hard drive, or to a server so that
it can be shared. Holding down the Publish It! button on
the gold Navigator ﬂap will show several publishing options.
Script/Scriptor
Objects can be sent messages and instructions by combining
tiles and running them inside a “Scriptor.” Before a script
is created for an object, the “Scripts” category in the viewer
only contains an “empty script.” It is good practice to name
your scripts as you create them.
Scripts can be dismissed
or hidden by clicking on the tan circle to the right of the
exclamation point.
Sketch
Any painted object, before it is named, is a sketch. It is good
practice to name your sketches after painting and keeping
them.
Sticky Pad
A sticky pad is a note pad ﬁlled with translucent “notes”
of various pastel colors. Sticky notes can be “torn oﬀ” the
pad and used for project annotation or a variety of purposes.
Some of the projects in this book suggest using sticky notes
as measuring devices.
Stop-Step-Go Buttons (All Scripts tool)
The set of stop step go buttons found in the Supplies ﬂap
will run (and stop) all scripts in a project. Clicking the small
blue button next to the go button will expand the buttons
into the All Scripts tool. This tool shows all scripts in a
project and can be very useful when reviewing other peoples’
projects to understand how they were constructed.
82
A Glossary of Squeak Vocabulary
Tab
Tabs are used to open and close ﬂaps such as viewers, Supplies
and the Navigator. Tabs are created for objects once a sketch
has been “kept” and its viewer selected by clicking on the
turquoise “eyeball” handle.
A small thumbnail drawing of
the sketch is shown on its tab.
The tab can be dismissed
(but not lost) by clicking the small tan circle at the top of
the object’s viewer, just to the right of the tab. If the tab
has been dismissed, it can be recalled by selecting the object
(revealing its handles) and selecting the turquoise “eyeball”
handle.
Tiles
Tiles are the units used for constructing messages and scripts
to send instructions to objects. Tiles are primarily found in
an object’s viewer. Tiles connected together form a “string.”
Viewer
An object’s viewer is revealed when clicking on the turquoise
“eyeball” handle of any object. The viewer shows categories
of properties and instructions for the object, represented by
tiles. Clicking the yellow exclamation point in the viewer will
run that particular instruction once (holding the exclamation
point will repeat the action).
Values of properties such as
“x”, “y” and “heading” are also shown in the object’s viewer.
There are several categories in the viewer. Clicking on the
green arrowheads next to any category (for example, “basic”)
will toggle between the categories. Adding panes to the viewer
(by clicking on the “miniviewer” icon in the viewer’s title bar)
will reveal additional categories. Explore!!!
Watchers
Watchers (simple and detailed) can be found in an object’s
viewer by clicking on the small menu to the left of its property.
A watcher can be added to a project to track a particular
property of an object. Detailed watchers are shown here. A
“simple” watcher shows only the numeric value.
World
The World is the basis or foundation of any Squeak project.
Simulations can run directly in the world. While the default
color of the world is gray, it can be changed to your liking (by
choosing the gray “repaint” handle).
83
Further Reading
The following is a small selection of books written by thinkers of “powerful ideas” whose names
have been mentioned in this book or whose work has had signiﬁcant inﬂuence on our curriculum
development and practice.
Jerome S. Bruner. Toward a Theory of Instruction. Harvard University Press, 1974.
Alan Cromer. Uncommon Sense: The Heretical Nature of Science. Oxford University Press, New
York, 1993.
Stillman Drake. Galileo at Work: His Scientiﬁc Biography. University of Chicago Press, 1981.
Yasmin Kafai and Mitchel Resnick (editors). Constructionism in Practice: Designing, Thinking
and Learning in a Digital World. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1996.
Alan C. Kay. A Personal Computer for Children of All Ages. Xerox Palo Alto Research Center,
August 1972.
Alan C. Kay. Computers, Networks and Education. Scientiﬁc American, September 1991.
http://www.squeakland.org/school/HTML/sci_amer_article/sci_amer_01.html
Maria Montessori. The Secret of Childhood. Ballantine Books, 1992.
Philip and Phylis Morrison. The Ring of Truth: an inquiry into how we know what we know.
Random House, Inc., 1987. ISBN 0–394–55663–1.
Pat Murphy, Ellen Klages and Linda Shore. The Science Explorer: An Exploratorium-at-Home
Book. The Exploratorium, San Francisco, CA, 2003.
Seymour Papert.
Mindstorms: Children, Computers and Powerful Ideas.
Basic Books, New
York, 1980.
Seymour Papert. Situating Constuctionism. In I. Harel and S. Papert (editors). Constructionism.
Ablex Publishing, Norwood, New Jersey, 1991.
Jean Piaget and Barbel Inhelder. The Psychology of the Child. Basic Books, New York, 2000.
Jean Piaget. The Child’s Conception of Number. Norton Press, New York, 1965.
Mitchel Resnick. Xylophones, Hamsters and Fireworks: The Role of Diversity in Constructionist
Activities. In I. Harel and S. Papert (editors). Constructionism. Ablex Publishing, Norwood,
New Jersey, 1991.
Mitchel Resnick. Turtles, Termites and Traﬃc Jams: Explorations in Massively Parallel Mi-
croworlds. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1994.
R. P. Taylor (editor). The Computer in the School: Tutor, Tool, Tutee. Teachers College Press,
New York, 1980.
If you would like a more technical treatment of these ideas then the following two works are a great
starting point.
H. Abelson and A. diSessa. Turtle Geomety: The Computer as a Medium for Exploring Mathe-
matics. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1980.
Michael Travers. Agar: An Animal Construction Kit. Master’s Thesis, MIT, 1988.
http://xenia.media.mit.edu/~mt/agar/agar.html
84
Hats Off!
The authors wish to give a deep bow of acknowledgement and thanks to our friend and colleague
Peter Maguire. Peter is the talented artist who breathed life into “Adam Link,” the character who
has appeared on the pages of this book and joined us through our Etoy adventures. Peter took
painstaking eﬀort to ensure that each of the graphics we chose for this book would appear crisp
and clean in its ﬁnal form.
We also give a multitude of thanks to Ian Piumarta, our editor and the brains behind the ﬁnal
typesetting and formatting of this book. We are so grateful for Ian’s volunteer eﬀorts toward this
most laborious task.
Final thanks to our colleagues — the teachers and friends that proofread and “beta-tested” the
projects in this book, and for the comments and encouragement they provided along the way.
BJ & Kim
85
About the Authors
BJ Conn has been a teacher in the Los Angeles Uniﬁed School District
for 36 years and is currently teaching at the Open Charter School. She
has been working for the last 20 years to create meaningful ways to help
integrate technology into classroom curricula, especially in the areas of
math and science. She is the recipient of numerous grants and awards for
her work, and was nominated for Teacher of the Year in 1988. BJ has been
called upon to share her knowledge and successes with technology within
the Los Angeles Uniﬁed School District, as well as numerous conferences
and workshops throughout the United States.
BJ has had the pleasure of working with Alan Kay since 1985, when
the Open Charter School was chosen to be the research site for Apple
Computer’s Vivarium Project.
BJ received her Bachelor of Arts Degree from California State College
at Los Angeles in 1968. She has worked as a teacher consultant for Apple
Computer and Walt Disney Imagineering Research & Development. She
is also a member of the International Academy of Digital Arts & Sciences.
Kim Rose is co-founder and Executive Director of Viewpoints Research
Institute, Inc., a non-proﬁt organization devoted to the continued develop-
ment of Squeak and other new media environments. She is also a Systems
Program Manager at Hewlett-Packard. A media developer, media critic,
and cognitive scientist, she has worked with Alan Kay and his team since
1986.
Kim works with children and teachers in a variety of schools, universi-
ties, and community learning centers around the world to develop and test
Squeak and Squeak-based collaborative dynamic curricula, and to explore
how powerful ideas can become more accessible to children.
Kim received her Bachelor of Arts Degree from the University of Cal-
ifornia, Los Angeles (UCLA) in 1979. In 1995 she was a visiting scholar
at NYU’s Media Ecology Department. In 2000, Prentice Hall published a
book edited by Kim and Mark Guzdial entitled “Squeak Open Personal
Computing and Multimedia.”
Kim has known BJ Conn for over 17 years and has spent many, many
hours collaborating with BJ inside and outside the classroom.
87
