112
Ieee spectrum April 1966
On the mechanization of
The goal of mechanizing certain creative processes
in problem solving is attainable, but not in the near
future. The problem is to find workable computer
procedures for evolving "appropriate" representa-
tions in given problem-solving situations. The answer
may lie in the extensionof ideas that were developed
for some elementary theory-formation procedures.
There is no general agreement on the nature of crea-
tivityor the characteristics of a creativeact. Such an act is
often surprising, has elements of a new approach,and is
not stereotypic. Beyond these phenomenological prop-
erties, one finds that a creativeact has a strong elementof
synthesis. It is usually associated with ill-defined goals or
it involves reformulation of externally imposed goals.
Some students of the human mind feel that formation of
powerful imagery, abstraction to appropriate spaces,
flexible associations, and rich generation of analogies are
key element sof creative processes. Others feel that, in
addition to these elements, some mysterious, unexplain-
able processes control the genesis of ideas and insights
in man'screativeprocess. If weexcludethe beliefin such
unexplainableprocesses, then it is reasonable to attempt
explications of(at leastsome) creative processes in terms
of information-processing models. Explications of this
type will essentially amount to advancing operational
definitionsof creative processes. By studying the implica-
tions of such proposed definitions, by testing themversus
existing notions of creative behavior, by subsequently
improving the proposed
and so on, we can
hope to attain a satisfactory understanding of the notion
of a creative process. In this manner, there is a chance
that we can arrive both at a psychological theory of
creativeprocesses and at the logicalprinciples that under-
lie computer realizationsof such processes.
I would like to present here some tentative ideas on an
operationaldefinitionof creative processes in the general
context of problem-solving processes. My comments are
restricted to some of the creative processes that occur in
the problem-solving activities of the physical scientist,
the engineer, and the mathematician.
An important type ofproblem confronting thephysical
scientist is the formation of theories that organize em-
pirical knowledge in certain desired ways. A common
problem for the engineer is to evolve a design that satis-
fies desired goals. One of theproblems of the mathemati-
cian is to prove theoremsin a formal system. In the last
decade, several procedures have been developed for
solving by computerproblemsof thesethreetypes. Much
of the present research in artificialintelligenceis directed
to extending the scope andpower of such problem-solv-
ing procedures. It is my belief that some of the difficult
problems that we are now facing in the design of more
powerful problem-solving procedures are related to the
problem of mechanizing certain creativeprocesses.
Extending the power of problem-solving procedures
Two central notions are involved in a problem-solving
procedure:
a problem state—a description of a
problem situation including goals, available resources,
and intermediateresults; and second, a set of relevant
moves that can be applied from a state to obtain new
states. The relevant moves commonlyreflect the rules of
the game, the rules of inference, the grammar,the avail-
able composition, etc., that can be used by a problem-
solving procedurein thecourse ofan attempt to construct
a solution. In designingproblem-solvingprocedures one
must find appropriatedescriptionsfor problem statesand
for transformation of states via moves. In other words,
one must face the problem of defining a problem-state
space;I call this the problem ofrepresentation.A closely
related problem is the problem of evaluation.It involves
the choice of concepts and methods for evaluatinga va-
riety of measures of progress—as well as estimatesof ex-
pected search efforts—that can be associated with points
in state space and also with transition between points
in that space. A third major problem is that ofcontrolling
the search for a solution in state space. Here one needs
overall strategies and specific decision functions for
intelligently selecting problems—solving moves between
problem states so that a solution can be found with as
smalla computational cost as possible. Most ofthe effort
expended on machine problem solving so far has been
directed to this third problem; specifically, to the study
of a variety of schemes for heuristic search.'
In the present state of the artificial intelligence art,
the designer of a problem-solving procedureis required to
solvewithoutaidfrom the machinetheproblems ofchoos-
ing a statespace, a basisfor evaluation,and a strategy for
heuristic search. The relatively intelligent behavior of
the machine thatsolves problems in accordance with the
problem-solving procedure formulatedby the designer is
therefore circumscribed by the choices ofrepresentation
evaluationand control thatare madeby the designer.
Amarel—Mechanization of creative processes
113
Ideas on an operational definition oj
creative processes in the general con-
text of problem solving are presented
—restricted
to such processes that
occur
in
the problem-solving
ac-
tivities of the physical scientist, the
engineer, and the mathematician
creative processes
Saul Amarel
RCA Laboratories
Improvement in the power of problem-solving pro-
cedures can be achieved by making appropriatechanges
in the rules thatcontrolsearch, in the methods of evalua-
tion, and in the modes of representation. Severalattempts
have already been made to adjust certain parameters
automatically in local decision rules that control search,
and also in evaluation functions—on the basis of sta-
tistical learning techniques. 2 However, no schemes exist
as yet for general nonparametric control of the search
and evaluation parts of problem-solving
procedures.
In our work with proving theorems of the proposi-
tional calculus by the method of natural deduction we
have developed a sequence of procedures of increasing
power in order to evaluate the nature of improvements
that occur at different stages of this evolution. The most
spectacularimprovement was obtainedwhen theproblem
representation was changed in an "appropriate" way—
the shift in representation has transformed the problem
to one of finding appropriateclosures to certain directed
graphs. The new problem representation immediately
suggests to human problem solvers a new, more power-
basis for evaluation and search the result is a much
better goal-oriented, thus less
problem-solv-
ing process. We had similar experiencewith other rela-
tivelysimple transportationscheduling problems. Indeed,
the importance of "having the right point of view,"
"casting the problem in the appropriate
"con-
ceptualizingthe problem correctly" has been recognized
for some time by students of problem-solving processes. 3
Finding the "most appropriate"space
I think that creative problem solvingis closely related
to the notion of directing the search for solution in the
"most appropriate"space. More specifically, I would like
to suggest that theformation ofan appropriateconcept of
problem space, where a given problem is to be treated—
in otherwords, the solutionof theproblem ofrepresenta-
tion—is a creative process. This process could also be
regarded as a process of building an appropriatemodel.
While the use of given models in problem solving has al-
ready been considered by workers in artificial intelli-
gence,4 the dynamic aspects of evolving an appropriate
model so far have received little attention.
It is commonly asserted that by furnishing a manwith
convenient graphical displays of appropriatemodels, he
will be stimulated to provide the creative contribution
expected from him in his problem-solving partnership
with the machine. Clearly, someone has to choose the
appropriatemodels to be displayed in specific situations;
I consider this selection of models as demanding the
main measureof creativity thatenters theproblem-solving
process. If the man's function in his partnership with the
machine is not only to utilize models (that facilitate his
searchfor a solution)but also toform and modifymodels
during the problem-solvingprocess, then he will indeed
be exercising his creative powers. This point of view has
certain implicationsregarding theflexibility and power of
model-building languages that are needed in a genuine
creative problem-solvingsystem involving man-machine
interaction. Also, it may provide a test framework for
identifyingthe part thatcreative processes play in prob-
lem solving.
Creative processes and theory formation
Ifwe start with the assumption that the function of a
creative process in problem solving is the formationof an
appropriateproblem representation(the growth of appro-
priate symbolizations or of suitable models), then the
mechanismsthatcome intoplay in a creativeprocess will
have much in common with theory-formation mecha-
nisms. In the theory-formation problem of the physical
scientist the objectiveis to construct efficientlyaninforma-
tion structure, in terms of existing linguistic and con-
ceptual resources, that would summarize "elegantly"
and "explain" a set (usually large) of empirically ob-
tained relationships in a given area. The information
structure, because of its mode of construction, expresses
the empirical knowledge in terms of existing theoretical
constructs, thus incorporating the new empirical infor-
mation in the main body of theoretical knowledge. It
also provides an appropriatebasis for solving problems
and answering questionsin the given area. In the model-
formation problem of the problem solver the objective
is to construct a theory in terms of appropriatelinguistic
and mathematical constructs that expresses in a con-
venient mannei to the problem solver the properties of
the problemstate space.
In our work on theory-formation processes we have
studied specifically procedures for the automatic forma-
11
n descnpt
appropriat
1
JOSS
it
building models (a model of for
evolve a model for a certain coi
again natural to ask how it is
machine an appropriatemodel tl
le the
lei. 4 Again, I
:hine formation ofanotl
:onsider the constructioi
lei as involving a
creative process
Mechanization of creative processes
In general, I think that many of the ideas used in
theory-formation procedures can be transferred to the
mechanization of processes for evolving appropriate
representations (or for recognizing that a certain formal
systemprovides an appropriatemodel) in given problem-
solving situations. If we agree that such representation
selection processes are creative processes, then we can
alreadyenvision an approach (through theory-formation
ideas,which, admittedly, are still at a very early stage of
development)to the mechanizationof creative processes
in problem solving. However,evenif a general approach
"d
ing quotation
ments: "The
■c
being purely presented but can be stated a
jnstructing ever higher types. These are as trar
dinals and thi
ranscending them by seeing previously unseen
;ive a sequence of such numbers. Now it seems tl
ted proce
conscious. But it is not given till it is made completely
conscious. But then it ought to be constructable purely
mechanical1
I find this statement remarkable because it as
the notions ofvisualization(symbolizationor rep
tion), of a hierarchy of such visualizations, and
scious
self-reflectiveness with
the
creative
pre
furthermore. it ends with a note of confidence ah
possiblemechanizationofcreative processes
This article is an expanded version
the author
F
view as expressed in a panel discussion on the mechaniz
creative processes that took place on May 28 at the 19'i65 IFIP
E.
A
ir
Feigenbaum; other panelists were J. McCarthy, V. Neisser
A
G.
and
1
I-
tideis sponsored by the Air Force Officeof ScientificR
F
of the Office of Aerospace
under Contract N
■8)- 1184.
6.
REFERENCES
Newell, A., and Ernst,
IFIP Congress 65. W. A. I
Washington, D.C: SpartanBooks, 1965,pp. 17-24.
2. Slagle, "A multipurpose theorem—proving
Proc.
the IFIP
;ton, D.C. : Spartan Be
in
Minsky, M. L., "M
W. A. X
Spartan
196
5. Amarel,
"Oj
M.
V
\V
Amarel, S.,
Wi
Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Isr
I
Amarel,
: Spartan Books, to be pub
N
Post, I
nore efficient. Not
:ussing the imporl
)n space is used
ition). Hence, il
ble to evolve ir
iut we are a
nplete seem
Congress in New York, N.Y. T
3. Polya, G, Mathematical Discovery, vols.
1 and 2. New V
Wiley, 1964.
