An Interview with
Vladimir Arnol′d
by S. H. Lui
432
NOTICES OF THE AMS
VOLUME 44, NUMBER 4
V
ladimir Arnol′d is currently professor
of mathematics at both the Steklov
Mathematical Institute, Moscow, and
Ceremade, Université de Paris–
Dauphine. Professor Arnol′d obtained
his Ph.D. from the Moscow State University in
1961. He has made fundamental contributions
in dynamical systems, singularity theory, sta-
bility theory, topology, algebraic geometry, mag-
neto-hydrodynamics, partial differential equa-
tions, and other areas. Professor Arnol′d has
won numerous honors and awards, including
the Lenin Prize, the Crafoord Prize, and the Har-
vey Prize.
This interview took place on November 11,
1995. The following articles may be of interest
to the reader:
1) Conversation with Vladimir Igorevich
Arnol′d, by S. Zdravkovska, Mathematical Intel-
ligencer 9:4 (1987). 
2) A mathematical trivium, by V. I. Arnol′d,
Russian Math. Surveys 46:1 (1991).
3) Will Russian mathematics survive?, by V. I.
Arnol′d, Notices of the AMS 40:2 (1993). 
4) Why Mathematics?, by V. I. Arnol′d, Quan-
tum, 1994.
5) Will mathematics survive? Report on the
Zurich Congress, by V. I. Arnol′d, Mathematical
Intelligencer 17:3 (1995). 
Lui: Please tell us a little bit about your early ed-
ucation. Were you already interested in math-
ematics as a child?
Arnol′d: The Russian mathematical tradition
goes back to the old merchant problems. Very
young children start thinking about such prob-
lems even before they have any knowledge of
numbers. Children five to six years old like them
very much and are able to solve them, but they
may be too difficult for university graduates,
who are spoiled by formal mathematical train-
ing. A typical example is:
You take a spoon of wine from a barrel of
wine, and you put it into your cup of tea. Then
you return a spoon of the (nonuniform!) mixture
of tea from your cup to the barrel. Now you
have some foreign substance (wine) in the cup
and some foreign substance (tea) in the barrel.
Which is larger: the quantity of wine in the cup
or the quantity of tea in the barrel at the end of
your manipulations?
Slightly older children, knowing the first few
numbers, like the following problem. Jane and
John wish to buy a children’s book. However, Jane
needs seven more cents to buy the book, while
John needs one more cent. They decide to buy
only one book together but discover that they
S. H. Lui is an assistant professor at the Hong Kong Uni-
versity of Science and Technology. His e-mail address
is shlui@uxmail.ust.hk.
This article previously appeared in the February
1996 issue of the Hong Kong Mathematics Society
Newsletter.
Editor’s Note: As this article went to press,
V. I. Arnol′d submitted an update on the in-
terview, based on subsequent correspondence
and events. It was received too late to be in-
cluded in the article.
Utilius scandalum nasci permittur quam veritas relinquatur.
(One should speak the truth even at risk of provoking a scandal.)
—Decretalium V of Pope Gregory IX, 1227–1241
APRIL 1997
NOTICES OF THE AMS
433
do not have enough money. What is the price of
the book? (One should know that books in Rus-
sia are very cheap!)
Many Russian families have the tradition of
giving hundreds of such problems to their chil-
dren, and mine was no exception. The first real
mathematical experience I had was when our
schoolteacher I. V. Morozkin gave us the fol-
lowing problem: Two old women started at sun-
rise and each walked at a constant velocity. One
went from A to B and the other from B to A. They
met at noon and, continuing with no stop, arrived
respectively at B at 4 p.m. and at A at 9 p.m. At
what time was the sunrise on this day?
I spent a whole day thinking on this oldie, and
the solution (based on what is now called scal-
ing arguments, dimensional analysis, or toric
variety theory, depending on your taste) came
as a revelation. The feeling of discovery that I had
then (1949) was exactly the same as in all the sub-
sequent much more serious problems—be it the
discovery of the relation between algebraic geom-
etry of real plane curves and four-dimensional
topology (1970) or between singularities of caus-
tics and of wave fronts and simple Lie algebra
and Coxeter groups (1972). It is the greed to ex-
perience such a wonderful feeling more and
more times that was, and still is, my main mo-
tivation in mathematics.
Lui: What was it like studying at Moscow State
University? Can you tell us something about the
professors (Petrovskii, Kolmogorov, Pontriagin,
Rokhlin,…)?
Arnol′d: The atmosphere of the Mechmat
(Moscow State University Mechanics and Math-
ematics Faculty) in the fifties when I was a stu-
dent is described in detail in the book Golden
Years of Moscow Mathematics, edited by
S. Zdravkovska and P. L. Duren and published
jointly by the AMS and LMS in 1993. It contains
reminiscences of many people. In particular, my
article was on A. N. Kolmogorov, who was my su-
pervisor.
The constellation of great mathematicians in
the same department when I was studying at the
Mechmat was really exceptional, and I have never
seen anything like it at any other place. Kol-
mogorov, Gelfand, Petrovskii, Pontriagin,
P. Novikov, Markov, Gelfond, Lusternik, Khinchin,
and P. S. Alexandrov were teaching students like
Manin, Sinai, S. Novikov, V. M. Alexeev, Anosov,
A. A. Kirillov, and me.
All these mathematicians were so different!
It was almost impossible to understand Kol-
mogorov’s lectures, but they were full of ideas
and were really rewarding! I recall his explana-
tion of his theory of the size of the minimal
cube into which you can embed every graph hav-
ing N vertices (balls of fixed size), each con-
nected with at most K others by wires of fixed
thickness. He explained that when N is very
large (while K is fixed), the diameter of the cube
grows like 
√
N by the following argument: the
grey matter (the body of the neurons) is on the
surface of the human brain, while the white mat-
ter (the connections) fills the interior part. Since
the brain is embedded into the head as eco-
nomically as possible, a sufficiently complicated
brain of N neurons can only be embedded in a
cube of size 
√
N (while a trivial brain, like that
of a worm, needs only the size 
3√
N).
Kolmogorov’s work on what is now called
KAM theory of Hamiltonian systems was a by-
product of compulsory exercises that he gave to
all second-year undergraduate students. One of
the problems was the study of some nontrivial
completely integrable systems (like the motion
of a heavy particle along the surface of a hori-
zontal torus of revolution). No computers were
available then! He observed that the motion in
all such classical examples was quasiperiodic
and tried to find examples of more complicated
motion (“mixing”, or in today’s language, “chaos”)
in the case of nonintegrable perturbed systems.
His attempts were unsuccessful. The problem
which motivated his study is still open—no one
has been able to find an invariant torus carry-
ing mixing flows in generically perturbed sys-
tems. However, the by-products of this investi-
gation are far more important than the initial
technical problem on mixing. They include the
discovery of the persistent nonresonant tori,
the “accelerated convergence” method and the
related implicit function theorems in function
spaces, the proof of stability of motion in many
Hamiltonian systems (e.g., gyroscopes and plan-
etary orbits), and the proof of the existence of
magnetic surfaces in the Tokamak geometry,
which is used in the study of plasma containment
for controlled thermonuclear fusion.
That consequences of an investigation are
more important than the original question is a
general phenomenon. The initial goal of Colum-
bus was to find a new way to India. The discov-
ery of the New World was just a by-product.
Pontriagin was already very weak when I was
a student at Mechmat, but he was perhaps the
best of the lecturers. He had just turned from
topology to control theory, and his personality
had also changed a lot. He later explained his rea-
sons for switching to applied mathematics and
his antisemitic ideas in his autobiography pub-
lished in the Russian Mathematical Surveys.
When he submitted this paper to the Editorial
Board, the KGB representative suggested that the
article should not be published as it was be-
cause of its extreme openness. I would prefer to
see the original text published—what you now
find is rather softened. Some people claim that
434
NOTICES OF THE AMS
VOLUME 44, NUMBER 4
his antisemitism might be simply a manifesta-
tion of his fear that some part of his blood might
be Jewish and that this might be discovered.
However, Pontriagin was not always like this!
During the war his best student, V. A. Rokhlin,
was wounded and imprisoned by the Germans.
Later, Rokhlin was liberated by the Americans,
returned to Russia, and continued to serve in the
Russian army, which was still fighting. One day,
while he was transporting a captured German of-
ficer to his superior, he met a drunk KGB offi-
cer, who wanted to shoot the German officer im-
mediately. Rokhlin objected. Fortunately, Rokhlin
was saved by his superior, who immediately
sent him to a different regiment. However, in the
end Rokhlin was, as were all the Russians who
were saved from the German camps by the Al-
lies, sent to the gulag (Russian concentration
camp) in the north of Russia.
Some months later, someone who was liber-
ated from this camp came to Moscow and told
Pontriagin that Rokhlin was still alive but dying
from starvation in the camp. Pontriagin, with the
help of Kolmogorov, Alexandrov, and others,
wrote a letter to Beria, the KGB chief, claiming
that Rokhlin should be immediately released
because he was the most talented mathematician
of his generation. Beria signed the order to lib-
erate Rokhlin, who was subsequently given a
machine gun and continued his military service
as a guard at the same camp where he had been
held prisoner. Pontriagin and others wrote a
second letter to Beria, and Rokhlin finally was
able to return to Moscow.
Rokhlin had no right to propiska in Moscow
since returning from the gulag. [Propiska is Russ-
ian, meaning the right to live in a specified area—
one is not free to live elsewhere. Propiska is ap-
plied to everybody!] Pontriagin was completely
blind and had a right to hire a personal secre-
tary at the Moscow Steklov Institute. He was
brave enough to give this position to Rokhlin,
who later became one of the leading Soviet math-
ematicians in topology and dynamical systems.
Rokhlin had a lot of influence on the younger
generation of mathematicians (like S. Novikov,
Sinai, Anosov, and me) and later created a very
important mathematical school at St. Peters-
burg. Some of his illustrious students include
Vershik, Gromov, Eliashberg, Viro, Shustin, Tu-
raev, and Kharlamov. I met him in the sixties
when he held a seminar in Moscow. He came to
Moscow from one hundred miles away, where his
propiska allowed him to live.
Rokhlin was of Jewish origin and survived
the German prisoner camp by pretending to be
a Muslim. Indeed, he was born in Baku, Azer-
baijan. It was really dangerous for Pontriagin to
help him and to approach Beria. Pontriagin pre-
served his high opinion of Rokhlin even after he
became an active antisemite. My personal rela-
tion with Pontriagin was rather good. He invited
me to his house and to his seminar and showed
genuine interest in my work, especially on sin-
gularity theory. This was partially due to our
common interests in differential topology and
control and game theory. The main reason, how-
ever, was that he wanted to say something
against me at an international meeting. Pon-
triagin was then the Russian representative in
the International Mathematical Union (IMU) and
had done a lot to prevent any vote for dissident
Russians. (I was blacklisted because I, along with
99 other mathematicians, had signed a letter
protesting the imprisonment of a perfectly
healthy Soviet mathematician in a psychiatric
hospital. This was the standard method of elim-
inating dissidents.) The IMU had always been very
political, and he succeeded. In his reminiscences
Pontriagin revealed that quite a few of the IMU
officers shared his cannibalistic views. I hope we
shall know their names. Curiously enough, I am
now in his former position, representing Russia
in the IMU.
Petrovskii, who was then the rector of the
university, usually met Rokhlin in the elevator
just before the seminar. I think it was danger-
ous for him to be seen in the company of Rokhlin.
Petrovskii was no longer active in mathematics.
However, he was extremely important for the
Moscow mathematical community, always try-
ing to support genuine mathematicians in dif-
ficult fights with the Communist Party.
His mathematical taste was rather classical,
based on the Italian school of algebraic geome-
try more than the set-theoretic conceptions. Sir
Michael Atiyah once told me that he was always
delighted by the way Petrovskii dealt with alge-
braic geometry in his works on PDEs. One of
these, the paper on the lacunas of hyperbolic
PDEs, was later rewritten by Atiyah, Bott, and
Gårding in modern terminology in two long pa-
pers in Acta Mathematica. It is a far-reaching gen-
eralization of the well-known fact of the im-
possibility of acoustic communication in the
even-dimensional spaces (for instance, in the
“plane” world), while in our three-dimensional
world we communicate easily. It is interesting
that in this paper, Petrovskii proved that the
cohomology classes of the complement of an al-
gebraic variety are representable by rational dif-
ferential forms—a result which is usually at-
tributed to Grothendieck.
The works of Petrovskii (1933 and 1938) on
real algebraic geometry (related to the 16th
Hilbert problem on the shape of real plane al-
gebraic curves) started an important branch of
modern mathematics—the topology of real al-
gebraic varieties. Results of this theory (for ex-
ample, a bound on the Betti numbers in terms
APRIL 1997
NOTICES OF THE AMS
435
of the degrees of the equations) are very useful
in many branches of mathematics, including
complexity theory. For instance, they were used
by Khovanskii in his fewnomial theory, by Smale
in his study of the “real P-NP” problem, and so
on. In the West these results are usually attrib-
uted to Thom and to Milnor (1965), while the pa-
pers by Petrovskii and his student Oleinik, pub-
lished in the forties, contained better estimates
(and were, by the way, quoted by Thom and by
Milnor). This is, however, a very standard situa-
tion—it is too easy to omit quoting Russian fun-
damental papers in the modern world of the job
hunters.
Petrovskii had never been a party member.
This was unknown to most Communists. He was
highly influential, partially because of his per-
sonal relation to his former students, who had
attained very high positions in the Soviet hier-
archical system. Petrovskii was made a member
of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, which
was the “collective president” of the Soviet Union.
He died at the door of the Party Central Com-
mittee building in Moscow of a heart attack after
a long fight at a meeting for the support of fun-
damental science. His last words were “I won.”
After his death the party and the KGB worked
for twenty years to destroy the mathematical cen-
ter at Mechmat created by him. They had stopped
the appointment of talented people to the fac-
ulty, and they have by now almost succeeded in
killing the center.
Lui: Can you tell us your philosophy of teaching
undergraduates and of supervising graduate stu-
dents and how many you have had in Russia
and France?
Arnol′d: The number of Ph.D. theses defended
under my supervision is something like forty. I
cannot give the exact number for several reasons.
In the “stagnation” period, I was not allowed to
supervise foreign graduate students at Moscow
University because I was not a party member.
They still were studying with me, but the offi-
cial supervisor was some friendly party member
who also got paid for it. Some graduate stu-
dents had other supervisors but wrote their the-
ses on topics discussed in my seminars and
were practically my students. Three examples are
S. M. Gusein-Zade, Yu. Iliashenko, and A. I. Neis-
tadt. At present, I’m working with two under-
graduates and three graduates in Moscow and
with four graduates in Paris. Two or three more
are supposed to start in January.
I learn a lot from my students, especially un-
dergraduates. I never assign a thesis topic to my
students. This is like assigning them a spouse.
I merely show them what is known and un-
known.
My Moscow seminar, working even when I
am abroad, consists of about thirty mathemati-
cians, mostly my former graduate students, but
there are always others. The seminar has ex-
isted for about thirty years, and among the par-
ticipants in different years were Ya. Sinai,
V. Alexeev, S. Novikov, M. Kontsevich, A. Gon-
charov, D. B. Fuchs, G. Tjurina, A. Tjurin.…
Life in Moscow is so difficult that most stu-
dents have to earn their living independently of
their scientific work. Some, for instance, start
their own businesses. The rate of crime is so high,
however, that in starting a business, one risks
being killed. One of my graduate students in
Moscow, who has just finished his thesis but has
not defended it, disappeared a few weeks ago.
We have doubts about whether he is alive or
not.
Lui: Do you have any mathematical heroes?
Arnol′d: I would mention Barrow, Newton (who
was, however, a very unpleasant person—see
my book Huygens and Barrow, Newton and
Hooke published by Birkhäuser, 1990), Riemann,
Poincaré, Minkowski, Weyl, Kolmogorov, Whit-
ney, Thom, Smale, and Milnor. One-half of the
mathematics I know comes from the book of
F. Klein Lectures on the Development of Math-
ematics in the 19th Century. I have also learned
a lot from many mathematicians like Gelfand,
Rokhlin, S. Novikov, P. Deligne, Fuchs, and from
my own students like Khovanskii, Nekhoroshev,
Varchenko, Zakaljukin, Vassiliev, Givental,
Goryunov, O. Scherbak, Chekanov, and Kazarian.
I am deeply indebted to Thom, whose singu-
larity seminar at the Institut des Hautes Études
Scientifiques, which I frequented throughout
the year 1965, profoundly changed my math-
ematical universe. I was always delighted by the
way in which Thom discussed mathematics,
using sentences obviously having no strict log-
ical meaning at all. While I was never able to com-
pletely free myself from the straitjacket of logic,
I was forever poisoned by the dream of the ir-
responsible mathematical speculation with no
exact meaning. “One can always find imbeciles
to prove theorems” was, according to Thom’s stu-
dents, his principle.
Milnor’s talks at Leningrad in 1961 on the
differential structures on the sphere made such
a profound impression on my supervisor, Kol-
mogorov, that he suggested that I put this in my
graduate curriculum. This forced me to study dif-
ferential topology from Novikov, Fuchs, and
Rokhlin. This came in handy because, a year
later, I was on the jury for Novikov’s thesis de-
fense on the differential structures on the prod-
ucts of spheres.
Smale was one of the first foreign math-
ematicians I met when he came to Moscow in
436
NOTICES OF THE AMS
VOLUME 44, NUMBER 4
1961. His influence on Russian works in dy-
namical systems and on me was enormous.
Lui: Do you notice any differences in the way peo-
ple from different cultures do mathematics?
Arnol′d: I was unaware of these differences for
many years, but they do exist. A few years ago,
I was participating in an International Science
Foundation (ISF) meeting in Washington, DC.
This organization distributes grants to Russian
scientists. One American participant suggested
support for some Russian mathematician be-
cause “he is working in a good American style.”
I was puzzled and asked for an explanation.
“Well,” the American answered, “it means that
he is traveling a lot to present all his latest re-
sults at all our conferences and is personally
known to all experts in the field.” My opinion is
that ISF should better support those who are
working in the good Russian style, which is to
sit at home working hard to prove fundamental
theorems which will remain the cornerstones
of mathematics forever!
Russian salaries are (and were) so small, that
if someone is doing mathematics, it means that
for him it is the goal and not a means to earn
money. It is still possible to attain a high repu-
tation in the Western mathematical community
by simply rewriting (or modernizing) classical
Russian achievements and ideas unknown to
the West.
The Russian attitude toward knowledge, sci-
ence, and mathematics always conforms to the
old traditions of the Russian intelligentsiya. This
word does not exist in other languages, since no
other country has a similar caste of scholars,
medical doctors, artists, teachers, etc., who find
more reward from their contributions to society
than from personal or monetary gains.
My friend Vershik recently tried to obtain an
American visa in Paris. “What is your salary in
St. Petersburg?” asked the staff at the American
consulate. After hearing his honest reply, the
staff asked, “Do you wish to persuade us that
you intend to return to St. Petersburg at such a
salary?” Vershik answered, “Of course. Money is
not all!” The staff was so shocked that Vershik
was given the visa immediately.
I was applying for a visa a week earlier, and
they put me on a waiting list for three weeks.
Their reasoning was that my papers must be
checked in Washington since I am a “donkey”. I
asked for an explanation. “Well,” they replied, “we
have such names for every crime: dog, cat, tiger,
camel, and so on.” They showed me the list, and
“donkey” is a pseudonym for a Russian scientist.
One other characteristic of the Russian math-
ematical tradition is the tendency to regard all
of mathematics as one living organism. In the
West it is quite possible to be an expert in math-
ematics modulo 5, knowing nothing about math-
ematics modulo 7. One’s breadth is regarded as
negative in the West to the same extent as one’s
narrowness is regarded as unacceptable in Rus-
sia.
The French mathematical school was brilliant
for several centuries, up to the penetrating works
of Leray, H. Cartan, Serre, Thom, and Cerf. The
Bourbakists claimed that all the great math-
ematicians were, using the words of Dirichlet, re-
placing blind calculations by clear ideas. The
Bourbaki manifesto containing these words was
translated into Russian as “all clear ideas were
replaced by blind calculations.” The editor of the
translation was Kolmogorov. His French was ex-
cellent. I was shocked to find such a mistake in
the translation and discussed it with Kol-
mogorov. His answer was: I had not realized
that something was wrong in the translation
since the translator described the Bourbaki style
much better than the Bourbakists did. Unfortu-
nately, Poincaré left no school in France.
A typical example of the French narrow-mind-
edness is the recent discussion at the Academy
of Sciences. Gromov was a foreign associate for
many years, but he recently chose the French na-
tionality and hence could no longer remain a for-
eign associate. The problem was to transfer him
to be an ordinary fellow of the Academy. The
French mathematicians, however, were opposed
to this, saying that “those places are for the re-
ally French people!” In my opinion, all the “re-
ally French” candidates were incomparably below
the level of Gromov, who is one of the world’s
leading mathematicians. In the end, Gromov is
still not a fellow.
To teach in France is very difficult because of
the formalized Bourbaki training the students
have. For example, at a written examination in
dynamical systems for fourth-year students at
Paris-Dauphine, one problem was to find the
limit of the solution of a system of Hamiltonian
equations on the phase plane starting with some
given initial point when time goes to infinity. The
idea was to choose the initial point on a sepa-
ratrix of a saddle, with the limit being the sad-
dle point.
Preparing the examination problem, I made
an arithmetical error, and the phase curve (the
energy-level curve containing the initial point)
was a closed oval instead of the separatrix. The
students discovered this and concluded that
there exists a finite time T at which the solution
returns to the initial point. Using the unicity
theorem, they were able to deduce that for any
integer n the value of the solution at time nT is
still the initial point. Then came the conclusion:
since the limit at infinite time coincides with the
limit for any subsequence of times going to in-
finity, the limit is equal to the initial point! This
APRIL 1997
NOTICES OF THE AMS
437
solution was invented independently by several
good students sitting at different places in the
examination hall. In all this reasoning, there are
no logical mistakes. It is a correct deduction
which one may also generate by a computer. It
is apparent that the authors understood noth-
ing. It is awful to think what kind of pressure the
Bourbakists put on (evidently nonsilly) students
to reduce them to formal machines! This kind
of formalized education is completely useless for
any practical problem and even dangerous, lead-
ing to Chernobyl-type events. Unfortunately, this
plague of formal deduction is propagating in
many countries, and the future of the math-
ematics infected by it is rather bleak.
The United States has a different danger. No
Russian professor is able to solve correctly the
problem they give in the Graduate Record Ex-
amination, the official entrance examination for
graduate studies: find the closest pair to (angle,
degree) among the pairs: (time, hour), (area,
square inch), and (milk, quart). Every American
immediately solves it correctly. The official ex-
planation for the correct response (area, square
inch) is: one degree is the minimal measure of
angle, one square inch is the minimal measure
of area, while an hour contains minutes and a
quart contains two pints. I always wondered
how it is possible for so many Americans to
overcome such difficulties and become great
mathematicians. One physicist in New York who
solved the problem successfully told me that he
had the correct model of the degree of stupid-
ity of the authors of such problems.
H. Whitney told me that the problem (in-
tended for fourteen-year-old American school
children) of whether 120% of the number 80 is
a number greater than, smaller than, or equal to
80 was correctly solved (in a nationwide test) by
30% of the students. People making the test
thought that 30% of the school children under-
stood percentages. Whitney explained to me,
however, that the number of those who really un-
derstood was negligible with respect to the whole
sample. Since there were three possible answers,
the statistical prediction for a correct random
choice was 33%, with a 5% uncertainty.
Recently, even the National Academy of Sci-
ences decided that scientific education in Amer-
ica should be enhanced. What they propose is to
eliminate from the curriculum unnecessary sci-
entific facts too difficult for American children
and replace them by really fundamental, basic
knowledge, such as all objects have properties
and all organisms have nature! (See Nature
372:5606 December 8, 1994.) Undoubtedly, they
will go far with this! Two years ago, I read in USA
Today that American parents have formed a list
of really necessary knowledge for children in
each age category. At ten they have to know that
water has two phases, and at fifteen that the
moon has phases and rotates around the earth.
In Russia we still teach children in primary school
that water has three phases, but the new Amer-
icanized culture will undoubtedly win in the
near future. There are, however, some remark-
able advantages in the free American system,
where a high school student may take, say, a
course on the history of jazz instead of algebra.
A few months before his death, Whitney, who
was still very active at the Institute for Advanced
Study in Princeton, told me the story of his math-
ematical studies. He was an undergraduate in vi-
olin at Yale, and after the second year he was sent
to one of the best centers in Europe for music.
Unfortunately, I have forgotten which city it was,
but in any case it was not far from the Alps, since
he already was a mountain climber. There, a stu-
dent had to pass an exam in a subject different
from his own studies. Whitney asked his fellow
students which subject was the most fashionable
then, and they told him quantum mechanics.
After his first class in quantum mechanics, Whit-
ney approached the famous lecturer (Pauli?
Schrödinger? Sommerfeld?) with the following
words: “Dear Professor, it seems to me that
something is wrong with your lectures. I’m the
best student from Yale, and still I am unable to
understand a word in your lecture.” The lec-
turer, after being informed that Whitney was
studying music, answered quite politely, “This
is because you need some background, such as
calculus and linear algebra.” “Well,” Whitney
replied, “I hope these are not so brand new as
your subject and someone has already written
textbooks on these subjects.” The lecturer agreed
and mentioned the titles of some textbooks. (If
someone knows about this story, I would like to
know the name of the city, lecturer, and titles.)
“In three weeks,” Whitney continued, “I was un-
derstanding his lectures, and at the end of the
semester I switched from music to mathemat-
ics.”
Kolmogorov also started as a nonmath-
ematician—he was studying history. His first
paper, written when he was seventeen, was re-
ported at a seminar given by Bakhrushin at
Moscow University. Kolmogorov came to some
conclusion based on an analysis of medieval tax
records in Novgorod. After his talk, Kolmogorov
asked Bakhrushin whether he agreed with the
conclusions. “Young man,” the professor said,
“in history, we need at least five proofs for any
conclusion.” Next day, Kolmogorov switched to
mathematics. The paper was rediscovered in his
archive after his death and is now published
and approved by the historians.
Lui: Any comments on the relation between pure
and applied mathematics?
438
NOTICES OF THE AMS
VOLUME 44, NUMBER 4
Arnol′d: According to Louis Pasteur, there exist
no applied sciences—what do exist are the AP-
PLICATIONS of sciences. The common opinion
of both pure mathematicians and theoretical
physicists on the applied mathematics commu-
nity is that it consists of weak thinkers unable
to produce something scientifically important
and of those who are more interested in money
than in mathematics. I do not think that this
characteristic is fully deserved by the applied
mathematics community. See my article “Apol-
ogy of applied mathematics” in Russian Math-
ematical Surveys, 1996. It summarizes my talk
at the opening of the Hamburg International
Congress of Industrial and Applied Mathemat-
ics, July 1995. I think that the difference be-
tween pure and applied mathematics is social
rather than scientific. A pure mathematician is
paid for making mathematical discoveries. An ap-
plied mathematician is paid for the solution of
given problems.
When Columbus set sail, he was like an ap-
plied mathematician, paid for the search of the
solution of a concrete problem: find a way to
India. His discovery of the New World was sim-
ilar to the work of a pure mathematician. I do
not think that the discoveries of Galileo (who was
immediately exploiting them in a businesslike
American style) are less important than, say,
those of the pure philosopher Pascal. The real
danger is not the applied mafia itself, but the di-
vorce between pure mathematics and the sci-
ences created by the (I would say criminal) for-
malization of mathematics and of mathematical
education. The axiomatical-deductive Hilbert-
Bourbaki style of exposition of mathematics,
dominant in the first half of this century, is now
fortunately giving place to the unifying trends
of the Poincaré style geometrical mathematics,
combining deep theoretical insight with real-
world applications.
By the way, I read in a recent American book
that geometry is the art of making no mistakes
in long calculations. I think that this is an un-
derestimation of geometry.
Our brain has two halves: one is responsible
for the multiplication of polynomials and lan-
guages, and the other half is responsible for ori-
entation of figures in space and all the things im-
portant in real life. Mathematics is geometry
when you have to use both halves. See, for in-
stance, “The geometry of formulae” by A. G.
Khovanskii in the Soviet Sci. Rev. Sect. C: Math.
Phys. Rev. V4 (1984).
