 l n the study of the history and
 sociology of sciencen there has been
 a relative lack of attention to one of
 the interesting aspects of the social
 process of discovery the resistance on
 the part of scientists themselves to
 scientific discovery. General and spe-
 cialized histories of science and
 biographies and autobiographies of
 scientists, as well as intensive discus-
 sions of the processes by which dis-
 coveries are made and accepted, all
 tend to make, at the most, passing
 reference to this subject. Tn two sys-
 tematic analyses of the social process
 of scientific discovery and invention,
 for example-analyses which tried to
 be as inclusive of empirical fact and
 theoretical problem as possible-there
 is only passing reference to such re-
 sistance in the one instance and none
 at all in the second ( 1 ) . This neglect
 is all the more notable in view of
 the close scrutiny that scholars have
 given the subject of resistance to
 scientific discovery by social groups
 other than scientists. There has been a
 great deal of attention paid to re-
 sistance on the part of econonlic,
 technological, religious, and ideological
 elements and grotlps outside science
 itself ( 13 ) Indeed, the tendency of
 such elements to resist seems some-
 times to be emphasized disproportion-
 ately as against the support which they
 a]so give to science. fn the matter of
 religion, for example are we not all
 a little too much aware that religion
 has resisted scientific discoveryS not
 eno-ugh aware of the large support it
 has given to Western science? (4,f).
 The mere assertion that scientists
 The author is professor of sociology at Bar-
 nard College, Columbia University, New YorkS
 N.Y. This is the text of a lecture delivered 28
 Decelnber 1960 at the New York meeting of
 {:he AAkfi S.
 S96
 Helmholt:z, Planck, and Lister
 Although the resistance by scientists
 themselves to scientific discovery has
 been neglected in systematic analysis,
 it would be surprising indeed if it had
 never been noted at all. If nowhere else,
 we should find it in the writings of
 those scientists who have suSered from
 resistance on the part of other scien-
 tists. Helmholtz, for example, made
 aware of such resistance by his own
 experience, commiserated with Fara-
 day on "the fact that the greatest bene-
 factors of mankind usually do not ob-
 tain a full reward during their life-time,
 and that new ideas need the more time
 for gaining general assent the more
 really original- they are" (7-9). Max
 Planck is another who noticed resist-
 ance in general because he had experi-
 enced it himself in regard to some
 new ideas on the second law of thermo-
 dynamics which he worked out in his
 doctoral dissertation submitted to the
 University of Munich in 1879. Ironical-
 ly, one of those who resisted the ideas
 proposed in Planck's paper, according
 to his account, was Helmholtz: "None
 of my professors at the University had
 any understanding for its contents,"
 says Planck. "I found no interest, let
 alone approval, even among the very
 physicists who were closely connected
 with the topic. Helmholtz probably did
 not even read my paper at all. Kirch-
 hoff expressly disapproved . . . T did
 not succeed in reaching Clausius. He
 did not answer my letters, and I did not
 find him at home when I tried to see
 him in person at Bonn. T carried on a
 correspondence with Carl Neumann, of
 Leipzig, but it remained totally fruit-
 less" (10, p. 18). And Lister, in a grad-
 uation address to medical students,
 warned them all against blindness to
 new ideas in science, blindness such as
 he had encountered in advancing his
 theory of antisepsis.
 Scientists Are Also Human
 Too often, unfortunately, where re-
 sistance by scientists has been noted lt
 has been merely noted, merely alleged,
 without detailed substantiation and
 without attempt at explanation. Some-
 times, when explanations are oSered,
 they are notably vague and all-inclusive,
 thus proving too little by trying to
 prove too much. One such explanation
 is contained in the frequently repeated
 phrase, "After all, scientists are also
 SCIENCE, VOL. 134
 themselves sometimes resist scientific
 discovery clashesn of course, with the
 sterotype of the scientist as "the
 open-minded man.' The norm of
 open-lllindedness is one of the strong-
 est of the scientist's values. As Philipp
 Frank has recently put it, ;;Every influ-
 ence of moral, religious or political
 considerations upon the acceptance of
 a theory is regarded as 'illegitimate' by
 the so-called 'community of scien-
 tists.' " And Robert Oppenheimer em-
 phasizes the "importance" of "the
 open mind," in a book by that title,
 as a value not only for science but for
 society as a whole (6). But values
 alone, and especially one value by it-
 selfj cannot be a sufficient basis for
 explaining human behavior. lIowever
 strong a value is, however large its
 actual inRuence on behavior, it usually
 exerts this inRuence only in conjunc-
 tion with a number of other cultural
 and social elements, which sometimes
 reinforce it, sometimes give it limits.
 This article is an investigation of
 the elemenlts within science which
 limit the norm and practice of "open-
 mindedness." My purpose is to draw
 a more accurate picture of the actual
 process of scientific discovery, to see
 resistance by scientists themselves as
 a constant phenomenon with specifi-
 able cultural and social sources. This
 purpose, moreover, implies a practical
 consequence. For if we learn more
 about resistance to scientific discovery,
 we shall know more also about the
 sources of acceptance, just as we know
 more about health when we success-
 fully study disease. By knowing more
 about both resistance and acceptance
 in scientific discoveryS we may be able
 to reduce the former by a little bit
 and thereby increase the latter in the
 same measure.
 Resistance by Scientists
 to Scientific Discovery
 This source of resistance has yet to be given the
 scrutiny accorded religious and ideological sources.
 Bernard Barber
This content downloaded from 104.239.165.217 on Sun, 18 Sep 2016 05:27:57 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 human beings," a; phrase implying that
 scientists are more human when they
 err than when they are right (11). Other
 such vague explanations can be found
 in phrases such as ssZeitgeistS "human
 nature" "lack of progressive spirit,"
 "fear of novelty," and "climate of
 opinion "
 As one of these phrasess ';fear of
 novelty," may indicate, there has also
 been a tendencyS where sotne explana-
 tion of the sources of resistance is
 offeredS to express a psychologistic bias
 -that is, to attribute resistance exclu-
 sively to inherent and ineradicable traits
 or instincts of the human personality.
 Thus, Wilfred Trotter, in discussing the
 response to scientific discovery, asserts
 that "the mind delights in a static en-
 vironment," thatS'change from without
 . . . seems in its very essence to be
 repulsive and an object of fear," and
 that "a little self-examination tells us
 pretty easily how deeply rooted in the
 mind is the fear of the new" (12). And
 Beveridge in The Art of Scientific lsa-
 vestigcltionS says, "there is in all of us
 a psychological tendency to resist new
 ideas'5 (13). A full understanding of re-
 sistance will, of course, have to include
 the psychological dimension-the fac-
 tor of individuaI personality. But it
 must also include the cultural and so-
 cial dimensions-those shared and pat-
 terned idea-systems and those patterns
 of socIal interaction that also contribute
 to resistance. It is these cultural and
 social elements that I shall discuss here,
 but with full awareness that psycho-
 logical elements are contribuitory causes
 of resistance.
 Because resistance by scientists has
 been largely neglected as a subject for
 systematic investigation, we find that
 there is sometimes a tendency, when
 such resistance is notedS to exaggerate
 the extent to which it occurs. Thus,
 Murray says that the discoverer must
 cllways expect to meet with opposition
 from his fellow scientists. And Trotter
 goes overboard in the same way- "the
 reception of new ideas tends always to
 be grudging or hostile.... Apart from
 the happy few whose work has already
 great prestige or lies in fields that are
 being actively expanded at the moment,
 discoverers of new truths always find
 their ideas resisted" (12, p. 26). Such
 exaggerations can be eliminated by
 more systematic and objective study.
 Finally, in the absence of such sys-
 tematic and objective study, many of
 those who have noted resistance have
 been excessively embittered and moral-
 1 SEPTEMBER 1961
 Istic. Oliver Heaviside is reported to
 have exclaimed bitterly, when his im-
 portant contributions to mathematical
 physics were ignored for 25 years,
 ;;Even men who are not Cambridge
 mathematicians deserve justice" (14).
 And Planckss reaction to the resistance
 he experienced was similar. "This ex-
 perience, he said? 4'gave me also an
 opportunity to learn a new fact a re-
 markable one, in my opinion: A new
 scientific truth does not triumph by
 cconvincing its opponents and making
 them see the light, but rather because
 ite; opponents eventually dies and a new
 generation grows up that is familiar
 with it5? (10). Such bitterness is not
 tempered by objective understanding of
 resistance as a constant phenomenon
 in science, a pattern in which all sci-
 entists may sometimes and perhaps of-
 terl participate now on the side of the
 resisters? now on that of the resisted.
 Instead, such bitterness takes the mor-
 alistic view that resistance is due to
 4'human vanities," to ;'little minds and
 ignoble minds.' Such views impede the
 objective analysis that is required.
 In his discussion of the Idols-idols
 of the tribe, of the cave, of the market-
 place and of the theatre-Prancis Ba-
 con long ago suggested that a variety
 of preconceived ideas, general and par-
 ticular, affect the thinking of all men,
 especially in the face of innovation.
 Similarly, more recent sociological the-
 ory has shown that while the variety
 of idea-systems that make up a given
 culture are functionally necessary, on
 the whole, for man to carry on his life
 in society and in the natural environ-
 menit, these several idea-systems may
 also have their dysfunctional or nega-
 tive eSects. Just because the established
 culture defines the situation for man,
 usually helpfully? it also, sometimes
 harmfully, blinds him to other ways of
 conceiving that situation. Cultural
 blinders are one of the constant sources
 of resistance to innovations of all kinds.
 And scientists? for all the methods they
 have invented to strip away their dis-
 torting idols, or cultural blinders, and
 for alI the training they receive in evad-
 ing the negative eSects of such blind-
 ers? are still as other men, though surely
 in considerably lesser measure because
 of these methods and this special train-
 ing. Scientists suffer, along with the
 rest of us? from the ironies that evil
 sometimes comes from good, that one
 noble vision may exclude another, and
 that good scientific ideas occasionally
 obstruct the introduction of better ones.
 Substantive Concepts
 Several different kinds of cultural re-
 sistance to discovery may be distin-
 guished. We may turn first to the way
 in which the substantive concepts and
 theories held by scientists at any given
 time become a source of resistance to
 new ideas. And our illustrations begin
 with the very origins of modern science.
 In his magisterial discussion of the
 Copernican revolution, Kuhn (3) tells
 us not only about the nonscientific op-
 position to the heliocentric theory but
 also about the resistance from the as-
 tronomer-scientists of the time. Even
 after the publication of De RevoZution-
 ibus, the belief of most astronomers in
 the stability of the earth was unshaken.
 The idea of the earth's motion was
 either ignored or dismissed as absurd.
 _
 k;ven the great astronomer-observer
 Brahe remained a life-long opponent
 of Copernicanisln; he was unable to
 break with the traditional patterns of
 thought about ithe earth's lack of mo-
 tion. And his immense prestige helped
 to postpone the conversion of other as-
 tronomers to the new theory. Of course
 religiousS philosophical, and ideological
 conceptions were closely interwoven
 with substantive scientific theories in
 the culture of the scientists of that time,
 but it seems clear that the latter as well
 as the former played their part in the
 resistance to the Copernican discoveriesv
 Moving to the early l9th century, we
 learn that the scientists of the day re-
 sisted Thomas Young's wave theory of
 light because they wereS as Gillispie
 says, faithful to a corpuscular model
 (15). By the end of the century, when
 scientists had swung over to the wave
 theory, the validity of Young's earlier
 discovery was recognized. Substantive
 scientific theory was also one of the
 sources of resistance to Pasteur's dis-
 covery of the biological character of
 fermentation processes. The established
 theory that these processes are wholly
 chemical was held to by many scien-
 tists, including Liebig for a long time
 (16). The same preconceptions were
 aIso the source of the resistance to
 Lister's germ theory of disease, although
 in this case, as in that of Pasteur, var-
 ious other factors were important.
 Because it illustrates a variety of
 sources of scientific resistance to dis-
 covery, I shall return several times to
 the case of Mendel's theory of genetic
 inheritance. For the present, I mention
 it only in connection with the source of
 resistance under discussion, substantive
 597
This content downloaded from 104.239.165.217 on Sun, 18 Sep 2016 05:27:57 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 scientific theories themselves. Mendel-
 ian theory, it seems clear, wazs resisted
 from the time of its announcement, in
 1865, until the end of the century, be-
 cause Mendel's conception of the sepa-
 rate inheritance of characteristics ran
 counter to the predominant conception
 of joint and total inheritance of biolog-
 ical characteristics (17, 18). It was not
 until botany changed its conceptions and
 concentrated its research on the sepa-
 rate inheritance of unit characteristics
 that Mendel's theory and Mendel him-
 self were independently rediscovered by
 de Vries, a Dutchman, by Carl Correns,
 working in Tubingen, and by Erich
 Tschermak, a Viennese, all in the same
 year, l 900.
 New conceptions about the electronic
 constitution of the atom were also re-
 sisted by scientists when fundamental
 discoveries in this field were being made
 at the end of the l 9th century. The
 established scientific notion was that of
 the absolute physical irreducibility of
 the atom. When Arrhenius published
 his theory of electrolytic dissociation,
 his ideas met with resistance for a time,
 though eventually, thanks in part to
 Ostwald, the theory was accepted and
 Arrhenius was given the Nobel prize
 for it (l9). Similarly, Lord Kelvin re-
 garded the announcement of llontgen's
 discovery of x-rays as a hoax, and as
 late as l 907 he was still resisting the
 discovery, by llamsay and Soddy, that
 helium could be produced from radium,
 and resisting Rutherford's theory of the
 electronic composition of the atom, one
 of the fundamental discoveries of mod-
 ern physics. Throughout his long and
 distinguished life in science Kelvin never
 discarded the concept that the atom is
 an indivisible unit (20 ) .
 Let us take one final illustration,
 from contemporary science. In a recent
 case history of the role of chance in
 scientific discovery it was reported that
 two able scientists, who observed, in-
 dependently and by chance, the phe-
 nomenon of floppiness in rabbits' ears
 after the injection of the enzyme pa-
 pain, both missed making a discovery
 because they shared the established
 scientific view that cartilage is a rela-
 tively inert and uninteresting type of
 tissue (21). Eventually one of the sci-
 entists did go on to make a discovery
 which altered the established view of
 cartilage, but for a long time even he
 had been blinded by his scientific pre-
 conceptions. This case is especially in-
 teresting because it shows how resist-
 ance occurs not only between two or
 598
 more scientists but also within an in-
 dividual scientist. Because of their sub-
 stantive conceptions and theories, sci-
 entists sometimes miss discoveries that
 are literally right before their eyes.
 Methodological Conceptions
 The methodological conceptions sci-
 entists entertain at any given time con-
 stitute a second cultural source of re-
 sistance to scientific discovery and are
 as important as substantive ideas in
 determining response to innovations.
 Some scientists, for example, tend to be
 antitheoretical, resisting, on that meth-
 odological ground, certain discoveries.
 "In Baconian science," says Gillispie,
 "the bird-watcher comes into his own
 while genius, ever theorizing in far
 places, is suspect. And this is why Ba-
 con would have none of Kepler or
 Copernicus or Gilbert or anyone who
 would extend a few ideas or calcula-
 tions into a system of the world" (15).
 Goethe too, as Helmholtz pointed out
 in his discussion of Goethe's scientific
 researches, was antitheoretical (22). A
 more recent discussion of GotheXs sci-
 entific work also finds him antianalyt-
 ical and antiabstract (15'). Perhaps
 Helmholtz had been made aware of
 Goethe's antitheoretical bias because his
 own discovery of the conservation of
 energy had been resisted as being too
 theoretical, not sufficiently experimen-
 tal. German physicists were probably
 antitheoretical in Helmholtz's day be-
 cause they feared a revival of the spec-
 ulations of the Hegelian "nature-philos-
 ophy" against which they had fought
 so long, and eventually successfully.
 Viewed in another way, Goethe's
 antitheoretical bias took the form of a
 positive preference for scientific work
 based on intuition and the direct evid-
 ence of the senses. "We must look upon
 his theory of colour as a forlorn hope,"
 says Ielmholtz, "as a desperate at-
 tempt to rescue from the attacks of
 science the belief in the direct truth of
 our sensations" (22). Goethe felt pas-
 sionately that Newton was wrong in
 analyzing color into its quantitative
 components by means of prisms and
 theories. Color, for him, was a qualita-
 tive essence projected onto the physical
 world by the innate biological character
 and functioning of the human being.
 Later scientists also have resisted
 discovery because of their preference
 for the evidence of the senses. Otto
 Hahn, noted for his discoveries in radio-
 activityo who received the Nobel prize
 for his splitting of the uranium atom
 in 1939, reports the following case:
 "Emil Fischer was also one of those
 who found it difficult to grasp the fact
 that it is also possible by radioactive
 methods of measurement to detect, and
 to recognize from their chemical prop-
 erties, substances in quantities quite
 beyond the world of the weighable; as
 is the case, for example, with the active
 deposits of radium, thorium, and ac-
 tinium. At my inaugural lecture in the
 spring of 1907, Fischer declared that
 somehow he could not believe those
 things. Por certain substances the most
 delicate test was aSorded by the sense
 of smell and no more delicate test
 could be found than that!" (23).
 Another methodological source of
 resistance is the tendency of scientists
 to think in terms of established models,
 indeed to reject propositions just be-
 cause they cannot be put in the form
 of some model. This seems to have
 been a reason for resistance to discov-
 eries in the theory of electromagnetism
 during the 1 9th century. Amperets
 theory of magnetic currents, for ex-
 ample, was resisted by Joseph Henry
 and others because they did not see how
 it could be fitted into the Newtonian
 mechanical modeT (24). They refused
 to accept Ampere's view that the atoms
 of the Newtonian model had electrical
 properties which caused magnetic phe-
 nomena. And Lord Kelvin's resistance
 to Clerk Maxwell's electromagnetic
 theory of light was due, says Kelvin's
 biographer (20), to the fact that Kelvin
 found himself unable to translate into
 a dynamical model the abstract equa-
 tions of Maxwell's theory. Kelvin him-
 self, in the lectures he had given in
 Baltimore in 1884, had said, "I never
 satisfy myself until I can make a me-
 chanical model of a thing. If I can
 make a mechanical model I can under-
 stand it. As long as I cannot make a
 mechanicaT model all the way through
 I cannot understand; and that is why I
 cannot get the electromagnetic theory"
 (20). Thus, models, while usually ex-
 tremely helpful in science, can also be
 a source of blindness.
 Scientists' positions on the usefulness
 of mathematics is a last methodological
 source of resistance to discovery. Some
 scientists are excessively partial to
 mathematics, others excessively hostile.
 Thus, when Faraday made his experi-
 mental discoveries on electromagnetism,
 Gillispie tells us, few mathematical
 physicists gave them any serious atten-
 SCIENCE, VOL. 134
This content downloaded from 104.239.165.217 on Sun, 18 Sep 2016 05:27:57 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 sisted among scientists for religious rea-
 sons. The difficulty, as Gillispie has put
 it on the basis of his classic analysis of
 geology during this period, "appears
 to be one of religion (in a crude sense)
 in science rather than one of religion
 versus scientists." The most embarrass-
 ing obstacles faced by the new sciences
 were cast up by the curious providential
 materialism of the scientists themselves
 (5 ) . When, in the 1 840's, Robert
 Chambers published his Vestiges of
 Creation, declaring a developmental
 view of the universe, the theory of
 development was so at variance.with
 the religious views which all scientists
 accepted that 4'they all spoke out: Her-
 schel, Whewell, Forbes, Owen, Prich-
 ard, Huxley, Lyell, Sedgwick, Murchi
 son, Buckland, Agassiz, Miller, and
 others" (5, p. 133; 28, 29).
 Religious resistance continued and
 was manifested against Darwin, of
 course, although many of the scientists
 who had resisted earlier versions of de-
 velopmentalism accepted Darwinss evo-
 lutionary theory, Huxley being not the
 least among them. In England, Richard
 Owen oSered the greatest resistance on
 scientific grounds, while in America
 and, in fact, internationally, Louis
 Agassiz was the leading critic of Dar-
 winism on religious grounds (5, 29, 30).
 In more recent times, biology, like
 physics before it, has been successfully
 accommodated to religious ideas, and
 religious convictions are no longer a
 source of resistance to innovation in
 these fields. llesistance to discoveries
 in the psychological and social sciences
 that stems from religious convictions is
 perhaps another story, but one that
 does not concern us here.
 In addition to shared idea-systemsR
 the patterns of social interaction among
 scientists also become sources of re-
 sistance to discovery. Here again we
 are dealing with elements that, on the
 whole, probably serve to advance sci-
 ence but that occasionally produce neg-
 ative or dysfunctional, effects.
 Professional Standing
 The first of these social sources of
 resistance is the relative professional
 standing of the discoverer. In general,
 higher professional standing in science
 is achieved by the more competentS
 those who have demonstrated their ca-
 pacity for being creative in their own
 right and for judging the discoveries of
 others. But sometimes, when discov
 sss
 tion. The discoveries were regarded
 with indulgence or a touch of scorn as
 another example of the mathematical
 incapacity of the British, their bar-
 barous emphasis on experiment, and
 their theoretical immaturity (15). Clerk
 Maxwell, however, resolved that he
 "would be Faraday's mathematicus''-
 that is, put Faradayls experimental dis-
 coveries into more mathematical, gen-
 eral, and theoretical a form. Initial re-
 sistance was thus overcome. Long ago
 Augustus De Morgan commented on
 the antimathematical prejudice of Eng-
 lish astronomers of his time. In 1845,
 he pointed out, the Englishman Adams
 had on the basis of mathematical cal-
 culations, communicated his discovery
 of the planet Neptune to his English
 colleagues. Because they distrusted
 mathematics, his discovery was not pub-
 lished, and eight months later the
 Frenchman Leverrier announced and
 published his simultaneous discovery
 of the planet, once again on the basis
 of mathematical calculations. Because
 the French admired mathematics, Le-
 verrier's discovery was published first,
 and thus he gained a kind of priority
 over Adams (25 ) .
 Mendel was another scientist whose
 ideas were resisted because of the anti-
 mathematical preconceptions of the
 botany of his time. "It must be ad-
 mitted, however," says his biographer,
 Iltis, "that the attention of most of the
 hearers [when he read his classic mono-
 graph, "Experiments in Plant-Hybridi-
 zation," before the Brunn Society for
 the Study of Natural Science in 1865]
 was inclined to wander when the lec-
 turer was engaged in rather diflicult
 mathematical deductions; and probably
 not a soul among them really under-
 stood what Mendel was driving at....
 Many of Mendel's auditors must have
 been repelled by the strange linking of
 botany with mathematics, which may
 have reminded some of the less expert
 among them of the mystical numbers
 of the Pythagoreans. . . ." (18) . Note
 that the alleged <'difficult mathematical
 deductions" are what we should now
 consider very simple statistics. And it
 was not just the audience in Brunn
 that had no interest in or knowledge of
 mathematics. Mendel's other biogra-
 pher, Krumbiegel, tells us that even the
 more sophisticated group of scientists
 at the Vienna Zoological-Botanical So-
 ciety would have given Mendel's theory
 as poor a reception, and for the same
 reasons.
 In some quarters the antimathemat-
 1 SEPTEMBER 1961
 ical prejudice persisted in biology for a
 long time after Mendel's discovery,
 indeed until after he had been redis-
 covered. In his biography of Galton,
 Karl Pearson reports that he sent a
 paperwto the Royal Society in October
 1900, eventually published in Novem-
 bel 1901, containing statistics in appli-
 cation to a biological problem (26).
 Before the paper was published, he
 says, "a resolution of the Council [of
 the Royal Society] was conveyed to me,
 requesting that in future papers mathe-
 matics should be kept apart from bio-
 logical applications " As a result of this,
 Pearson wrote to Galton, "I want to
 ask your opinion about resigning my
 fellowship of the Royal Society." Gal-
 ton advised against resigning, but he
 did help Pearson to found the journal
 Biometrika, so that there would be a
 place in which mathematics in biology
 would be explicitly encouraged. Galton
 wrote an article for the first issue of
 the new journal, explaining the need
 for this new agency of "mutual en-
 couragement and support" for mathe-
 matics in biology and saying that "a
 new science cannot depend on a wel-
 come from the followers of the older
 ones, and ftherefore] . . . it is advisable
 to establish a special Journal for Biom-
 etry" (27). It seems strange to us now
 that prejudice against mathematics
 should have been a source of resistance
 to innovation in biology only 60 years
 ago.
 Iteligiolls Ideas
 Although we have heard more of the
 way in which religious forces outside
 science have hindered its progress, the
 religious ideas of scientists themselves
 constitute, after substantive and meth-
 odological conceptions, a thi-rd cul-
 tural source of resistance to scientific
 innovation. Such internal resistance
 goes back to the beginning of modern
 science. We have seen that the astron-
 omer colleagues of Copernicus resisted
 his ideas in part because of their re-
 ligious beliefs, and we know that Leib-
 niz, for example, criticized Newton "for
 failing to make providential destiny
 part of physics" (15). Scientists them-
 selves felt that science should justify
 God and tfis world. Gradually, of
 course, physics and religion were ac-
 commodated one to the other, certainly
 a:mong scientists themselves. But all
 during the first half of the l9th century
 resistance to discovery in geology per-
This content downloaded from 104.239.165.217 on Sun, 18 Sep 2016 05:27:57 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 eries are made by scientists of lower
 standing, they are resisted by scientists
 of higher standing partly because of the
 authority the higher position provides.
 Huxley commented on this social source
 of resistance in a letter he wrote in
 1852: "For instance, I know that the
 paper 1: have just sent in is very orig-
 inal and of some importance, and I am
 equally sure that if it is referred to the
 judgment of my 'particular' friend that
 it will not be published. He won't be
 able to say a word against it, but he
 will pooh-pooh it to a dead certainty.
 You will ask with woncierment, Why?
 Because for the last twenty years [....]
 has been regarded as the great author-
 ity in these nzatters, and has had no
 one tread on his heels, until, at last, I
 think, he has come to look upon the
 Natural World as his special preserve,
 and 'no poachers allowed.' So I must
 manoeuvre a little to get my poor
 memoir kept out of his handsS' (8,
 p. 367).
 Niels Henrik Abel, early in the l9th
 century, made important discoveries on
 a classical mathematical problem, equa-
 tions of the fifth degree (31). Not only
 was Abel himself unknown but there
 was no one of any considerable pro-
 fessional standing in his own country,
 Norway (then part of Denmark), to
 sponsor his work. He sent his paper to
 various foreign rnathematicians, the
 great Gauss among them. But Gauss
 merely filed the leaflet away unread,
 and it was found uncut after his death,
 among his papers. Ohm was another
 whose work, in this case experimental,
 was ignored partly because he was of
 low professional standing. The re-
 searches of an obscure teacher of
 mathematics at the Jesuit Gymnasium
 in Cologne made little impression upon
 the more noted scientists of the German
 * * o
 unlversltles.
 Perhaps the classical instance of low
 professional standing helping to create
 resistance to a scientist's discoveries is
 that of Mendel. The notion that Men-
 del was "obscure," in the sense that
 his work did not come to the attention
 of competent and noted professionals
 in his field, can no longer be accepted.
 First of all, the proceedings volume of
 the Brunn society in which his mono-
 graph was printed was exchanged with
 proceedings volumes of more than 120
 other societies, universities, and acad-
 emies at home and abroad. Copies of
 his monograph went to Vienna and
 Berlin, to London and Petersburg, to
 Rome and Upsala (18). In London, ac-
 600
 cording to Bateson, the monograph was
 received by the Royal Society and the
 Linnaean Society (32 ) . Moreover, we
 know from the extensive correspond-
 ence between them correspondence
 which was later published by Mendel's
 rediscoverer, Correns that Mendel sent
 his paper to one of the distinguished
 botanists of his time, Carl von Nageli
 of Munich (15 17 18). Von Ntageli
 resisted Mendel's theories for a number
 of reasons: because his own substantive
 theories about inheritance were differ-
 ent and because he was unsympathetic
 to Mendel's use of mathematics, but
 also because he looked down, from his
 position of abthority, upon the unim-
 portant monk from Brunn. Mendel had
 written deferentially to von Nageli, in
 letters that amounted to small mono-
 graphs. In these letters, Mendel ad-
 dressed von Nageli most respectfully,
 as an acknowledged master of the sub-
 ject in which they were both interested.
 But von Nageli was the victim of his
 own position as a scientific pundit.
 Mendel seemed to him a mere amateur
 expressing fantastic notions, or at least
 notions contrary to his own. Von
 Nageli's letters to Mendel seem unduly
 critical to present readers, more than a
 little supercilious. Nevertheless, the
 modest Mendel was delighted that the
 great man had even deigned to reply
 and sent cordial thanks for the gift of
 von Nageli's monograph. On both sides,
 von Nageli was defined as the great
 authority, Mendel as the inferior asking
 for consideration his position did not
 warrant. Ironically, Mendel took von
 Nageli's advice, to change from experi-
 ments on peas to work on hawkweed,
 a plant not at all suitable at that time
 for the study of inheritance of separate
 characteristics. The result was that
 Mendel labored in a blind alley for the
 rest of his scientific life.
 Nor was von Nageli unique. Others,
 such as W. O. Focke, Hermann Hoff-
 man, and Kerner von Marilaun, also
 dismissed Mendel's work because he
 seemed "an insignificant provincial" to
 them. Focke did list Mendel's mono-
 graph in his own treatise, Die PJZanzen-
 mischlinge, but only for the sake of
 completeness. Focke paid much more
 attention to those botanists who had
 produced quantitatively large and ap-
 parently more important contributions
 men such as Kolreuter, Gartner,
 Wichura, and Wiegmann, of higher pro-
 fessional standing (33). Certainly, in
 this case, quantity of publication was
 inadequate as a measure of professional
 worth. Fockels listing of Mendel served
 only to bring his work, directly and in-
 directly, to the attention of Correns,
 de Vries, and von Tschermak after they
 had independently rediscovered the
 Mendelian principle of inheritance.
 Mendel met with resistance from the
 authorities in his field after his dis-
 covery was published. But sometimes
 men of higher professional standing sit
 in judgment on lesser figures before
 publication and prevent a discovery's
 getting into print. This can be illus-
 trated by an incident in the life of Lord
 Rayleigh. For the British Association
 meeting at Birmingham in 1886, Ray-
 leigh submitted a paper under the title,
 "An Experiment to show that a Divided
 Electric Current may be greater in both
 Branches than in the Mains. " "His
 name," says his son and biographer,
 "was either omitted or accidentally de-
 tached, and the Committee 'turned it
 down' as the work of one of those
 curious persons called paradoxers. tIow-
 ever, when the authorship was dis-
 covered, the paper was found to have
 merits after all. It would seem that even
 in the late 1 9th century, and in spite
 of all ithat had been written by the
 apostles of free discussion, authority
 could prevail when argument had
 failed!" (34). So says the fourth Baron
 llayleigh, and we may wonder whether
 his remark does not still apply, some
 75 years lafter.
 Professional Specialization
 Another social source of resistance
 is the pattern of specialization that pre-
 vails in science at any given time On
 the whole, of course, as with any social
 or other type of system, such specializa-
 tion is efficient for internal and environ-
 mental purposes. Specialization con-
 centrates and focuses the requisite
 knowledge and skill where they are
 needed. But occasionally the negative
 aspect of specialization shows itself, and
 innovative "outsiders" to a field of
 specialization are resisted by the "in-
 siders." Thus, when Helmholtz an-
 nounced his theory of the conservation
 of energy, it met with resistance partly
 because he was not a specialist in what
 we now think of as physics. Referring
 in the later years of his life to the op-
 position of the acknowledged experts,
 Helmholtz said he met with such a re-
 mark as this from some of the older
 men: "This has already been well known
 to us; what does this young medical
 SCIENCE. VOL. 134
This content downloaded from 104.239.165.217 on Sun, 18 Sep 2016 05:27:57 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 react to new ideas is in the nature of
 things. For, as Bacon says, scientia
 inttat, and the dignitaries who hold high
 honors for past accomplishment do not
 usually like to see the current of prog-
 ress rush too rapidly out of their
 reach" (39).
 Now of course the older workers in
 science do not always resist the younger
 in their innovations, nor can it be physi-
 cal aging in itself that is the source of
 such resistance as does occur. If we
 scrutinize carefully the two comments
 I have just quoted and examine other,
 similar ones with equal care, we can see
 that aging is an omnibus term which
 actually covers a variety of cultural
 and social sources of resistance. Indeed,
 we may put it this way, that as scientists
 get older they are more likely to be
 subject to one or another of the several
 cultural and social sources of resistance
 I have analyzed here. As a scientist gets
 older he is more likely to be restricted
 in his response to innovation by his sllb-
 stantive and methodological precon-
 ceptions and by his other cultural ac-
 cumulations; he is more likely to have
 high professional standing, to have
 specialized interests, to be a member or
 official of an established organization,
 and to be associated with a "school."
 The likelihood of all these things in-
 creases with the passage of time, and
 so the older scientist, just by living
 longer, is more likely to acquire a cul-
 tural and social incubus. But this is not
 always so, and the older workers in
 science are often the most ardent cham-
 pions of innovation.
 After this long recital of the cultural
 and social sources of resistance, by
 scientists, to scientific discovery, I need
 to emphasize a point I have already
 made. That some resistance occurs, that
 it has specifiable sources in culture and
 social interactionS that it may be in
 some measure inevitable, is not proof
 either that there is more resistance than
 acceptance in science or that scientists
 are no more open-minded than other
 men. On the contrary, the powerful
 norm of open-mindedness in science,
 the objective tests by which concepts
 and theories often can be validated, and
 the social mechanisms for ensuring
 competxtion among ideas new and old-
 all these make up a social system in
 which objectivity is greater than it is in
 other social areas, resistance less. The
 development of modern science demon-
 strates this ever so clearly. Nevertheless,
 some resistance remains, and it is this
 we seek to understand and thus perhaps
 601
 mar1 imagine when he thinks it neces-
 sary to explain so minutely all this to
 us?" (8, p. 97). TO be sure, on the other
 side, medical specialists have a long
 history of resisting scientific innovations
 from what they define as "the outside."
 Pasteur met with violent resistance from
 the medical men of his time when he
 advanced his germ theory. He regretted
 that he was not a medical specialist, for
 the medical men thought of him as a
 mere chemist poaching on their scien-
 tific preserves, not worthy of their at-
 tention. In France, even before Pasteur1
 Magendie had met with resistance for
 attempting to introduce chemistry into
 medicine (35). If medicine now listens
 more respectfully to nonmedical sci-
 ence and its discoveries, it is partly be-
 cause many nonmedical scientists have
 themselves become experts in a variety
 of medical-science specialties and so
 are no longer "outsiders."
 Societies, "Schools," and Seniority
 Scientific organizations, as we may
 safely infer from their large number
 and their historical persistence, serve a
 variety of useful purposes for their
 members. And of course scientific pub-
 lications are indispensable for communi-
 cation in science. But occasionally, when
 organizations or publications are incom-
 petently staSed and run, they may serve
 as another social source of resistance to
 innovation in science. There have been
 no scholarly investigations into the true
 history of our scientiSc orgarlizations
 and publications, but something is
 known and points in the direction I have
 suggested. In the early l9th century, for
 example, even the Royal Society fell on
 bad days. Lyons tells us that a contem-
 porary, Granville, "severely criticized
 the shortcomings of the Society" during
 that period (36). Granville gave numer-
 ous instances in which the selection or
 rejection of papers by the Committee of
 Papers was the result of bad judgment.
 Sometimes the paper had not been read
 by any Fellow who was an authority
 on the subject with which it dealt. In
 other cases, none of the members of
 the committee who made the judg-
 ment could have had any expert opinion
 in the matter. It was such an incom-
 petent committee, for example, that
 resisted Waterston's new molecular
 theory of gases when he submitted a
 paper making this contribution. The
 referee of the Royal Society who re-
 jected the paper wrote on it, "The
 1 SEPTEMBER 1961
 paper is nothing but l;lonsense.'' As a
 result, Waterston's work lay in utter
 oblivion until rescued by Rayleigh some
 45 years later (12, p. 26). Many pres-
 ellt-day misjudgments of this kind prob-
 ably occur, although the multiplicity
 of publication outlets now provides
 more than one chance for a significant
 paper ignored by the incompetent to
 appear in print.
 The rivalries of what are called
 "schools" are frequently alleged to be
 another social source of resistance in
 scxence. SIuxley, for example, is re-
 ported to have said, two years before
 his death, "'Authorities,' 'disciples,' and
 'schools' are the curse of science; and do
 more to interfere with the work of the
 scientiSc spirit than all its enemies" (37).
 Murray suggests that the supposed
 warfare between science and theology
 is equaled only by the warfare among
 rival schools in each of the scientific
 specialties. Unfortunately, just what the
 term school means is usually left un-
 clear, and no empirical evidence of any-
 thing but the most meager and un-
 systematic character is ever offered by
 way of illustration (38). No doubt some
 harmful resistance to discovery, as well
 as some useful competition, comes out
 of the rivalry of "schools" in science,
 but until the concept itself is clarified,
 with definite indicators specified, and
 until research is carried out on this
 more adequate basis, we can only feel
 that "there is something there" that
 deserves a scholarly treatment it has
 not yet received.
 That the older resist the younger in
 science is another pattern that has often
 been noted by scientists themselves and
 by tlhose who study science as a social
 phenomenon. "I do not," said Lavoisier
 in the closing sentences of his memoir
 Ref ections on Phlogiston (read before
 the Academy of Sciences in 1785),
 4'expect my ideas to be adopted all at
 once. The human mind gets creased
 into a way of seeing things. Those who
 have envisaged nature according to a
 certain point of view during much of
 their career, rise only with difiiculty to
 new ideas. It is the passage of time,
 therei ore, which must confirm or de-
 stroy the opinions I have presented.
 Meanwhile, I observe with great satis-
 faction that the young people are be-
 ginning to study the science without
 prejuclice...." (15). Or again, Hans
 Zinsser remarks in his autobiography,
 ;'That academies and learned societies-
 commonly dominated by the older
 foofoos of any profession --are slow to
This content downloaded from 104.239.165.217 on Sun, 18 Sep 2016 05:27:57 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 to reduce. If "the edge of objeetivity'
 in seienee, as CharIes Gillispie has re-
 cently pointed out requires us to take
 physieal and biologieal nature as it is,
 without projeeting our wishes upon it,
 so also we have to take man's soeial
 nature, or his behavior in society, as it
 is. As men in soeiety, seientists are
 sometimes the agents, sometimes the
 objects, of resistanee to their own dis-
 coveries (40) .
 References and lSotes
 1. S. C. G-ilfillan, The Sociology of Inlentfo)1!
 ( Follet, Chicago, 1 935 ); B. Barbers Science
 arld tZle Social Ozdez (Free Press, Glencoe,
 1l1., 1952), chap. 9.
 2. P. G-. Frank, in The Validution o Scien-
 tffic Tl1eories P. G. Frank, Ed. (Beacon
 Press, Boston, 1957); J. Rossman, The
 Pscltology of the Inlyentor ( Inventors Pub-
 lishing Co., Washington, D.C., 1931), chap.
 1 ]; R. H. Shryock, The Delelop)1tent of
 Modern Medicine ( Univ. of Pennsylvania
 Press, Philadelphia, 1936 ), chap , 3 - B. J.
 Stern, in Techological Trends and National
 Policy ( Government Printing Office, Wash-
 ington, D.C., 1937); V. H. Whitney, Azn.
 J. Sociol. 56 247 (1950); J. Stamp, The
 ScieB1ce of Social Ad:justment (Macmillan,
 London, 1937), pp. 34 ff.; A. C. Ivy,
 ScieB7ce 108, 1 ( 1948) .
 3 T. S. Kuhn, T/le Copernican Revolution
 (Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, Mass.,
 1957) .
 4. A . N. Whitehead, Science and the Mod ern
 WorSd (Macmillan, New York, 1947), chap.
 1; R. K. Merton, Osiris 4, pt. 2 ( 1938 ) .
 5. C. C. Gillispie, Geztesis sed Geolog (Har-
 vard Univ. Press, Cambridges Mass., 1951 ) .
 6. R. Oppenheimer, The Opesl Mind (Simon
 and Sclluster, New York, 1955 ) .
 7. Quoted from von Helmholtz's Vortrage und
 Reden in R. H. Murray (8).
 8. R. H. Murray, Science and Scientists fn the
 to reduce. If "the edge of objeetivity'
 in seienee, as CharIes Gillispie has re-
 cently pointed out requires us to take
 physieal and biologieal nature as it is,
 without projeeting our wishes upon it,
 so also we have to take man's soeial
 nature, or his behavior in society, as it
 is. As men in soeiety, seientists are
 sometimes the agents, sometimes the
 objects, of resistanee to their own dis-
 coveries (40) .
 References and lSotes
 1. S. C. G-ilfillan, The Sociology of Inlentfo)1!
 ( Follet, Chicago, 1 935 ); B. Barbers Science
 arld tZle Social Ozdez (Free Press, Glencoe,
 1l1., 1952), chap. 9.
 2. P. G-. Frank, in The Validution o Scien-
 tffic Tl1eories P. G. Frank, Ed. (Beacon
 Press, Boston, 1957); J. Rossman, The
 Pscltology of the Inlyentor ( Inventors Pub-
 lishing Co., Washington, D.C., 1931), chap.
 1 ]; R. H. Shryock, The Delelop)1tent of
 Modern Medicine ( Univ. of Pennsylvania
 Press, Philadelphia, 1936 ), chap , 3 - B. J.
 Stern, in Techological Trends and National
 Policy ( Government Printing Office, Wash-
 ington, D.C., 1937); V. H. Whitney, Azn.
 J. Sociol. 56 247 (1950); J. Stamp, The
 ScieB1ce of Social Ad:justment (Macmillan,
 London, 1937), pp. 34 ff.; A. C. Ivy,
 ScieB7ce 108, 1 ( 1948) .
 3 T. S. Kuhn, T/le Copernican Revolution
 (Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, Mass.,
 1957) .
 4. A . N. Whitehead, Science and the Mod ern
 WorSd (Macmillan, New York, 1947), chap.
 1; R. K. Merton, Osiris 4, pt. 2 ( 1938 ) .
 5. C. C. Gillispie, Geztesis sed Geolog (Har-
 vard Univ. Press, Cambridges Mass., 1951 ) .
 6. R. Oppenheimer, The Opesl Mind (Simon
 and Sclluster, New York, 1955 ) .
 7. Quoted from von Helmholtz's Vortrage und
 Reden in R. H. Murray (8).
 8. R. H. Murray, Science and Scientists fn the
 NiB1eteezttit Centllr ( Sheldon, London,
 1 825)
 9. Lord Kelvin also comme1lted on the "re-
 sistance" to Faraday. In his article on
 "Heat" for the 9tll edition of the Ez7cy-
 clopaedea Britlz1ica he made a comment
 on the circumstance "th at fifty years passed
 before the scientific world was converted
 by the experiments of Davy and Etumford
 to the rational conclusion as to the non-
 materiality of heat: 'a remarkable instance
 of the tremendous inefficiency of bad Togic
 in confounding public opinion and ob-
 structing true philosophic thought.' " [S. P.
 Thompson The Life of Willza)n T1107>tson.
 Barotz Kellni)l of Largs (Macmillan, London,
 1910) 1.
 10. M. Planck, Scientific Atftohiogrsph}, F.
 Gaynor, trans. (Philosophical Library, New
 York, 1949 ) .
 11. See D. L. Watson, Sciezl tists are Human
 (Watts, London, 1938).
 12. W. Trotter, Collected Papers (Humphrey
 Milfords London, 1941 ) .
 13. W. I. B. Beveridge, The Art of Scientific
 lzll estigation (Random House, New Yorle,
 rev. ed., 1959 ) .
 14. H. Levy, U)1il erse of Scie)tce ( Century,
 New York, 1933-), p. 197.
 15. C. C. Gillispie, The Edge of Objectizity
 (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.,
 1960) .
 16. R. Vallery-Radot, The Life of Pasteur, R.
 L. Devonshire, trans. (G arden City Pub-
 lishing Co., New York, 1926), pp. 175,
 215.
 17. I. Krumbiegel, Gregor Mez1del und das
 sclticksal Sei)ler Entdeckuztg (Wissen-
 schaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft, Stuttgart,
 1957) .
 18. H. Iltis, Life of Me)tdel, E. Paul and C.
 Paul, trans. (W. W. Norton, New YorlQ,
 l 932) .
 19. J. J. Thomson, Recollections and lVeflections
 (Bells Londons 1936), p. 390.
 20. S. P. Thompson, The Life of Willia)n Thom-
 S0Z7: Baron Kelirx of Largs (Macmillan,
 London, 1910).
 21. B. Barber and R. C. Fox, Atn. J. Sociol. 64,
 128 ( 1958 ) .
 22. H. von Helmholtz, Po pubr Scientific Lec-
 tures (Appletons New York, 1873 ) .
 NiB1eteezttit Centllr ( Sheldon, London,
 1 825)
 9. Lord Kelvin also comme1lted on the "re-
 sistance" to Faraday. In his article on
 "Heat" for the 9tll edition of the Ez7cy-
 clopaedea Britlz1ica he made a comment
 on the circumstance "th at fifty years passed
 before the scientific world was converted
 by the experiments of Davy and Etumford
 to the rational conclusion as to the non-
 materiality of heat: 'a remarkable instance
 of the tremendous inefficiency of bad Togic
 in confounding public opinion and ob-
 structing true philosophic thought.' " [S. P.
 Thompson The Life of Willza)n T1107>tson.
 Barotz Kellni)l of Largs (Macmillan, London,
 1910) 1.
 10. M. Planck, Scientific Atftohiogrsph}, F.
 Gaynor, trans. (Philosophical Library, New
 York, 1949 ) .
 11. See D. L. Watson, Sciezl tists are Human
 (Watts, London, 1938).
 12. W. Trotter, Collected Papers (Humphrey
 Milfords London, 1941 ) .
 13. W. I. B. Beveridge, The Art of Scientific
 lzll estigation (Random House, New Yorle,
 rev. ed., 1959 ) .
 14. H. Levy, U)1il erse of Scie)tce ( Century,
 New York, 1933-), p. 197.
 15. C. C. Gillispie, The Edge of Objectizity
 (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.,
 1960) .
 16. R. Vallery-Radot, The Life of Pasteur, R.
 L. Devonshire, trans. (G arden City Pub-
 lishing Co., New York, 1926), pp. 175,
 215.
 17. I. Krumbiegel, Gregor Mez1del und das
 sclticksal Sei)ler Entdeckuztg (Wissen-
 schaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft, Stuttgart,
 1957) .
 18. H. Iltis, Life of Me)tdel, E. Paul and C.
 Paul, trans. (W. W. Norton, New YorlQ,
 l 932) .
 19. J. J. Thomson, Recollections and lVeflections
 (Bells Londons 1936), p. 390.
 20. S. P. Thompson, The Life of Willia)n Thom-
 S0Z7: Baron Kelirx of Largs (Macmillan,
 London, 1910).
 21. B. Barber and R. C. Fox, Atn. J. Sociol. 64,
 128 ( 1958 ) .
 22. H. von Helmholtz, Po pubr Scientific Lec-
 tures (Appletons New York, 1873 ) .
 23. O. Hahn, New A totns, Progress a71d Sonte
 Meznories (Elsevier, New York, 1950), pp.
 154-155.
 24. T. Coulson, Joseph Henry: His Lifie bmd
 Work (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton,
 N.J., t950), p. 36.
 25. S. E. De Morgan, Memoir of Augustus De
 Morgan (Longmans, Green, London, 1882).
 26. K. Pearson, The Lif e, Letters and Labours
 of Francis Galton (Cambridge Univ. Press,
 Cambridge, England, 1924), vol. 3, pp. 100,
 282-283.
 27. Biometrika 1, 7 (1901-02).
 28. That scientists were religious also, and in
 the same way, in America can be seen in
 A. H. Dupree (29 ) .
 29. A. H. Dupree, Asa Gray (Harvard {Jniv.
 Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1959).
 30. E. Lurie, Louis Agassiz: A Life in Science
 ( Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1960 )
 31. O. Ore, Niels Henrik Abel: Matheznatician
 Extraordinary (Univ. of Minnesota Press,
 Nlinneapolis, 19S7 ) .
 32. R. A. Fisher, Ann. Sci. 1, 116 (1933).
 33. H. F. Roberts, Plant Hybrid iz.ation Bef ore
 Mendel (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton,
 N.J., 1929), pp. 210-211.
 34. R. J. Strutt, John William Strutt, Third
 Baron Rayleigh (Arnold, London, 1924), p.
 228.
 3S. J. M. D. Olmstead, FrnnXois Magendie,
 Pioneer in Experlnet. Sg-zZ Phsiology az7d
 Scientific Med icin.e w t}Xe l 9th Century
 ( Schuman, New Yorlc . 194), pp. 173-175.
 36. H. Lyons, The Royal ,Society, 16f J-1940
 ( Cambridge Univ . Press, Cambridge, Eng-
 land, 1944), p. 254.
 37. C. Bibby, T. H. Huxley: Scientist, Musnnn-
 ist, and Ed ucator (Horizon, New York,
 1959), p. 18.
 38. For the best available sociological essay,
 see F. Enaniecki, The Social RoZe of tS2e
 Man of Knowledge (Columbia Univ. Press,
 New York, 1940 ), chap. 3.
 39. H. Zinsser, As l Remember Hint: The
 Biography of R. S. (Little, Brown, Boston,
 1940), p. 1-05-
 40. For invaluable aid in the preparation of
 this article I am indebted to Dr. Elinor
 G. Barber. The Council for Atomic Age
 Studies of Columbia University assisted with
 a grant for typing expenses.
 23. O. Hahn, New A totns, Progress a71d Sonte
 Meznories (Elsevier, New York, 1950), pp.
 154-155.
 24. T. Coulson, Joseph Henry: His Lifie bmd
 Work (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton,
 N.J., t950), p. 36.
 25. S. E. De Morgan, Memoir of Augustus De
 Morgan (Longmans, Green, London, 1882).
 26. K. Pearson, The Lif e, Letters and Labours
 of Francis Galton (Cambridge Univ. Press,
 Cambridge, England, 1924), vol. 3, pp. 100,
 282-283.
 27. Biometrika 1, 7 (1901-02).
 28. That scientists were religious also, and in
 the same way, in America can be seen in
 A. H. Dupree (29 ) .
 29. A. H. Dupree, Asa Gray (Harvard {Jniv.
 Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1959).
 30. E. Lurie, Louis Agassiz: A Life in Science
 ( Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1960 )
 31. O. Ore, Niels Henrik Abel: Matheznatician
 Extraordinary (Univ. of Minnesota Press,
 Nlinneapolis, 19S7 ) .
 32. R. A. Fisher, Ann. Sci. 1, 116 (1933).
 33. H. F. Roberts, Plant Hybrid iz.ation Bef ore
 Mendel (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton,
 N.J., 1929), pp. 210-211.
 34. R. J. Strutt, John William Strutt, Third
 Baron Rayleigh (Arnold, London, 1924), p.
 228.
 3S. J. M. D. Olmstead, FrnnXois Magendie,
 Pioneer in Experlnet. Sg-zZ Phsiology az7d
 Scientific Med icin.e w t}Xe l 9th Century
 ( Schuman, New Yorlc . 194), pp. 173-175.
 36. H. Lyons, The Royal ,Society, 16f J-1940
 ( Cambridge Univ . Press, Cambridge, Eng-
 land, 1944), p. 254.
 37. C. Bibby, T. H. Huxley: Scientist, Musnnn-
 ist, and Ed ucator (Horizon, New York,
 1959), p. 18.
 38. For the best available sociological essay,
 see F. Enaniecki, The Social RoZe of tS2e
 Man of Knowledge (Columbia Univ. Press,
 New York, 1940 ), chap. 3.
 39. H. Zinsser, As l Remember Hint: The
 Biography of R. S. (Little, Brown, Boston,
 1940), p. 1-05-
 40. For invaluable aid in the preparation of
 this article I am indebted to Dr. Elinor
 G. Barber. The Council for Atomic Age
 Studies of Columbia University assisted with
 a grant for typing expenses.
 Public notice has been attracted to
 the relationships of these organizations
 with the Defense Department through
 an article by Gene M. Lyons and Louis
 Morton7 of Dartmouth, published in the
 March 1961 issue of the Bulletin of the
 Atomic Scientists, and by Senator Ful-
 bright's memorandum on right-wing
 activities by the military.
 "The activities of the institute,"
 Lyons and Morton wrote, "began to
 expand with the series of strategy
 seminars it has sponsored during the
 past 2 years. This program started with
 the National Strategy Seminar, spon-
 sored jointly by the institute and the
 Reserve Officers Association in the sum-
 mer of 1959. It was repeated in 1960
 and both acted as catalysts for regional
 seminars held in different parts of the
 country. What is particularly striking
 about the National Strategy Seminars
 is that through the authorizatioll of the
 Joint Chiefs of Staff the Institute for
 Americzan Strategy in effect took over
 the responsibility of training reserve
 officers on active duty even though the
 SCIENCE, VOL. 134
 Public notice has been attracted to
 the relationships of these organizations
 with the Defense Department through
 an article by Gene M. Lyons and Louis
 Morton7 of Dartmouth, published in the
 March 1961 issue of the Bulletin of the
 Atomic Scientists, and by Senator Ful-
 bright's memorandum on right-wing
 activities by the military.
 "The activities of the institute,"
 Lyons and Morton wrote, "began to
 expand with the series of strategy
 seminars it has sponsored during the
 past 2 years. This program started with
 the National Strategy Seminar, spon-
 sored jointly by the institute and the
 Reserve Officers Association in the sum-
 mer of 1959. It was repeated in 1960
 and both acted as catalysts for regional
 seminars held in different parts of the
 country. What is particularly striking
 about the National Strategy Seminars
 is that through the authorizatioll of the
 Joint Chiefs of Staff the Institute for
 Americzan Strategy in effect took over
 the responsibility of training reserve
 officers on active duty even though the
 SCIENCE, VOL. 134
 deeade. The- basis for this interpretation
 of the 4'Forward Strategy" put forth by
 the Foreign Poliey Researeh Institute of
 the University of Pennsylvania was re-
 ported in this spaee last week. The
 Researeh Institute has been finaneed
 primarily by a tax-free edueational
 foundation, the Riehardson Foundation,
 whose direetor of researeh, Frank Bar-
 nett, is also direetor of researeh for the
 Institute for American Strategy, another
 edueational foundation, whieh is de-
 voted to influencing the pub]ic to Sllp-
 port the overt aspects of the Forward
 Strategy.
 deeade. The- basis for this interpretation
 of the 4'Forward Strategy" put forth by
 the Foreign Poliey Researeh Institute of
 the University of Pennsylvania was re-
 ported in this spaee last week. The
 Researeh Institute has been finaneed
 primarily by a tax-free edueational
 foundation, the Riehardson Foundation,
 whose direetor of researeh, Frank Bar-
 nett, is also direetor of researeh for the
 Institute for American Strategy, another
 edueational foundation, whieh is de-
 voted to influencing the pub]ic to Sllp-
 port the overt aspects of the Forward
 Strategy.
 Science and the News
 Science and the News
 Grand Strategy: The Administration
 Has a Problem That It Would
 Rather Not Deal With in Public
 The Administration as noted here
 last week, faees an interesting and deli-
 cate problem in dealing with the rela-
 tionship between elements in the De-
 fense Department and three elosely
 tied organizations whieh advocate an
 unrelentingly aggressive proseeution of
 the Cold War in terms whieh take on a
 coherent meaning only in a eontext of
 preparing for a surprise nuelear attaek
 ol:l Russia sometime within the eurrent
 602
 Grand Strategy: The Administration
 Has a Problem That It Would
 Rather Not Deal With in Public
 The Administration as noted here
 last week, faees an interesting and deli-
 cate problem in dealing with the rela-
 tionship between elements in the De-
 fense Department and three elosely
 tied organizations whieh advocate an
 unrelentingly aggressive proseeution of
 the Cold War in terms whieh take on a
 coherent meaning only in a eontext of
 preparing for a surprise nuelear attaek
 ol:l Russia sometime within the eurrent
 602
This content downloaded from 104.239.165.217 on Sun, 18 Sep 2016 05:27:57 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
