History of Technology, Volume Twenty-three, 2002
Chronicle of the Death of a
Laboratory: Douglas
Engelbart and the Failure of
the Knowledge Workshop
–––––––––––––––––––
THIERRY BARDINI AND
MICHAEL FRIEDEWALD
It is common knowledge that California, especially the San Francisco Bay
Area is the birthplace of modern computing. Between 1945 and 1970 people
such as Frederick Terman, professor of electronics at Stanford University, or
William Shockley, co-inventor of the transistor transformed the once rural
Santa Clara County south of San Francisco into Silicon Valley, the fast
growing industrial centre of high-technology.
1 But the Bay Area of the 1960s
is not only well known for technical ingenuity but also as the stronghold of
social movements (anti-Vietnam, civil rights, women’s liberation), that are
often subsumed under the term ‘counter culture’.
2 It is sometimes overlooked
that there was an intense interaction between these two developments, at least
during a short time around 1970. In this chapter we will analyse the creative
and destructive effects of this interaction. Therefore it focuses on Douglas
C. Engelbart and his computer science laboratory at the Stanford Research
Institute in Menlo Park, CA.
DOUGLAS CARL ENGELBART: A REDISCOVERED PIONEER OF PERSONAL
COMPUTING
Until recently very few people knew ‘Doug’ Engelbart (born 1925) outside
the computer science community. But after he had received some of the
major computer science awards for his pioneering work in interactive
computing—including the National Medal of Technology, the highest award
in its class in the United States, in 2000—there has been a growing interest
in Engelbart’s contribution to today’s computing. Especially the ‘mouse’, the
now ubiquitous input-device developed by Engelbart’s research group at the
Stanford Research Institute (SRI) in Menlo Park, California obtained much
interest, as if it had been Engelbart’s only goal to develop the second most
successful input device besides the keyboard.
3 On the other side many of
today’s computer scientists like to claim Engelbart
192
Chronicle of the Death of a Laborator
History of Technology, Volume Twenty-three, 2002
as the father of ‘Hypertext’ and ‘Computer Supported Co-operative Work’,
which is certainly not wrong, but nevertheless not the whole truth.
4
Even more surprising is that the participation of Engelbart’s laboratory in
the development of the Pentagon’s Advanced Research Projects Agency
Computer Network (ARPANET) in the late 1960s and early 1970s is hardly
known though the early history of the ARPANET has been arguably well
covered in the literature.
5 We do not intend to provide a detailed synthesis of
these studies but merely address their coverage of the Network Information
Center (NIC) inside Engelbart’s laboratory. In nearly all of these studies,
Engelbart’s laboratory never gets more than a couple of paragraphs, even in
lengthy publications. Engelbart’s Augmentation Research Center was indeed
the second node on the ARPANET, after the University of California in Los
Angeles and before the University of California in Santa Barbara and the
University of Utah, and served as the NIC from the design of the network to
the mid-1970s. In this context, earlier developments at Engelbart’s
Augmentation Research Center (ARC) took a different meaning when it
became time to move to the next development step. Thus it seems
worthwhile to take a closer look at Engelbart’s research in networking, his
motives, his methodology and especially at the reasons for his failure.
AUGMENTATION OF HUMAN INTELLECT: CO-EVOLUTION OF MAN
AND MACHINE
Engelbart likes to tell the story of how he became committed to ‘improving
mankind’s capability for dealing with its pressing problems, especially those
over-taxing our collective capability to cope with complexity and urgency’.
6
Thus at the end of the 1950s he came up with a vision of a ‘Tool for
thought’
7, a means for ‘augmenting human intellect’. In Engelbart’s own
words ‘augmentation of human intellect’ meant:
increasing the capability of a man to approach a complex problem
situation, to gain comprehension to suit his particular needs, and to
derive solutions to problems. Increased capability in this respect is taken
to mean a mixture of the following: more-rapid comprehension, better
comprehension, the possibility of gaining a useful degree of
comprehension in a situation that previously was too complex, speedier
solutions, better solutions, and the possibility of finding solutions to
problems that before seemed insoluble. And by “complex situations” we
include the professional problems of diplomats, executives, social
scientists, 
life 
scientists, 
physical 
scientists, 
attorneys,
designers–whether the problem situation exists for twenty minutes or
twenty years. We do not speak of isolated clever tricks that help in
particular situations. We refer to a way of life in an integrated domain
where hunches, cut-and-try, intangibles, and the human “feel for a
situation” usefully co-exist with powerful concepts, streamlined
terminology and notation, sophisticated methods, and high-powered
electronic aids.
8
Thierry Bardini and Michael Friedewald
193
He became convinced that the electronic computer was a medium for
improving idea development and group communication and therefore was the
perfect means to achieve his ambitious goals.
Since Engelbart was trained in systems engineering and influenced by
cybernetics and Artificial Intelligence (AI), he chose a development method
that was different from other research and development project in computer
science and engineering of the time. After he had read the works of Benjamin
Lee Whorf
9 whose ethno-linguistic writings influenced many scientists
during the late 1950s, he was convinced that technological systems were not
only shaped by humans but also shaped human thinking themselves. Man
and machine could not be treated separately in such a technological system.
Thus Engelbart concluded that developing a tool for ‘augmenting human
intellect’ had to be a co-evolution of man and technology.
10
These considerations resulted in the concept of ‘bootstrapping’, which
meant to build a tool, testing it during the inventive process, and then
refining it.
11 Bootstrapping had the additional advantage that it was possible
to present quick results to those military agencies that were providing
growing funds to Engelbart and his Augmentation Research Center after
1963. Finally, bootstrapping enabled development work in a field that was
scarcely understood. In 1962 Engelbart wrote hopefully that ‘we do not have
to wait until we learn how the mental processes work... but getting started
now will provide not only orientation and stimulation... but will give us
improved problem-solving effectiveness with which to carry out the
pursuits.’
12
The first step was to augment the facilities available to the ARC staff
themselves, a bootstrapping operation to speed the development of even more
sophisticated tools. The results of the ARC group were impressive. Not only
were a number of studies conducted on new methods of communication with
the computer that finally resulted in the development of the ‘mouse’, but a
system was developed–the On-Line System or NLS–which embodied a
number of aspects relevant to Engelbart’s initial goals. The system, which
was presented by Engelbart and his group at the Fall Joint Computer
Conference on 9 December 1968, provided an integrated ‘knowledge
workshop’ for the person, not an isolated bunch of tools. The idea was to
demonstrate what it might be like to perform one’s work through such a
computer system: writing, editing, running programs, scheduling, etc. The
use of the mouse, and the novel five-finger keyset, while requiring a little
time for new users to get used to, offered a fast and smooth way for the user
to input, edit and format information. Although a standard keyboard was also
provided, many operations could be performed by a combination of mouse
and keyset commands, with the user’s hand never having to move on the
keyboard.
13 This demonstration that is sometimes called the ‘mother of all
demos’ was ‘one of the most impressive things I’d ever seen in my life,’
recalls Charles Irby who worked for Engelbart in the early 1970s. ‘People
were spellbound. It seems so trite today. At that time, no one had ever done
anything like that before… It
194
Chronicle of the Death of a Laborator
History of Technology, Volume Twenty-three, 2002
just sent chills down your spine. The audience was totally enthralled by
it.’
14
Thus by 1969 Engelbart and a team that had grown to some 30 people had
a highly developed system that served a single user as a ‘vehicle…to roam
over ”information space”’ as Engelbart’s student David Evans wrote in his
dissertation. But he also complained that the On-Line System did not meet
all the demands formulated in Engelbart’s initial plan, because it was only a
‘highly developed monologue support system’ and did not include any
means for supporting the collaboration of knowledge workers, maybe even at
places spread all over the country.
15 A large-scale network, as the ARPANET
that was being built since 1969, could best achieve communication and
collaboration among users.
THE ONLINE-SYSTEM AND THE NETWORK INFORMATION
CENTER
The early developments of the ARPANET occurred when Engelbart was
starting to think about the diffusion of the On-Line System, that he framed
in terms of bootstrapping cycles. In fact, at the time of the preparation of the
1968 demonstration, Engelbart envisioned the fate of the system out of his
laboratory, in the building of a community of users that would differ, to a
certain extent, from the reflexive users of the first phase.
16 These users of the
network were still supposed to be computer programmers: that was the case
of the earliest ARPANET users, because networking was thought to be a
natural extension of Time-Sharing-projects of the early 1960s. By 1966 most
of the major computer science centres (at least those funded by ARPA) had
Time-Sharing Computers that were running in isolation. For an exchange of
software it was still necessary to send magnetic tapes through the country.
Thus it was an economic necessity to
make every local resource available to any computer in the net in such a
way that any program available to local users can be used remotely
without degradation... The resources, which can be shared in this way,
include software and data, as well as hardware... An effective network
would 
eliminate 
the 
size and 
distance limitations 
on 
[local]
communities.17
As early as 1966, Robert Taylor, then director of ARPA’s Information
Processing Techniques Office (IPTO) (ARPA) and a committed sponsor of
ARC since the early 1960s, discussed the opportunity provided by a network
project with Engelbart. Engelbart’s reactions, at first, were not too different
from those of most other contractors: He remembers thinking ‘Why would
anyone want to do that?’ But Engelbart could not seriously reject the offer to
participate in IPTO’s next big project and after more thinking; he soon
realised how ‘it would fit into the community goals’ that he had been
thinking of.
18 During the Ann Arbor contractors’ meeting in April 1967,
Engelbart therefore volunteered to establish the Network Information Center
in his laboratory. This decision, however, was not exactly well accepted by
his staff when he came back to SRI and told them that he had
Thierry Bardini and Michael Friedewald
195
volunteered for the Network Information Center.
In spite of these early negative reactions, planning for the Network
Information Center inside the lab started with the first Network Working
Group (NWG) meetings, in 1967. Until 1970, several ARC staff members
participated to those meetings and represented SRI and the laboratory. Elmer
Shapiro was only associated to Engelbart’s laboratory, but he provided an
important link to the NWG.
ARC’s limited technical contribution to the development of the
ARPANET seems to be bound to certain people like Elmer Shapiro, Bill
English, and Jeff Rulifson. All of them were ARC veterans who had already
joined Engelbart’s lab in the mid-1960s and were instrumental in the creation
of the On-Line System. Along with other ARC members they left the
laboratory in 1970-1 and joined the newly founded Xerox Palo Alto Research
Center (PARC) that was going to take a leading role in the development of
personal computing and local networks and during the 1970s. As a result the
technical contribution of the ARC members slowed down significantly in
1972. In 1974-5 it resumed under the impulse of Jon Postel and Jim White
who had been involved in networking projects at the University of California
in Los Angeles and Santa Barbara before coming to SRI in 1973. Thus, from
1974 on, NWG contribution from ARC was limited to the work of two staff
members who were not part of the early NLS development group in the
laboratory.
19
Nevertheless, planning of the ARPA Network Information Center started
as early as 1967 with the mandate to organise the Network Information
Center as a depository for information relevant to ARPANET users,
including network protocols, and other information pertinent to ARPA
resource-sharing.
20 In particular the Network Information Center was to
collect all information concerning network practice; it would create reference
documentation and integrate external information into a common database.
Finally it was to be responsible for the maintenance, update and
dissemination of hard-copy information to all users and a general query
service and a telephone hotline. Engelbart also believed that there was an
expressed ‘desire to make use of SRI computer aids for composing, studying,
and modifying documentation’ and thus to become users of the On-Line
System.
21 Over the next years Engelbart became more and more convinced
that the Network Information Center could be the starting point for an
extension of his research program. In his bootstrap program the homogeneous
group of computer programmers was replaced by a group of NIC users who
were still computer professionals but with more varying qualifications. Thus,
by 1970, he wrote that running the Network Information Center ‘offers new
ways to experiment with collaborative dialogue. As we ourselves learn how
to deal with it... we expect to begin offering use of our ‘’Dialogue support
system’’, through the network, to people scattered over the country who want
to do collaborative things in pursuit of Network activities’.
22
In Engelbart’s mind, forming an on-line library was a way to enrol the
ARPANET users in using the On-Line System over the network. According
196
Chronicle of the Death of a Laborator
History of Technology, Volume Twenty-three, 2002
to Engelbart, however, his first attempts to do so met a relative lack of
interest amongst both his sponsors at the Information Processing Techniques
Office and his fellow contractors. His ARPA assignment to establish the
Network Information Center was typically vague, and ‘contained no specific
guidelines as to what form NIC services should take.’ On the other hand,
when he took the initiative to ask his fellow contractors what services they
expected from the NIC, he got another vague and ‘often contradictory’
response. Some thought that ‘there was little need for the NIC,’ when some
others thought that the Network Information Center should ‘supply initiative
and leadership in the development of overall Network conventions and
methodologies’.
23
The emerging discrepancy between Engelbart’s plan to use the NIC as a
means for his ambitious goals and the rest of the community’s persistent idea
of the NIC as a network library became the core of a fundamental crisis when
the Network Information Center finally went on-line in late 1971.
ENHANCEMENTS TO NLS: JOURNAL AND MAIL
Confronted with such an uncertain situation, Engelbart decided that the
Network Information Center should provide two kinds of specific services:
basic library services and on-line services. Basic library services covered the
trivial aspects of the NIC management and were concerned with typical
information retrieval services such as accumulation, indexing, referencing,
and storage of a ‘physical collection of information items in various sizes and
media’.
24 On-line services, on the other hand, constituted a more interesting
challenge for Engelbart and his staff, since it meant harnessing the
capabilities of the Network to provide such services.
It is at this level that Engelbart planned the remote use of his On-Line
System over the network, first with a typewriter-oriented version, and later
with the display terminal-based On-Line System. From 1969-1971, during
the planning stages of the Network Information Center, Engelbart and his
staff created several enhancements to NLS to provide these on-line services.
In 1969, they worked on the design of a windowing capability for the
system, and implemented the Mail and the Journal features of NLS. In 1970
and 1971, these features were in regular use in the laboratory, and they
implemented a version of NLS for the then popular PDP-10 TENEX
operating system. This latest enhancement made sense, not only because
ARC was acquiring a Digital Equipment PDP-10 Computer to replace its
SDS 940 Computer, but also because the PDP-10 was the time-sharing
system used at most contractors’ sites. In April 1971, nine of the 25
computers connected to the ARPANET were DEC PDP-10s.
25
The Journal feature of the On-Line System had already been
conceptualised in 1966 as a tool for improving the effectiveness of
management work, but specification and implementation did not start before
1969. Just the name ‘Journal’ gives a hint of what Engelbart and his student
Dave Evans had in mind. The Journal should have the same importance for
computer augmented teamwork as scientific journals had for traditional
Thierry Bardini and Michael Friedewald
197
knowledge work. Every NLS entry was eventually recorded in a permanent
database. NLS’ ability to forge linkages between Journal entries created a new
form of documentation and communication that was called ‘recorded dialog’.
For handling the vast amount of documents (more than 30,000 entries in five
years) the system provided features for the indexing and retrieval of data. At
the time of its submission, the Number System automatically transferred a
mail message to a read-only file identified by its unique catalogue number.
Catalogue indexes based on message identification, name or ident of its
author(s) and keywords were available. The user could consult such catalogue
indexes when editing a message, in order to link it to previous messages.
Other features allowed the use of ‘irregular Augment files’ such as those (text
or graphics) that other NLS users were working on but that they had not
submitted to the Journal yet, if those people made them accessible. The
system also provided a way of analysing a set of recorded dialogue, such as
all the passages relevant to a given issue (identified by keywords or
comments). After a phase of habituation the Journal proved to be a powerful
tool for the quick informal dissemination of information, for discussing
immature ideas. It is less certain if the Journal ever became a tool for
‘qualitative planning’ as its creators originally intended it. However the
collected Journal entries give us a valuable insight into the atmosphere and
day-to-day work at ARC from 1971 onward.
Since all users of NLS were logged onto the same Time-Sharing-
Computer that was running the Journal it was no problem to distribute
documents to particular people who were also users of the same machine. The
recipient of a message was notified to have a look at a certain document that
was filed to the Journal. In this way sophisticated mailing lists could be
realized without too much effort. Finally Engelbart was a strong supporter of
Time-Sharing and understood the Network Information Center as a centre for
all kinds of information and communication in the network community. In
this respect there was no need to develop programs that transmitted messages
from one computer to another.
26
The NLS Mail and Journal features never had exposure outside ARC. The
availability of a number of simple but not very powerful electronic mail
applications prevented NLS mail feature to become predominant in the
context of network mail between 1971 and 1977.
27 ARC/NIC staff members
still contributed to the Mail Protocol discussions, but they were in no
position to impose NLS mail as the application of choice. They still used it
internally, however, in connection with the Journal. For Engelbart, NLS’
Mail, and Journal features were crucial components in the second phase of his
research program that had moved from the augmentation of individuals to the
augmentation of communities of people working collaboratively. This was in
fact J.C.R.Licklider and Robert Taylor’s original idea: to conceive the
computer as a communication medium, as an interpersonal interface.
28 But
for Engelbart, the implementation of such an interpersonal interface also
supposed an active research on the human side of the system, on the ways to
improve group collaboration to take advantage of the newly acquired
computers aids.
198
Chronicle of the Death of a Laborator
History of Technology, Volume Twenty-three, 2002
OF MICE AND HUMANS
We now focus on one of the social experiments that Engelbart carried out at
ARC in 1972. Explicitly devoted to the ‘human side’ of the system, these
experiments reveal the problems of the laboratory at the time of the
beginning of the implementation of the ARPANET and the early
developments at Xerox’ Palo Alto Research Center. Engelbart designed one
integrated experimental plan in three distinct activities that he launched
separately between the end of January and May 1972, in three internal memos
in the NLS Journal: ‘To launch PODAC’, ‘To launch LINAC’; and ‘To
launch FRAMAC’.
29
The line activity (LINAC) was designed ‘to carry out activities within the
framework that move [the laboratory] toward the goals’. The framework
activity (FRAMAC) was designed to ‘discuss and set the framework goals’.
30
In the next section, we start with a look at the Personal and Organizational
Development Activity (PODAC), which was meant to compose ‘the people’s
organization, representing all of the human beings that work in/for ARC’.
31
Stirring the PODs
The PODAC episode ran in the laboratory between 25 January and 11
September 1972. We have noticed previously that the ARC technical
contribution to the Network Working Group slowed down in 1972. The
PODAC episode might explain part of this situation, since it created a crisis
inside ARC. Engelbart conceived PODAC as ‘a separate organizational set-up
from that for which we departmentalize our activities... in the business of
setting and pursuing our goals.’ PODAC participation for a weekly meeting
of at least two hours was mandatory for the staff members, and the whole
ARC staff was distributed in four groups, called PODs, ‘aiming for balanced
representation in age, sex, professional training, length of association with
ARC, and work roles.’
This kind of a ‘social experiment’ was not new to ARC or Engelbart. As
an individual, Engelbart had had some experience with encounter groups and
had generally felt that his interaction with these groups had helped him ‘to
understand himself better, to fully appreciate his attitudes and beliefs and
integrate his thinking and opinions, and... to communicate better with the
world outside himself’.
32
PODAC became more personal at first: the personal development side of
the activity, at first, took over the organisational side. Topics discussed
covered ‘raising kids, philosophies of life, likes and dislikes, funny incidents
in our lives, the dope rackets, “hippies” as they are vs. as the general public
thinks they are... you name it’.
33 At this level, we can see how the on-line
computing culture at ARC was anchored in the general counter-cultural
background of the Bay Area of the late 1960s.
More serious concerns about the organisational aspect of the activity were
strongly voiced during some of the meetings: ‘There was widespread
dissatisfaction with the lack of well-defined roles, structure, and goals here
Thierry Bardini and Michael Friedewald
199
at ARC... there were objections and dissatisfactions expressed about how
Doug performs his role. There is an impression that Doug goes off in a
corner and hatches ideas. People are uncomfortable with all the surprises...
Doug does not allow enough control, goal setting, participation for ARC in
general.’
34 Several people also felt that ARC was becoming more and more a
service operation and less and less research-oriented.
35
After the initial three months devoted to experimentation, according to
Engelbart’s design, PODAC underwent an internal evaluation. Each POD
was asked to reflect on its own experience and discuss it with other PODs.
36
This evaluation showed a differential gap in the level of success for each
POD. Some PODs considered the experiment very successful, while others
disagreed and wanted to end it. The final word eventually came from the
chairman of the PODAC committee (PODCOM), Walter Bass:
What evaluative processes have been attempted have reached no
expressed conclusions, and we have no framework for PODAC
evolution in which to discuss ANY specific proposals for changing (or
not changing) the POD organization. Frankly we don’t know what the
hell is going on. In this context, the PODCOM reshuffling proposal is
pure bullshit, and if that is the best PODCOM has to offer us, then
perhaps PODCOM—and maybe the POD organization itself—has
earned oblivion.
37
However, this death was not the end of the social experiment dealing with
personal and organisational development. Some staff members took up
Engelbart’s proposition to call on external help. As early as 21 April, one
POD arranged for the visit of Gus Matzorkis, a consultant in organisational
development, which was followed on 19 May by that of another, Dr Arthur
Hastings. Gus Matzorkis eventually wrote a report based on his meetings
with ARC members. The report, dated 30 June, was eventually submitted to
the Journal on 11 September 1972. It marked the end of PODAC, and
concluded that
There is a largely unacknowledged clash of personal values systems in
ARC... There is considerably more formality in the ARC work culture
than appears at first glance...There is a tendency in ARC to sometimes
be unduly tied down to the past, to be preoccupied with evaluating past
decisions and events, to be carrying a load of yesterday’s “unfinished
business”... The relationships between Doug and ARC as a whole, and
between Doug and various individuals and subgroups in ARC, set much
of the tone and pace of the work culture and provide the immediate
setting or background for the major issues and problems in the culture.
This dominance of the leader/others relationships is stronger here than in
most work cultures.
38
No other PODAC-related Journal entries were submitted after this point.
Both professional organisational consultants concluded that specific issues
plagued the ARC work culture, issues that needed more than nice bull
sessions to move toward a resolution. Most of these related to the specific
200
Chronicle of the Death of a Laborator
History of Technology, Volume Twenty-three, 2002
kind of leadership that Engelbart exercised on ARC and appeared finally as
built-in problems in an organisation set up around one man’s crusade. It is
no wonder, then, that the last episode of this social experiment led more to
‘personal’ than ‘organizational development,’ and to still more conflicts
between Engelbart and the participants in his crusade.
From the Organisation to the Persons: A Persecutory Account
Along with the search for professional help from organisational development
consultants, some ARC members turned to the personal-development
movements that were popular in the Bay Area at the end of the 1960s. In
May 1972, one POD started to ‘evaluate’ an organisation called ‘Erhard
Seminars Training’ (EST).
Paul Nathan Rosenberg, alias Werner Erhard, launched EST in October
1971, at the Jack Tar Hotel in San Francisco with nearly a thousand people
in attendance.
39 A former car-salesman and self-taught individual who had
been influenced by such self-help books as Napoleon Hill’s Think and Grow
Rich, Rosenberg created ‘Erhard Seminars Training’ as the kind of self-help
program known to psychologists as ‘Large Group Self-Awareness Training.’
The seminar was built eclectically on the principles of Zen, Scientology and
other such philosophies. ‘Erhard Seminars Training’ lasted for almost fifteen
years before Erhard repackaged it as the Landmark Forum.
40
One POD invited Stewart Emery from ‘Erhard Seminars Training’ to
introduce the organisation to ARC, and Walter Bass attended some of their
seminars.
41 He came back very enthusiastic about EST, saying that ‘the EST
course is worth $150’ and that ‘EST theory has a great deal in common with
Augmentation Theory’.
42 He managed to communicate his enthusiasm to
Engelbart, who soon reiterated his proposal to pay for half of the cost of EST
to his staff members who were willing to participate.
The lack of Journal entries describing what happened next means that to
document it, we have to turn from hard evidence to literature. Jacques F.
Vallée gave a ‘composite, imaginary, fictionalized’ account of the EST
episode at ARC in his 1982 book The Network Revolution: Confessions of a
Computer Scientist.
43 Its portrait of the EST episode at SRI, however, is
very thinly disguised. Vallée’s narrative is a good source since he only
applies a thin cover over reality: names are changed, issues are focused, the
narrative is somewhat exaggerated, but Vallée mainly reports real events. In
his narrative, Pacific Research Laboratory stood for SRI, ‘Stanley’ for
Engelbart, the ‘Systematic Thought-Enhancement Machine’ (STEM) for NLS
and/or ARC, and the Military Equipment and Gear Agency (MEGA) for
ARPA. Vallée tells the story of an experiment that went amok, or how ‘the
human factors came back and took revenge’.
44
It shows clearly, and from the inside, the importance of the human side of
the experiment at work. Several aspects of this narrative echo Matzorkis’
insights concerning the problems of the laboratory: the focus on one man’s
‘genial dream,’ the turn to the organisation’s past goals, the conformity.
Moreover, its narrative abounds with mystic, religious/cultish aspirations to
turn doom and tragedy into ‘salvation’ and ‘transfiguration.’ The crusade
Thierry Bardini and Michael Friedewald
201
was failing on the shore of the promised land, its prophet entrenched in its
vision, its soldier-priest lost in self-doubt. The very nature of this
exaggeration gives us a clue to an interpretation of the collapse of the
laboratory: look for the religious aspect, the mingling of the personal
(individual salvation), and the organisational (church-like) aspects of the
story. This is why we propose to make use of a model that the religious
scientist René Girard developed to analyse collective persecutions in times of
crises, e. g. during the medieval plague epidemic or the French Revolution.
45
Girard states that there are a number of texts that obviously exaggerate the
historical events and reiterate the baseless or even obviously foolish
accusations against the victims of a persecution. But he refuses to admit that
those texts are worthless as a source for the historian. Instead he suggests that
they include three types of stereotypes that help decipher the historical ‘truth’
behind the text. These stereotypes include (1) a situation of crisis of
indifferentiation with its ‘simultaneously monotonous and monstrous
aspect’, which turns into an (2) indifferentiating crime which turns a certain
individual or group of individuals into (3) the designated criminals and
therefore the designated victims of the persecutions, because they are
paradoxically different and undifferentiated at the same time. The persecutory
mechanism of the scapegoat is a social tautology: if there is a crisis, there
must be a crime; if there is a crime there must be criminals; if there are
criminals, they must be the cause of the crisis (or as Monty Python once
genially put it, ‘if she burns, she must be a witch’).
46 As we shall now see
the collapse of Engelbart’s laboratory was a time of scapegoats and a
murderous crowd: Vallée’s story combines the three main stereotypes of a
persecutory text according to Girard.
In the first stage of his story, Vallée exposes the first stereotype: a
situation of crisis that is a crisis of indifferentiation. The STEM/ARC project
as a whole has to prove that it is different, but is facing a paradoxical
situation: its members can be mistaken for the ‘lackeys of the Master of
War,’ since STEM is funded by MEGA. At this crucial juncture, the prophet
himself is speechless. He has lost his ability to convey the Word. Too busy
fighting these evil forces on their own ground, he cannot find the energy to
guide his converts spreading the Word. The Word has already been given to
them, anyway, they should be convinced but they doubt. This is where
Werner Erhard comes in. Another prophet, master of the word, offers
salvation: they can become what they are, persons. This is the ultimate
meaning of personal development. They can re-differentiate, regain their
individuality, and become again the ‘clever opportunists’ they claimed to be
from the start.
Werner Erhard is another figure of the prophet, a quasi-equivalent of the
first prophet, Engelbart. Walter Bass said so after his initiation, and even
Eric Elsevier, Vallée’s outsider, says so, as well. EST techniques are well
designed for the gospel to work: public disclosure of the individual’s whole
being, good and evil, sometimes under stress, sometimes with pleasure.
Carroll describes Erhard’s method as ‘often abusive, profane, demeaning, and
authoritarian’. He quotes a former ‘adept’ who describes the Land-
202
Chronicle of the Death of a Laborator
History of Technology, Volume Twenty-three, 2002
mark Forum experience as follows: ‘You can’t go to the bathroom when
you want, you take meals in groups, there are strict rules about talking and
conduct, and the leader won’t hesitate to shame you into compliance.’
47 And
Vallée says ‘they had gone through the humiliation, the stripping, the public
flogging of their souls, the animectomy’.
48 This is the second stereotype of
the persecutory account for Girard: the undifferentiation crisis as turned into
an indifferentiating crime. The crime has been punished, and the sinners have
repented. They are saved and they can go back to the Word. The crowd is
turned into a mob by the seminars: mobile individuals who know their
purpose and share it, thanks to the power of the church.
In Vallée’s narrative, the persecutory account is framed into three phases
corresponding to three groups of staff members (‘waves’) inside the
laboratory. The redeemed mob of phase one takes on the role of the accuser,
the ‘persecutor’ of Girard’s model. The undifferentiation crisis is turned here
again into an undifferentiating crime, according to the second stereotype of
the persecution text. The undifferentiating crime of the Second Wave is
motivated by the mimetic desire of the managers of the laboratory aspiring to
be young and idealistic again. Here comes the third stereotype of the
persecutory account into play.
The designated criminals are designated victims of the persecutions
because they are indeed paradoxically different and undifferentiated at the
same time. The managers are ‘old Dinosaurs,’ they have been working for the
Monster. In this they are different from the first wave members, they even
represent what the First Wave members fear: undifferentiation. The very
presence of these ‘confused managers’ in STEM raises the doubt and
indifferentiate the now redeemed members of the First Wave. Assuming that
the Word cannot be wrong, and that the project is nevertheless failing, the
managers must be guilty of the undifferentiating crime.
The Second Wave turns to EST for a different motive than the First Wave,
but in the same fashion, as a crowd. They are not sinners, they might be
traitors: who could say if the Word has really touched them? The redeemed
converts of the first phase promise them the reward of acceptance at last. If
they become ‘developed persons’ they will eventually fit in. It is the third
ordeal. The Second Wave goes through the ordeal; it can now join the mob.
The set is ready for the third phase.
In this final phase, the persecutory vocabulary is even clearer: the ‘whole
STEM project’ is infected and ‘must be saved’, the mob looks for other
‘victims.’ The redeemed STEM members, sinners and traitors alike, are now
‘apostles of EST.’ The mob has become the majority and the link to the
Prophet has been restored. But the persecution fails, because the remaining
individuals resist the pressure. They are different, they cannot be accused of
the undifferentiating crime: ‘they are individuals who could stand on their
two feet.’
The resisting victims are the real heroes of Vallée’s account: ‘this was
revelation to Eric. He discovered the strength and the resilience of some team
members whose real spirit he had never suspected’.
49 This is the
Thierry Bardini and Michael Friedewald
203
fourth and final ordeal, where the designated victims become the strong
persons that they are, without the help of any prophet or church. The
resisting victims are heroes because they already are fully developed persons
with some faith of their own and the technological or managerial abilities to
be contributing members of the organisation. They occupy strategic positions
in the project and are essential to it. Of each of them, he says something like
‘it was impossible to get rid of him’.
50 Therefore the end is clear. The
prophet becomes the final victim, the ultimate scapegoat. The unlikely result
of the fourth ordeal brings us back to the first ordeal, the ordeal of the
Prophet. And the result is failure.
Using Girard’s persecutory model to read Vallée’s account of the EST
episode might just be a way to reveal a possible line of interpretation of the
collapse of ARC. Several other signs, however, allow us to justify such a
preferred reading. Engelbart was on the board of ‘Erhard Seminars Training’
for a while in the 1970s, thereby giving some plausibility to the hypothetical
prophetic equivalence called for in our interpretation. In an interview that one
of us carried out, Jacques Vallée stood by his narrative, without the veil of
fiction, this time.
51 Other staff members confirmed this reading through the
recurrent use of a religious vocabulary
52 or the vividness of their memories
some twenty years after the facts.
53 The EST episode affected ARC staff
members in a definite way. Some gave up research, moved to communes;
others became very sensitive to interactions.
It might still appear doubtful to use a model designed to read narratives of
collective persecution in a case where the crowds and mobs are constituted of
groups of less than 20 individuals. To this possible objection, we answer
that we have looked here at a located instance of a much broader
phenomenon. Personal development movements such as ‘Erhard Seminars
Training’ were quite a massive phenomenon in the Bay Area in the late
1960s—and still are today. The conflict of values between hackers, hippies
and straight managers, at a time when most of the funding in research in
computing came from the military, is nothing special to ARC either.
54 These
phenomena were actually going on long after the episode narrated here. Some
of the key researchers at Xerox PARC had taken ‘Erhard Seminars Training’
too, for instance Robert L. Belleville.
55 Alan C. Kay, a leading actor at
PARC even told us that this specific context might after all have been a
condition of the innovative climate that flourished then:
‘There was a whole 1960s thing... the Free University was in Palo Alto.
There was a lot of stuff going on... psychodrama, EST was going on,
Essalen, down in Big Sur, the Whole Earth Catalog was right across the
street at that time to SRI... You know, I am from the East Coast and I
found it too confining. California was wide open, particularly during
this time: anything went. Of course a lot of people floundered... I think
that it helped a lot that there was sort of the perfect climate to put an
engineering cast into, because they were just naturally looser... It was a
very nice set-up generally... a little crazy. We had some riots at Stanford
and stuff, that were
204
Chronicle of the Death of a Laborator
History of Technology, Volume Twenty-three, 2002
unfortunate, and other things. But basically it was a very good set-up I
think’.
56
In other words, we believe that the relatively small crowds involved at ARC
in the EST episode are representative of a much larger phenomenon that
actually characterised the Bay Area at that time. Jacques Vallée’s semi-
fictional narrative might be exaggerated, but because of this exaggeration it is
the best account to read this episode. The next and final section of this
chapter will bring us back to the real with the last significant episode of the
collapse of the laboratory.
THE BREAKTHROUGH LAB AND ITS DISCONTENTS
The previous sections have shown that ARC was confronted with various
problems with respect to the contractors’ community. The original plan to
further bootstrap the On-Line System with the participation in the Network
Information Center first met a relative lack of interest from the contractors
and a lack of specific guidance from ARPA. Later, the attempt to enrol the
contractors with the help of NLS Mail and Journal features failed because of
the availability of other mail applications that made the use of NLS
unnecessary. In the early days of 1972, ARC was facing a tough situation:
the relationship with its sponsors was getting very tense, as this excerpt from
an internal ARC memo from Richard W. Watson reveals:
I went to a NWG meeting at Ill. [University of Illinois] and found that
while things were more sympathetic there, ARC and NIC were
somewhat of a joke. Throughout the following months as I met people I
knew, I was constantly asked why I had gone to work for the [ARC]
scandel [sic] as some put it. I was constantly defending the project and
saying wait you’ll see type of things.
57
Internally, various contributions to PODAC echoed this dissatisfaction from
the ARPA sponsor. The minutes of a POD meeting held on 9 February, for
instance, reported that ‘dissatisfaction was expressed with the apparent
tendency of ARC to design processes and systems that are hurried, short-
term, make-shift efforts for an immediate, urgent need to produce something
and then allow that process to remain without redesigning for long-term and
more efficient job handling.’
58 Some basic problems of the Journal system
handling were especially mentioned.
In several other POD meetings, the question of the new users’ needs was
addressed over and over again. Bootstrapping to the next circle of users
meant that the laboratory should be able to shift its mode of operation to
serve a community of users with different needs and aspirations. The
emphasis, however, was put on bootstrapping NLS rather than on addressing
the needs and aspirations of these new users. For the whole of 1972, the
relationship with ARPA went through ups and downs, but the situation
remained practically unchanged. In October 1973, in another internal memo
Richard W. Watson summarized this situation.
Thierry Bardini and Michael Friedewald
205
Watson insisted again on the fact that ‘there has been little or no feedback
or guidance from ARPA in the intervening years as to what needs they would
like to meet at what costs.’ More importantly, he insisted that this lack of
guidance had become an impediment to the actual functioning of the Network
Information Center. For instance, Watson complained that ARPA had not set
up any ‘explicit procedures associated with new sites coming on the NET to
assure that the NIC receives timely notification (or any notification for that
matter) and other information it needs for its data bases.’ The NIC’s function
was not only unclear, but also not exclusive enough since there was by then
‘two or three other groups on the ARPANET providing related and
occasionally redundant information services to the NET.’
59
By late 1973, some inside ARC began to recognise that the very idea of
bootstrapping NLS might be at the origin of some problems of the laboratory
in its dealing with the ARPA sponsor: ‘ARC management, including
myself, have seen the importance of the NIC to ARC in terms of what the
NIC can contribute to ARC’s broader goals,’ Watson wrote. Now he realised
that ‘the NIC has had to use NLS based technology to meet network needs
and often has had to perceive these needs in NLS terms. This haw [sic] led to
occassional [sic] distortions of actual needs and thus failures to perceive and
meet actual network needs.’ Although he insisted that this kind of distortion
could go both ways, Watson believed that the core of the problem was that
‘often NIC priorities have had to take second place to broader ARC
objectives.’
Also, Watson finally recognized the basic difficulty in carrying out
research and service simultaneously on the same system: ‘the system on
which the NIC has been based was not originally designed explicitly for
many NIC functions, and while it is being adapted to meet NIC needs as part
of its development evolution, it is incomplete and not finished through to
the level of detail necessary for many NIC needs.’ In such a set-up, two
distinct kinds of pressure apply: the system is under constant pressure to
adapt to the needs of its clients and to the evolving representation of these
needs, but also suffers from the pressure that the changes brought by the
evolution of the research create. Watson insisted that ‘these factors make it
hard to create a stable plan and to carry it out as new factors are constantly
appearing on a daily and weekly basis to shift priorities or over come some
new glitch.’
60
Elizabeth ‘Jake’ Feinler, who was by then in charge of the Network
Information Center, was prompt to respond to Watson. What appeared in
Watson’s memo as the result of a built-in conflict in ARC/NIC design
became for her a source of complaints about the NIC.
61 In 1973, there thus
was still an internal division inside the laboratory over the decision to
implement the Network Information Center on the basis of the further
development of NLS. While Engelbart conceived of the Network Information
Center as the vehicle to bootstrap NLS further, the Network Information
Center insisted that it was an activity in itself that could be considered as a
worthwhile research and development activity. Feinler sta-
206
Chronicle of the Death of a Laborator
History of Technology, Volume Twenty-three, 2002
ted in her memo that the Network Information Center could ‘create a
whole new research area of resource sharing and information retrieval.’ But
she also insisted that it would require that the Network Information Center
should stop being considered as a ‘foster child’ and that it should receive
‘adequate recognition and support from within.’
This final demand should be read in the context of the social experiments
attempted by Engelbart with PODAC, LINAC, and FRAMAC. Feinler’s
plea and complaints actually referred to organizational and personal problems
inside the laboratory. Watson only diagnosed an organizational problem
stemming from the dual nature and the hierarchisation of the goals of the
laboratory, but Feinler was clear in her evaluation about the personal
problems that these organisational problems created. According to her,
individuals contributing to the Network Information Center were still set
apart as ‘a nuisance’ or ‘system hogs’ in late 1973. She finally insisted that
the NIC members should be given ‘equal footing within the framework of
ARC.’ Therefore, in late 1973, the problems that should have been dealt with
in the PODAC experiment were still there. The EST episode that marked the
end of the experiment, as we have seen, concluded in a failure to settle the
differences between the ARC members and restore the link with Engelbart. A
final contribution to this episode, dated from the end of 1973 too, will help
us understand its conclusion.
Donald ‘Smokey’ Wallace, the model for Vallée’s hero ‘Guru,’ summed
up the situation of the laboratory in an internal ARC memo entitled ‘Of Mice
and Man (a Revelation)’.
62 His take on Engelbart’s social experiments is
worth commenting on here, because it explains how the nature of the
relationships between Engelbart and his staff might have changed
dramatically after the 1972 social experiments. If our analysis of Vallée’s
account of the EST episode is right, after PODAC and EST, the status of
Engelbart in the laboratory changed drastically from ‘hero’ to ‘victim.’ We
will see now that we could consider him a special kind of ‘victim’ that keeps
some features of a ‘hero,’ namely a tragic hero.
For Wallace, PODAC was a definite ‘experiment’ that was aiming at
creating conflict inside the laboratory (‘no safe heaven in the PODs’). His ‘Of
Mice and Man’ memo gives his own version of how Engelbart was actually
‘fucking’ with his staff members, who were ‘the laboratory animals’ in his
experiments. For him, PODAC was an experiment in creating confusion and
chaos in the laboratory: when something started to work Engelbart would
change the rules and say that it was not the result that he expected. At the
same time, Wallace notes the paradox: the augmentation framework was not
changing. For Wallace, Engelbart is indeed the author of the indifferentiating
crime that is at the core of the persecutory account. He insists that Engelbart
had a problem with sharing the credits or even acknowledging references. For
him, ‘an awful lot of what was built [at ARC] had the personality of the
various individuals who built it.’ Engelbart might appear as ‘the lone guy
who invented all that stuff’, when it was really built by all these people (who
didn’t get any credits),’almost by accident’ in Wallace’s mind, ‘the best
people in the industry at that time’.
63
Thierry Bardini and Michael Friedewald
207
But the crucial point in Wallace’s account is that there is an ultimate
reason to this situation: Engelbart created chaos and confusion with his
experiments in order to achieve a ‘breakthrough.’ For Wallace indeed:
‘Granted some progress had been made but most people agree that a
breakthrough in computer programming is necessary and maybe long
overdue.’
For him, this breakthrough had not been achieved and thus was still
needed in 1973 because ‘programming (system design etc.) is a much more
complex problem’
64 than the one addressed by earlier breakthroughs such as
physics, etc. In his memo, Wallace proposed a variation on Engelbart’s idea
of complex/urgent problems. This first step in the memo therefore reaffirms
Engelbart’s original motivation. It relies on a confirmation of the same
original premises, and therefore appears as a renewed adhesion to Engelbart’s
original purpose. The second step in the memo is an attempt to characterise
the laboratory set-up that could create ‘the conditions of an environment
necessary to maximize the probability of a breakthrough of the desired type.’
For Wallace, these conditions amount to a somewhat paradoxical purpose:
sustain chaos and frustration of its staff, but in a productive way.
In this clever justification, the personal problems created for the various
individuals staffing the laboratory appear finally as a necessary consequence
of the organisational set-up needed to maximise the chance of a breakthrough.
These problems, however, should not exceed a certain level:
care must be taken that the frustrations level of the participants must not
become so high, or the incremental rewards so low, as to cause the
subjects’ to leave the lab or for the apparent normalcy of the project to
become unstable. Such tools as apparent, inept or indecisive
management, fuzzy goals and unclear departmental or functional lines
can, and should, be used as effective devices in creating an atmosphere
of ‘creative frustration’.
In spite of its apparent paranoid character, Wallace’s memo achieves one
crucial move: it restates and therefore reaffirms the goal of the laboratory and
justifies Engelbart in organising it (or, rather, in disorganising it) the way he
did. The Prophet turned victim reappears as a hero because even if he is
blamed, this blame is the necessary price he must pay to carry the Word: the
Prophet becomes a tragic hero. The end eventually justifies the means, even
if these means ‘tamper with the lives of the staff in a very significant way.’
Ironically enough, the very word ‘breakthrough’ was also at the core of the
EST gospel, which considered the experience of such a ‘breakthrough’ as one
of the most important goal of the Seminars. Wallace’s argument is therefore
tantamount to a renewal of faith, if not in the person of the Prophet, at least
in his revelation.
In his memo, Wallace insists that he has shared his model with some of
his colleagues, and that ‘it has been as revealing to them as it has been to
me.’ Numerous other renewals of trust in the Journal archive seem to confirm
this point. Even Elizabeth Feinler, for instance, concluded
208
Chronicle of the Death of a Laborator
History of Technology, Volume Twenty-three, 2002
her ‘demanding’ piece with the following statement:
Up until now systems have emphasized the output of one knowledge
worker or have amassed the work of scores, but few systems have come
to grips with the problem of easy interchange between the two so that an
individual is able to build, tear-down, and rebuild from a combination
of his own input matched against or added to the vast input of others.
This is where the excitement is, this is where the pay-off lies, and this
is my view of Doug’s dream of a knowledge workshop.
65
Inside ARC, therefore, the conclusion of the PODAC-EST episode
represented the beginning of the collapse of the laboratory. Engelbart’s vision
was still accepted as the ultimate goal to pursue, but the means to reach this
goal were by no means the object of a consensus among the staff workers. If
his prophecy was still accepted, the Prophet had become a tragic hero, since
it was clear already by that time that he would not succeed in realising the
prophecy. Externally, on the other hand, Engelbart’s system was redesigned
at PARC in a very different perspective, centred on ‘user-friendliness’:
Engelbart’s vision of the personal interface gave way to a modeless interface
where the focus was on the screen and where manual input settled for a
combination of a mouse and QWERTY keyboard that made no sense to him.
In the context of the early days ARPANET, alternative systems provided a
much more diffused way to establish connections across the network. The
Network Information Center continued facing a lot of problems, and
Engelbart and his staff’s contribution to the building of the ARPANET came
to be definitely translated as a ‘joke.’
CONCLUSIONS
This set of reasons, internal collapse, and external disregard, sealed the fate of
Engelbart’s vision and led to his relative failure. Staff members continued to
leave the laboratory, and the sponsors slowly pulled out. ARPA ceased its
funding in 1974, and SRI eventually sold the project to Tymshare in 1977.
The system was sold again to McDonnell Douglas in the early 1980s, and
Augment (the new name of NLS) slowly faded into oblivion. When one of
us met Engelbart in the early 1990s, he was indeed a ‘bitter man,’ desperately
trying to continue his evangelism from the two offices that Logitech, a
leading mouse manufacturer, was giving him to locate his ‘Bootstrap
Institute.’ His ‘bitterness,’ however, stemmed from the inherent difficulties
of technology transfer (‘bootstrapping to wider masses of users’) and not
from the weakness of his vision.
The research and development process for a technological system such as
personal and distributed computing is complex and highly uncertain. For us,
the main uncertainty resides in the process by which one gets others to accept
one’s research agenda by convincing them that the problems they wish to
solve can be best solved by using one’s methods. The agenda of an actor will
not necessarily prevail, even if rational reasons can be advanced
Thierry Bardini and Michael Friedewald
209
retrospectively about the social or technological characteristics of his
solution. In this perspective, innovation-development is a socio-technological
process, a social shaping through negotiation of the technology and its uses,
as well as the shaping of social groups involved in the innovation
development process, their identity, their ideology, etc.
Success or failure of the technology transfer in such a complex
technological system depends on the stabilisation of the chain of associations
in the social and technological networks involved in the process.
Geographical, psychological, and social characteristics of the technology
transfer finally sum to the necessary contextual conditions of the process. We
conclude that the understanding of the user’s need in each phase of the
process (from experimental research to widespread diffusion of the
technology) is very important for the success of the transfer process. In this
perspective, the technology transfer process is best seen as a social process
organised by the ultimate purpose of marketing a product that consumers will
buy or at least, use regularly.
Each phase of the technology transfer process presents unique social
characteristics, and what makes for success at a certain phase does not
necessarily promise success for a later phase. For instance, the strength of
ARC’s innovative work in personal computing technologies did not
guarantee its success in the later phases of the technology transfer. Overall
success requires dramatic changes in strategies on the basis of new
perspectives of the user. These changes are often so ‘revolutionary’ for an
organisation accustomed to work on a given representation of the user, that
they appear quasi-impossible to implement. In this paper, we have seen that
the organisational setting of ARC, with this dual purpose as a laboratory and
a service facility, can be read in the perspective of the process of the
realisation of the user. What seemed at first an opportunity to Engelbart (on
the ARPANET, he thought, there was the community of users he had been
dreaming of), soon became the source of unbearable organisational and
personal tensions.
Today, Engelbart is no longer a ‘bitter man’: the massive success of the
World Wide Web has put his work in the forefront again. NLS is now very
often considered as the precursor of today’s hypermedia, the original
application in computerised systems of the principle of hypertext envisioned
by Vannevar Bush. Other institutions like Xerox PARC, Apple, Microsoft,
CERN and Netscape have carried out to its term the technology transfer
process, on a path of trial and errors where often only the last man gets the
rewards.
66 After having celebrated Engelbart’s famous San Francisco demo as
the predecessor of modern computer technology in 1998, we ought to
remember that the path of successful technology development indeed includes
all these ‘genial errors’—and takes time.
Notes and References
1 Stuart W. Leslie, The Cold War and American Science: The Military-Industrial-Academic
Complex at MIT and Stanford (New York, 1993).
2 Theodore Roszak, The Making of a Counter Culture: Reflections on the Technocratic
Society and Its Youthful Opposition [1968] (Berkeley, 1995).
210
Chronicle of the Death of a Laborator
History of Technology, Volume Twenty-three, 2002
3 Andrew Pollack, ‘Two Men, Two Visions of One Computer World, Indivisible,’ The New
York Times, 8 December 1991, F13; A. M. Louis, ‘Inventor of the Mouse Wins $500, 000 Prize.
Bay Area scientist wins Lemelson-MIT award for creations,’ San Francisco Chronicle, 10
April 1997: C3; Christoph Drössser, ‘Der Erfinder der Maus,’ Zeit Magazin, 20. August 1998.
4  Jeff Conklin, 'Hypertext: An Introduction and Survey', IEEE Computer, 1987, 20(9), 17-
41; Irene Greif, ed. Computer-Supported Cooperative Work: A Book of Readings (San Mateo,
CA., 1988); Jakob Nielsen, Hypertext & Hypermedia (Boston, 1993).
5 For instance Arthur L. Norberg, Judy E. O'Neill and Kerry Freedman, Transforming
Computer Technology: Information Processing in the Pentagon 1962-1986 (Baltimore Md.,
1996), 153–196; Katie Hafner and Matthew Lyon, Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins of
the Internet (New York, 1996); Peter H. Salus, Casting the Net: From ARPANET to INTERNET
and beyond... (Reading, Mass., 1995); Michael Hauben and Ronda Hauben, Netizens: on the
history and impact of usenet and the internet (Los Alamitos, CA, 1997).
6 Douglas C. Engelbart, 'Toward Augmenting the Human Intellect and Boosting our
Collective IQ', Communications of the ACM, 1995, 38(8), 30-33.
7 Howard Rheingold, Tools for thought: The People and Ideas behind the Next Computer
Revolution (New York, 1985), Chapter 9.
8 Douglas C. Engelbart, ‘Augmenting Human Intellect: A Conceptual Framework’ Summary
Report for the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (Menlo Park, CA, 1962), 1; Douglas C.
Engelbart. ‘A Conceptual Framework for the Augmentation of Man's Intellect’ in P. W.
Howerton and D. C. Weeks (eds.), The Augmentation of Man's Intellect by Machine
(Washington, 1963), 1–29, esp. 1.
9 Benjamin Lee Whorf, Language, Thought, and Reality: Selected Writings of Benjamin Lee
Whorf. Edited by J. B. Carroll (Cambridge, 1956).
10 Engelbart, Augmenting Human Intellect, op. cit. (8), 115–127; Michael Friedewald,
'Konzepte der Mensch-Computer-Kommunikation in den 1960er Jahren: J. C. R. Licklider,
Douglas Engelbart und der Computer als Intelligenzverstärker', Technikgeschichte, 2000,
67(1), 1–24.
11 Engelbart, Augmenting Human Intellect, op. cit. (8), 115–127; Thierry Bardini,
Bootstrapping: Douglas Engelbart, Coevolution, and the Origins of Personal Computing
(Stanford, CA, 2000).
12 Engelbart, Augmenting Human Intellect, op. cit. (8), 131.
13 Douglas C. Engelbart and William K. English, ‘A research center for augmenting human
intellect’ in Proceedings of the AFIPS 1968 Fall Joint Computer Conference (Washington,
1968), 9-21; Douglas C. Engelbart Engelbart, ‘Coordinated Information Services for a
Discipline- or Mission-Oriented Community’ in Proceedings of the Second Annual Computer
Communications Conference (San José, 1972).
14 C. H. Irby, Personal interviews with Stan Augarten, 1993-1994, cited in Stan Augarten,
‘The Pixelated Cookie Monster: How a Small Group of Scientists in Massachusetts and
California Invented Personal Computing and Changed the World,’ unpublished book
manuscript, 1994.
15 David A. Evans, Man/Computer Augmentation Systems for Qualitative Planning, Ph.D.
Thesis (Stanford University, 1969), esp. 153, 213; cf. also Nilo Lindgren, 'Toward the
Decentralized Intellectual Workshop', Innovation, 1971, 24(September), 50-60, esp. 53.
16 Thierry Bardini and August T. Horvath, 'The Social Construction of the Personal
Computer User', Journal of Communication, 1995, 45(3), 40-65.
17 Lawrence G. Roberts and Barry D. Wessler, ‘Computer network development to achieve
resource sharing’ in Proceedings of the AFIPS 1970 Spring Joint Computer Conference
(Atlantic City, 1970), 543-549, esp. 543
18 Douglas C. Engelbart, An Oral History, four interviews conducted by H. Lowood and J.
Adams between December 1986 and April 1987, edited by T. Bardini (Stanford, 1986/87),
available on-line at:   http://www-sul.stanford.edu/depts/hasrg/histsci/ssvoral/engelbart/start.html .
19 J. Reynolds and Jonathan Postel, ‘The Request for Comments Reference Guide,’ Request
for Comments #1000, August 1987.
20 Elizabeth Feinler, ‘The Identification Data Base in a Networking Environment’, in
National Telecommunications Conference (NTC) ‘77 Record (New York, 1977), 21–31.
Thierry Bardini and Michael Friedewald
211
21 Roberts and Wessler, op. cit. (17), 548; Douglas C. Engelbart, ‘Study for the
Development of Human Intellect Augmentation Techniques,’ Quarterly Technical Letter
Report No. 6. to NASA Langley Research Center, 28 November, Appendix A ‘Early Notes on
NIC.’ Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 2, Folder 10.
22 Douglas C. Engelbart, ‘Intellectual Implications of Multi–Access Computer Networks’ in
Proceedings of the Interdisciplinary Conference on Multi–Access Computer Networks (Austin,
1970).
23 Douglas C. Engelbart and Staff of Augmentation Research Center, Advanced Intellect-
Augmentation Techniques, NASA Contractor Report 1827 (Menlo Park, 1972), esp. 126–127.
24 Engelbart et al., Advanced Intellect-Augmentation Techniques, op. cit. (23), 129.
25 Douglas C. Engelbart, ‘The augmented knowledge workshop’ in Adele Goldberg (ed.), A
History of Personal Workstations (Reading, 1988), 187-236.
26 Engelbart, The augmented knowledge workshop, op. cit. (25), 212-213; Engelbart and
English, A research center for augmenting human intellect, op. cit. (13), 47-48; Douglas C.
Engelbart, ‘NLS Teleconferencing Features: The Journal, and Shared–Screen Telephoning’ in
IEEE CompCon Digest, 9–11 September 1975, 173-176.
27 Salus, op. cit. (5), 95-98; Ian R. Hardy, ‘The Evolution of ARPANET email,’ History
Thesis Paper (University of California at Berkeley, 1996).
28 Joseph C.R. Licklider and Robert Taylor, ‘The Computer as a Communication Device,’
Science and Technology, 1968, April, 21–31.
29 Douglas C. Engelbart, ‘To Launch PODAC,’ 25 January 1972, DCE Journal # 8651,
Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 62; Douglas C. Engelbart, Engelbart,
‘To Launch LINAC,’ 7 April 1972, DCE Journal # 10034, Stanford University Library,
Engelbart Collection, Box 19; Douglas C. Engelbart, ‘To Launch FRAMAC,’ 4 May 1972, DCE
Journal # 10331, Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 19.
30 Douglas C. Engelbart, ‘Initial FRAMAC meeting Notes,’ 23 May 1972, DCE Journal
# 10457, Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 19.
31 Douglas C. Engelbart, ‘To PODAC, on its bootstrapping into representational dialogue
skills and practices,’ 25 April 1972, DCE Journal 10225, Stanford University Library,
Engelbart Collection, Box 62.
32 Mil E. Jernigan, ‘Fir POD Meeting, 18 April 1972,’ 20 April 1972, DCE Journal # 10125,
Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 62; cf. also Douglas C. Engelbart and
Staff of Augmentation Research Center, Computer-Augmented Management-System Research
and Development of Augmentation Facility, Final Report RADC-TR-70-82 (Menlo Park, 1970),
esp. 37–50.
33 Mil E. Jernigan, ‘A Fir POD Report of Activities, 11 April 1972,’ 20 April 1972, DCE
Journal # 10188, Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 62.
34 Bruce L. Parsley, ‘Communiqué from the Cedar 9 - 26 Jan.,’ 29 January 1972, DCE
Journal # 8717, Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 62.
35 Marilyn F.Auerbach, ‘Redwood Pod Notes - 10 Feb 72,’ 14 February 1972, DCE Journal
# 9070, Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 62.
36 Walter L. Bass, ‘PODCOM Request for Comments on PODAC Evaluation,’ 24 April
1972, DCE Journal # 10221, Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 62.
37 Walter L. Bass, ‘Comments on PODCOM reshuffling proposal (11041),’ 14 July 1972,
DCE Journal # 11059, Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 62.
38 Gus Matzorkis, ‘Some Reflections Of and On ARC,’ 11 September 1972, DCE Journal
# 11732, Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 62.
39 Steven Pressman, Outrageous Betrayal: The Dark Journey of Werner Erhard From EST
to Exile (New York, 1993).
40 Robert T. Carroll, ‘Werner Erhard, EST and the Landmark Forum’ in Sceptic’s
Dictionary, 1999. Available on-line at   http://wheel.dcn.davis.ca.us/~btcarrol/skeptic/est.html; 
cf. also Martin Lell, Das Forum: Protokoll einer Gehirnwäsche. Der Psycho-Konzern
Landmark Education (Munich, 1997).
41 Walter L. Bass, ‘Oak POD is Evaluating Erhard Seminars Training,’ 30 May 1972, DCE
Journal # 10610, Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 62.
42 Walter L. Bass, ‘Personal Evaluation of the EST Course,’ 19 June 1972, DCE Journal
# 10761, Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 62.
212
Chronicle of the Death of a Laborator
History of Technology, Volume Twenty-three, 2002
43 Jacques Vallée, The Network Revolution: Confessions of a Computer Scientist (Berkeley,
1982), 87–114..
44 Vallee, The Network Revolution, op. cit. (43), 100.
45 René Girard, Things hidden since the foundation of the world (Baltimore, 1986); René
Girard, The Scapegoat (London, 1987).
46 Girard, The Scapegoat, op. cit. (45), Chapter 1.
47 Carroll, op. cit. (40).
48 Vallee, The Network Revolution, op. cit. (43), 110, emphasis in the original.
49 Vallee, The Network Revolution, op. cit. (43), 110.
50 Vallee, The Network Revolution, op. cit. (43), 111-112.
51 Jacques F. Vallée, Personal interview with Thierry Bardini, San Francisco, CA, 5 June
1996. Cf. also Kenneth E. Victor, E-Mail message to Michael Friedewald, 4 April 1999.
52 E. g. Donald C. Wallace, Personal interview with Thierry Bardini, Mountain View, CA, 3
June 1996.
53 E. g. Harvey Lehtman, Personal interview with Thierry Bardini, Cupertino, CA, 14
December 1992.
54 Roszak, op. cit. (2).
55 Robert L. Belleville, Personal interview with Thierry Bardini, Mountain View, CA, 19
March 1993.
56 Alan C. Kay, Personal interview with Thierry Bardini, Los Angeles, CA, 17 December
1992.
57 Richard W. Watson, ‘Some Background on Pressures Existing on ARC,’ 13 January 1972,
DCE Journal # 8634, Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 18.
58 Mil E. Jernigan, ‘Fir POD Meeting, 9 Feb 1972,’ 22 February 1972, DCE Journal # 9239,
Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 62.
59 Richard W. Watson, ‘Experience from the NIC Showing Factors Creating Instability in
Application Operations,’ 26 October 1973, DCE Journal # 19870, Stanford University Library,
Engelbart Collection, Box 27.
60 Watson, Experience from the NIC Showing Factors Creating Instability in Application
Operations, op. cit. (57).
61 Elizabeth Feinler, ‘Adjunct to RWW’s memo 19870,’ 26 October 1973, DCE Journal
# 19874, Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 27.
62 Donald C. Wallace, ‘Of Mice and Man (a Revelation),’ 4 November 1973, DCE Journal
# 20039, Stanford University Library, Engelbart Collection, Box 27.
63 Wallace, Interview, op. cit. (52).
64 Jernigan, Fir POD Meeting, 9 Feb 1972, op. cit. (58).
65 Feinler, The Identification Data Base in a Networking Environment, op. cit. (20).
66 Douglas K. Smith, Robert C. Alexander, Fumbling the Future: How Xerox Invented, Then
Ignored the First Personal Computer (New York, 1988); Michael A. Hiltzik, Dealers of
Lightning: Xerox PARC and the Dawn of the Computer Age (New York, 1999).
