393 
10.5 
A NEW APPROACH TO THE FUNCTIONAL 
DESIGN OF A DIGITAL COMPUTER 
R. S. Barton 
Computer Consultant 
Altadena, California 
Summary 
The present methods of determining the func-
tional design of computers are critically reviewed 
and a new approach proposed. 
This is illustrated 
by explaining, in abstracted form, part of the con-
trol organization of a new and different machine 
based, in part, on the ALGOL 60 language.*• The 
concepts of expression and procedure lead directly 
to use of a Polish string program. 
A new arrange-
ment of control registers results, which provides 
for automatic allocation of temporary storage within 
expressions and procedures, and a generalized sub-
routine linkage. 
The simplicity and power of these notions sug-
gests that there is much room for improvement in 
present machines and that more attention should be 
given to control functions in new designs . 
Introduction 
The ideas presented arise from the conviction 
that for a true general purpose digital computer both 
coding and operation should be fully automated. 
Higher level programming languages , such as ALGOL, 
should be employed to the practical exclusion of 
machine language; questions of efficiency of object 
program and translation process ought not to arise 
if the machine has been properly designed. Opera-
tion should be under the control of the machine it-
self, in a fuller sense than is typical in current 
practice. 
The functions of scheduling, segmenta-
tion of programs for multi-level storage, and control 
of input - output operations should be handled by a 
general operational program. 
This new approach.will be illustrated after re-
viewing the customary methods of machine design. 
The Special Purpose Machine 
In simple and well defined applications, the 
design engineer may dispense entirely with program-
ming assistance and the program may be entirely , 
or in large part, in the hardware. If the processing 
required is complex, programmers are invited to as-
sist the engineers. There will be a period of trading-
off programmed and component logic, but the result-
ing machine will tend to resemble the conventional 
general purpose computer. 
The Engineers' General Purpose Machine 
In the design of machines to meet competition, 
the utilization of new components is likely to be of 
vital concern to the designers. 
While requiring a 
complete new set of programs, the new product sel-
dom shows more than minor variations of the tradi-
tional design. Its new features originate with both 
programmers and logical designers, but those ideas 
which are contributed by the programmers stem usu-
ally from applications experience with previous 
machines rather than from systematic theory. The 
logical designer has the lastword and is most likely 
to accept ideas which require a minimum of new 
design. 
The Programmers' General Purpose Machine 
It seems to be the case that as yet no machine's 
"design has been significantly effected by persons 
experienced in the development of automatic program-
ming systems. 
Programming still must be imposed 
upon designs that have been determined by market-
ing pressures and tradition. 
It must be admitted 
that the programmers of the last decade have been 
poorly prepared to make the kind of contribution that 
should be expected. The art of programming has de-
veloped in a helter-skelter manner, leaving behind 
little of value. There is almost no theory and little 
standard methodology. 
The logical designers have 
a large body of switching theory as a basis for their 
work and have, consequently, done better. 
The Simultaneous Design of Computers 
and Programming Systems 
Rather than hope for a new spirit of cooperation 
among disparate product planning, engineering, and 
programming departments, a single small organiza-
tion is needed for each product conception. 
This 
would be comprised of three kinds of people respon-
sible for aspects of system model, program design, 
and logical design. 
As an example, for a computer to process appli-
cations expressible in the ALGOL 60 language, the 
system model group would interpret the language , 
specify a hardware representation and necessary 
language supplements, define speed or cost objec-
tives , and the "use image" the machine is to present. 
They would have responsibility for ensuring proper 
interpretation of the model by both programmers and 
logical designers. 
The program designers would have background 
experience in the construction of translators and 
some knowledge of logical design. They will con-
sider necessary reductions in the source language 
and translation techniques to enable efficient object 
time interpretation by hardware. 
The logical designers would be oriented in cur-
rent programming practice and become familiar with 
the source programming language to be used. Their 
task is to produce designs to handle the reduced 
languages. 
Concepts for the Design 
Some simple ideas are now presented that arise 
quite naturally from using the ALGOL 60 language as 
a model. 
These ideas have actually entered into 
the design of a new Burroughs Information Processing 
System, 
For purposes of exposition, they will be 
considered out of the context of the actual machine, 
and liberties will be taken to avoid complications 
which are not germane to the subject. 
Polish String Program 
The Polish notation was invented by the logician 
Lukasiewicz for use in the propositional calculus. 
It has the advantage that rules of operator prece-
dence and signs of grouping are not required. 
At 
least two logical machines have been built which 
use it as a source language. The first of these was 
the Burroughs Truth Function Evaluator^. 
More re-
cently, Bauer described a similar logical device ^ 
and hinted of remarkable results which were dis-
cussed in another paper 4. 
During the past few 
years , numerous persons have "discovered" the ex-
tension of this notation to arithmetic expressions 
and found it useful as an intermediate language in 
designing algebraic translators. 
Any expression, as defined by ALGOL 60, can 
be simply translated into Polish form, and this can 
be the basis of an efficient machine language to be 
used in place of the customary single or multiple-
address command formats. 
Methods for doing this 
are well known and familiarity with an algorithm is 
assumed. While it would be q"uite feasible to con-
struct a machine to directly interpret ALGOL expres-
sions having suitably restricted identifiers, it was 
decided, in view of the simplicity of the transforma-
tion, to use the Polish form. 
At this point, it is 
important to stress that programs need never be 
written in Polish form; and no lower level assembly-
type language is required. 
This form provides a machine language with many 
desirable properties. 
Programs consist of a string 
of elements which correspond to identifiers, literals, 
or operators. All the operators defined in ALGOL60 
can be included. 
Using the stack construct, next 
described, there is no need for store and fetch com-
mands such as are normally associated with the 
temporary storage of intermediate quantities in the 
evaluation of expressions. More important, there-
suiting program is in a better form for the applica-
tion of procedures to improve program efficiency than 
is the case with the usual command languages. 
The Stack Construct 
Assume that the elements of the string are exa-
mined from left to right so that operators need not 
be deferred. Normally, for unary and binary opera-
tors , the transformation to Polish form would ensure 
(excepting in the case of procedures) that at most 
two operands would have to be fetched before each 
execution. 
To mechanize the Polish string program, a spe-
cial address-length register called the stack counter 
is provided to hold the most current cell address in 
a vector of temporary storage cells referred to as the. 
stack. 
Two word-length arithmetic registers-hold 
the most recently fetched or computed operands . 
Associated with each of the latter is an occupancy 
toggle for indicating whether or not that register 
contains an operand. 
The action of the stack is defined in Table I. 
The following notation applies: S, A, B, TA, Tg 
represent the contents of the stack counter , arith-
metic registers, and occupancy toggles. 
X is an 
operand. 
© and © are unary and binary operators. 
S* signifies the contents of the cell addressed by 
the contents of S. 
Now, while the case of stack operation, which 
is presented is somewhat simplified, it does show 
how a Polish string program can be mechanized. The 
occurrences of operators with TA = TB = 0 is actually 
abnormal, but are included to allow continuation in 
the event that the evaluation of an expression is 
interrupted. 
The state T& = 1 / Tg = 0 is unstable. 
It is worth noting that upon completion of the 
evaluation of a well-formed expression we have 
TA = 0, Tg = I , with the value of S upon completion 
equal to its initial value. This offers a possibility 
for checking in the hardware which does not exist in 
such a simple form for the usual command language. 
In the event that the reader does not happen to 
be familiar with the Lukasiewicz notation, he may 
find it useful to trace the operation of the stack for 
the program XY + VW/U + x Z + which corresponds 
to the expression 0C + Y) x (U + V/W) + Z. 
Subroutines and ALGOL Procedures 
To realize additional important advantages from 
this program format , we extend these notions to 
handle n-ary operators or n-place functions that are 
defined by sub - programs. 
The important case of 
call - by - name is deferred. 
Call-by-value only is 
discussed. 
Declarations of functions will cause 
subroutines to be generated and extensions of the 
operator set to be defined. Similarly, it is assumed 
that for each array one or more storage - mapping 
functions have been defined and that, corresponding 
to each, a subroutine has been created from the ar-
ray declaration which will have access to informa -
tion on bounds of indices and the base address of 
the array. Such subroutines will also be called by 
extensions of the operator set. The program corres-
ponding to the array element or function call will 
then consist of an ordered set of expressions repre-
senting the indices or arguments. The values of 
these are entered into the stack. When the opera-
tor corresponding to that subroutine is encountered, 
linkage automatically results. 
Subroutine Control Using the Stack 
It is now necessary to place the contents of 
registers A and B (or B if A is empty) into the stack 
since the subroutine to be executed will generally 
require these registers. Furthermore, the contents 
of the control counter, C, must be saved to enable 
return from the subroutine. This return can be saved 
in the stack and the position of this address recorded 
in another address-length register designated F. To 
afford a link to the return for a possible higher level 
subroutine, the former contents of F are retained in 
the cell with C. 
Finally, the subroutine entry ad-
dress specified by the extension operator is entered 
into C and linkage to the subroutine is complete. 
Within the subroutine, the parameters are ad-
dressed minus relative to F in reverse order. Tem-
porary storage is allocated for the subroutine by 
advancing S corresponding to the number of cells 
needed. 
These cells can then be addressed plus 
relative to F. 
It will al'so be useful to store con-
stants used by the subroutine ahead of its entry and 
address them minus relative to C. 
Upon exit, the resulting value is left in B, the 
contents of S are replaced by F, and for the cell then 
addressed by S , the C-part will go to C and the F -
part to F. Finally, S is reduced by n - 1. This auto-
matic linkage construct enables the use of subrou-
tines in depth and a subroutine may call itself. 
Denoting the F and C parts of S* by S*p and 
S*Q , respectively, the location of the subroutine by 
P, and other notation as previously defined, the ac-
tion upon entry and exit is displayed in Table II. 
395 
10.5 
Let it now be assumed that the execution of a 
scanned program element is delayed until the follow-
ing syllable has been interpreted. Operators can be 
defined which force the preceding syllable to be a 
call-by-name. Each word in the stack has a control 
bit that distinguishes between values and names. v 
The address referenced by the element preceding the 
call-by-name operator then is entered into the stack 
and the control bit for that cell set to indicate a 
name. 
If an operator is encountered, followed by 
the call-by-name operator, the operator (or the lo-
cation of the subroutine which effects execution of 
an extended operator) goes into the stack and the 
control bit is set. Within a subroutine, any refer-
ence to this stack cell that is not followed by a call-
by-name operator will cause execution. If, other-
wise, the reference to the cell is again followed by 
a call-by-name operator, the cell contents are co-
pied into the new stack level. A similar action re-
sults whenever a parameter of one subroutine is used 
in a lower level subroutine. 
Other Consequences of the Design 
Some of the key aspects of the logical organiza-
tion of the machine have been introduced in a gradual 
fashion. 
While not all of the consequences of the 
model which have been developed can be presented 
in this paper, a few concluding remarks may be of 
value. 
Change of sequence is accomplished by one of 
two means: 
jumps relative to C of conditional or 
unconditional type, or via a switching table of en-
tries corresponding to labeled program segments. 
The conditional jumps examine the truth value in the 
stack produced by evaluation of a Boolean expres -
sion, and then cause it to be erased. 
Fbr ease of 
segmentation and effective use of a random-access 
secondary storage device, we make program invariant 
with respect to its position in storage. Correspond-
ing to each declaration of array, switch, or proce-
dure will be a " locator " word which is assigned in 
a table. Program references are then made to these 
words to obtain the location of the corresponding pro-
gram. These words contain other information which 
isitilizedin multi-programming and automatic seg-
mentation control. 
"Locator" words also correspond to labeled pro-
gram segments and input-output control information. 
The latter are grouped for scanning by a universal 
input-output control program which assigns I/O chan-
nels . 
The main program and I/O control program 
communicate via a status bit in these words. 
Character and bit manipulation constructs for 
the machine are also departures from familiar prac-
tice , but arise from different considerations and will 
not be discussed here. 
396 
10.5 
Conclusion 
References 
It is hoped that a case has been made for a way 
to introduce some new ideas into a field where enor-
mous amounts of technical talent are spent in d e -
signing the hardware and programs for a large number 
of very similar machines. Most of these are "general 
purpose." 
Much of the effort in developing these 
machines could better be spent in designing some 
useful "special purpose" computers. An ALGOL ma-
chine would fit into the latter category. With auto-
mated logical design and fabrication in the imme-
diate future, any number of these useful special 
purpose machines can be envisaged. 
This paper is based on work sponsored by the 
Burroughs Corporation, 
1. Naur, P . (Editor): Report on the Algorithmic 
Language ALGOL 60, Comm. Assn. Comp. Mach. 3 , 
No. 5 (1960), 299-314. 
2. Burks,A.W.,Warren, D.W., Wright, J. B.: 
An Analysis of a Logical Machine Using Parentheses-
Free Notation, Math. Tables Aids Comp. 9 (1954) , 
53-57. 
3. 
Bauer, F. L.: The Formula-Controlled Logi-
cal Computer "Stanislaus," Math. Comp. 14, No. 69 
(1960), 64-67. 
4. Samelson, K. and Bauer, F. L.: Sequential 
Formula Translation, Comm. Assn. Comp. Mach. 3 , 
No. 2 (I960), 76-83. 
T A = T B = 0 
TA = 0 
TB = 1 
T A « T B = 1 
1. 
2 . 
1. 
1. 
2 . 
3 . 
4. 
OPERAND 
X—»A, T A = 1 
A—»B, TB = 1, T A = 0 
X—»A, T A = 1 
S + l—>S 
B—*S* 
A - * B 
X—>A 
UNARY OPERATOR 
1. 
S * - » B , TB = 1 
2 . 
S - l — » S 
3 . 
B 9 - * B 
1. 
B0—»B 
1. 
AS—»A 
1. 
2 . 
3 . 
4. 
5 . 
6. 
3. 
4. 
5 . 
6. 
6. 
BINARY OPERATOR 
S * - » B , TB = 1 
S - 1 - > S 
B - * A , TB = 0 , T A = 1 
S * - * B , TB = 1 
S - 1 - » S 
AB©—»B, T A = 0 
B—»A, TB = 0, 1A= 
1 
S*—*B, T B = 1 
S - 1 - * S 
AB@—»B, % = 0 
AB©—>B, T A = 0 
TABLE I 
ENTRY 
EXIT 
TA = TB - 0 
T A - 0 
TB = 1 
TA = TB = 1 
6. 
S + I—>S 
7. 
F - » 3 * p , C - * S * C 
8. 
S - * F 
9. 
P - » C 
4. 
S+I—»S 
5 . 
B—»S*,T B = 0 
Steps 6 through 9 
1. 
S + 1 - * S 
2 . 
B—>S* 
3 . A—>-B, T A = 0 
4. 
S + I—»S 
5 . 
B—>.S*,TB = 0 
Steps 6 through 9 
(Normal for procedure 
without value) 
1. 
F—»S 
2 . 
S * F - * F , S * C - * C 
3 . 
S - n - I — » S 
(Normal for procedure 
with value) 
(Same as above) 
(Improper) 
TABLE II 
