S u r v e y s  i n  H i g h  E n e r g y  P h y s i c s  
Volume 1 ( 2 ) ,  J a n u a r y  1980, pp. 11 3-140 
0 1 9 8 0  harwood academic publishers gmbh 
Printed i n  the United States of America 
0142-2413/80/0102-113-140$04.50/0 
STABLE PARTICLES AS BUILDING BLOCKS OF MATTER 
A.O. 
BARUT 
Department of Physics, University of Colorado, 
Boulder, Colorado So309 
only absolutely stable indestructible particles can 
be truly elementary. A simple theory of matter based 
on the three constituents, proton, electron and 
neutrino (and their antiparticles), bound together 
by t h e  ordinary magnetic forces is presented, which 
allows us t o  give an intuitive picture of all pro- 
cesses of high-energy physics, including strong and 
weak interactions, and make quantitative predictions. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A t  present, the picture of elementary particle physics 
mostly used i n  high-energy phenomenology is becoming ad- 
mittedly very complicated. Besides leptons (which we see), 
one introduces families of ,'quarkstt, each with different 
colours, then the so-called tggluons'l, which are the gauge 
vector mesons binding the quarks, then there are the so- 
called "Higgs particles", which give masses t o  some of the 
vector mesons (all of which are not seen in the laboratory). 
One is already beginning t o  talk about a second generation 
of more fundamental and simpler objects for these quarks 
and gluons etc., even though these first generations of 
t%asictt objects have not been seen. This type of f r  e- 
work seems t o  create more problems than it solves 1y 
Against this background of recent developents, we 
wish t o  expand here a very intuitive and simple physical 
theory, along the traditions of atomic and nuclear struc- 
ture theories, from which a unified picture of high-energy 
phenomena can be deduced. High-energy physics is very ex- 
113 
114 A.O. 
BARU" 
pensive. One must have alternative views, if only t o  test 
better the inevitability of the orthodox picture 2 ) .  
Furthermore, physical phenomena must be explainable in a 
simple intuitive form i n  terms of already verified de- 
finite primary concepts, and continuous w i t h  the existing 
physics. 
11. THE PHYSICAL PRINCIPLE3 
Atoms and molecules are best described as built from 
electrons and nucleibound by Coulomb forces because they 
disintegrate into electrons and nuclei, which we detect, and 
because these constituents are stable as f a r  as atomic pro- 
cesses are concerned. In turn, nuclei and a l l  the hadrons 
eventually decay into the absolutely stable particles: 
protons, electrons, neutrinos and photons (electromagnetic 
field). From t h e  point of view of S-matrix theory, the 
asymptotic states are at the end the stable particles, 
and 
poles in the S-matrix between these stable particles. 
This is a theorem. Is it not simpler,therefore,to describe 
all the intermediate phenomena as a dynamical problem be- 
tween the stable particles, instead of introducing new 
hypothetical particles? ( O r ,  how must t h e  interactions be- 
tween the stable particles look like t o  account for the 
observed phenomena?) If p, e, V, are indestructible, they 
must be also indestructible inside the hadrons. We present 
here a theory in which a l l  matter is made up of these 
stable constituents, bound again by electromagnetic forces. 
other unstable particles must occur as resonance 
One can of course ask questions about the nature of 
the absolutely stable particles themselves. This is another 
level of enquiry. In this paper we shall take these as 
given and elementary. 
A t  first such an idea might seem impossible or out- 
rageous, because electromagnetic forces between p, e and Y 
(and their antiparticles) cannot possibly, one would think, 
give the necessary strong binding and strong interactions 
between hadrons,and 
hand, the idea that stable particles are the constituents 
of hadrons is probably very old as a general idea, i f  not 
carried out in specific details. For example, w i t h  the 
hypothesis of neutrino in 
decay, Pauli's model of the 
so-called weak forces. On the other 
STABLE PARTICUS AS BUILDING BLOCKS OF MATTER 
115 
neutron was a bound state proton, electron and antineutrino 3? 
This model was soon abandoned (to be revived much later 4)) 
for one did not know how t o  suppress the large magnetic moment 
of the electron (on nuclear scale) inside the nucleus, and 
one did not know any deep enough well t o  contain or confine 
the electron inside the nucleus. 
What is new, however, is the recognition that magnetic 
forces between the stable particles,when treated non-pertur- 
batively, become very Arong at short distances (short-ranged), 
provide a deep enough well t o  give rise t o  high mass narrow 
resonances, have saturation property and lead, by magnetic 
pairing, t o  the compensation of the large magnetic moment 
of the electron. In the construction of atoms and molecules 
we make use only of the electric (Coulomb) part of the 
electromagnetic forces and treat magnetic forces as small 
perturbations. There is, however, another regime of energies 
and distances in which magnetic forces play the dominant 
role and the electric forces are small perturbations. We 
shall show this duality with explicit calculations. It 
would have been strange i f  Nature provided magnetic forces 
just t o  be tiny corrections t o  the building principle of 
atoms and molecules (which could exist without them) and 
not t o  play an equally important role in the structure of 
matter. Clearly, a model of t h i s  type also automatically 
provides a dynamical theory of nuclear forces, 
Even from the point of view of perturbative &ED one 
knows that &ED is, asymptotically a strong coupling theory: 
the effective coupling constant increases with momentum 
transfer. Hence, one may end up with structures giving rise 
t o  new states. The whole of electromagnetic interactions 
cannot be simply disposed of by calculating a lowest order 
one-photon-exchange diagram. 
There are two main immediate questions or objections t o  
our propositions. ( i )  Why do we not see in the laboratory 
strong forces between proton and electron, electron and 
positron, or electron and neutrino etc., whereas we see 
strong forces between pions and protons, or protons and 
neutrons etc.? ( i i )  How can we obtain the rich world of 
hadrons just starting from the three stable particles 
p, e, V (and their antiparticles), the multitude of 
internal quantum numbers like isospin, strangeness, charm 
etc., the multiplet structures and symmetries? 
Correspondingly, this work has two parts. A kine- 
matical part showing the composition of a l l  hadrons and 
their multiplet structures, hence the meaning of internal 
quantum numbers i n  terms of the stable particles, p, e, V .  
This by itself is a remarkable mapping of hadron states 
onto the combinations of stable particles, the eventual 
final products of a l l  unstable matter, and of hadron quantum 
numbers into those of three stable particles, p, e , V  . 
The second part is dynamical sharing t h a t  ordinary magnetic 
spin-spin and spin-orbit forces, when treated non-pertur- 
batively, have the correct strength and shape t o  give 
hadronic and nuclear states. 
We begin with the second part in order t o  answer 
immediately the questions raised above. 
The Dynamics of Mametic Interactions 
A number of models, with increasing complexity, have 
been studied in recent years, and we have a good understand- 
ing of the 
distances 47 - 7). In Appendix I we discuss the results of 
these models and in Appendix I1 we give the analytical 
proof of the existence of resonances. Here we shall explain 
the main idea in terms of a simple case. Consider, for example, 
a relativistic charged spinless particle m in the field of 
a fixed (quantum) magnetic momentum 
M 81, or alternatively, 
a charged spin 112 particle of 
in the field of a fixed charge 8. 
In both cases, the effec- 
tive radial equation can be written, in appropriate co- 
ordinates, as 
~ 
pin-spin and spin-orbit potentials at short 
ss m and magnetic moment r?' , 
where the effective potential is given, apart, from the 
Coulomb potentialqr, by 
with 
= 1 1  (relative sign of the charge and magnetic 
moment); c(j,L) is equal t o  - ( b l )  for &= j -t 1/2 and 
equal t o  4, for 4, = j - 1/2. Furthermore (in units c =* = l), 
r = Mey w0(a/m)y (W is the mass of fixed magneticr moment - 
in the second case put M = m), and the eigenvalue X is 
STABLE PARTICLES AS BUILDING BLOCKS OF MATTER 
117 
2 
2 
2 2  
2 
2 
2 a L  
X =(E -m )p a =(E -rn )p -7 
o 
4M 
If we solve the same problem w i t h  a Dirac equation and give 
also an anomalous magnetic moment a t o  the particle, then 
additional terms are added t o  Eq. (2). 5 )  Further models also 
treat the magnetic moments of both of the particles.(App. 
1) 
The potential (2) is treated i n  atomic phenomena 
(lately also i n  the quark model) as a perturbation. This is 
justified if the energies are of the order of Coulomb 
energies and for Coulombic bound state wave functions. New 
phenomena occur, however, if the magnetic potential is 
treated non-perturbatively. 
Fig. I shows the schematic form 
of the potential at two different energies and angular 
momenta and in the case when the anomalous magnetic moment 
terms are also included. 
FIGURE 1. Schematic form of the effective radial magnetic po- 
tential V as a fuction of the radial distance r 
f o r  two different fixed values of energy and angular 
momemtun. 
118 
A.O. 
BARUT 
We see three d i s t i n c t  regions of potential wells: The 
Coulomb region a t  distances r =I/m(Bohr radius), hence 
momenta of t h  
energies d a  (- 70 MeV) and the supernuclear region of r% 2/rn 
and energies m/G (10 GeV). The occurence of the energy scales 
Ida= 70 MeV (andm/&?= 9.6 GeV) is a characteristic of 
magnetic interactions. It is empirically known that masses 
of hadrons are integer or half integer multiples of m/a . 
order of am o r  non-relativistic energies of 
the order o f a  'i m, the nuclear region at rw/m , (relativistic) 
For unstable, hence positive energy, magnetic resonances 
the t o t a l  mass is in general preater than the sum of the 
constituents, i.e. positive binding energy. This is an 
important difference from the usual intuition of a negative 
binding energy-composite systems. 
The form of the potential at very short distances is 
still quite uncertain in these models. Furthermore, the 
potentials are modified by form factors. F o n  factors must 
also be calculated non-perturbatively, and self-consistently 
from the wave functions which are localized around each well, 
respectively, i n  Fig. 1, 6), 7 )  Form factors can easily be 
incorporated into the model (1) - (2) by taking Pz p (r). 
A t  intermediate distances the form of the potential is essen- 
t i a l l y  correct. Unfortunately, quantum electrodynamics cannot 
t e l l  us anything about the non-perturbative short distance 
behaviour of the potential between two particles. 
Zero-mass L i m i t  
It is important f o r  our model later t o  remark t h a t  
Eqs. ( 1 )  and (2) also hold f o r  a massless particle in the 
f i e l d  of a magnetic moment, or f o r  a massless particle with 
an anomalous magnetic moment (or with on y an anomalous 
form factor) in the f i e l d  of a charge loj. Rote that 
mass 
rn appears only in Eq. (31, setting the scale of the 
eigenvalue A of Eq. (1 ). (Appendix 111) 
We can now answer the question as t o  why we apparently 
do not see strong interactions i n  t h e  laboratory between the 
stable particles p, e, V .  
Scattering against a Barrier 
The effect of large repulsive potential barriers as 
in Fig. 1 on the scattering of two fermions (say e+, e') 
STABLE PARTICLES AS BUILDING BLOCKS OF MATTER 
119 
can be evaluated numerically (and sometimes analytically). 
(Appendix IV) The cross-section of penetration t o  the 
attractive region is very small except at the sharp energy 
and angular momentum of the resonance, when "resonance 
penetration" 11 ) takes place. The partial phase shift, shown 
in Fig. 2, shows a sharp jump of about IT near the resonance 
energy (anonlalous scattering). 
v \ 
I I 
I 
EP 
E 
FIGURX 2. The effect of a repulsive barrier on the 
rD 
cross section o- around the resonance energg E 
120 
A.O. 
BARUT 
The sharper t h e  resonance, the steeper is the jump of the 
phase shift. The effect of t h i s  behaviour on the t o t a l  
cross section is, however, only a small. bump, its width 
being proportional t o  the width of the resonance (Fig. 2 ). 
Indeed most hadron resonances are experimentally seen as 
such small bumps i n  cross sections on a large background. 
Some predictions based on t h i s  phenomenon w i l l  be made a f t e r  
we present the model of hadrons. 
On the other hand, a pion, being i t s e l f  a spin-zero 
resonance state of stable particles (see following sections), 
can penetrate much more easily into the region of strong 
magnetic forces of other hadron constituents, because of the 
absence of the spin-orbit barrier. 
An important property of magnetic potentials (Fig. 1) 
is that t h e  scattering amplitude is analytic in the whole 
of the angular momentum plane, hence is a sum of Reme pole 
contributions only. This has many applications i n  the 
analysis of scattering processes. (Appendix V )  
111. ORDINARY AND STRANGE MATTER 
Ordinary matter can be b u j l t  up from p, e and 
(and 
t h e i r  antiparticles) according to the rules that we s h a l l  
s t a t e  explicitly. These are pions, neutron and 
resonances, 
hence also nuclear matter, atoms and molecules. In order t o  
describe the building-up principle in a more general way 
t o  include Itstrange" particles, we must first t a l k  about 
the P meson. The CI 
meson can be thought of as a magnetic 
excitation of the electron due t o  the interaction of its 
anomalous magnetic moment with its o 
ments are at present semiclassical 1B9f'g$. 
Another (per- 
haps equivalent) way, from our point of view, is t o  consider 
P as a magnetic resonance s t a t e  of (evv) into which it 
decays. We s h a l l  see t h a t  t h e  pairs of the type (eT) are 
identified with pions. Thus, in order t o  obtain a spin-1/2 
state we need three stable particles, and (eVT) should be 
then dynamically a l i t t l e  more stable than the (eo) states. 
mated by an equivalent two-body problem ( d ) V  and considera- 
tions similar t o  Eqs. (1) - ( 3 )  may be applied. The charge- 
magnetic moment system gives i n  the BohrSommerfeld quanti- 
d. These argu- 
The magnetic three-body problem (evg) can be approxi- 
STABLE PARTICL;ES AS BUILDING BLOCKS OF MATTER 1 2 1  
zation a quantized energy spectrum of the form L!E 
=I n4, 
n = 1, 2, 3,... Adding this t o  he rest mass, one obtains 
4 
a leptonic mass spectrum m 
d 
(4) 
% = m e + + $  
1 * 
n-o 
for electron (N = 0), muon (N = ?>, I 
(N = 2),,.. 
The pre- 
dictions for muon (105.55 MeV) and 7(1786.06 MeV) work very 
well and the next lepton predicted i 
lativistic version of Eq. (4) 
c i a t  3/2 can also be derived 
These results should only be considered as a beginning of a 
dynamical theory of heavy leptons. Nevertheless, they are 
interesting, because we have no other hints or ideas con- 
cerning the repetitions of leptons in the series e,k~,'f,..., 
which is one of the most fundamegtal ppen problems of 
particle physics l4). 
The V-resonances are inferred as mentioned above from 
the m = 0 l i m i t  of the Dirac equation in models similar t o  
Eqs. (1 ) - (3). Hence an interacting V is necessarily a 
four-component neutrino. Only i n  the asymptotic region can 
the free Dirac equation be s p l i t  into two two-component 
equations. We shall make the hypothesis that the neutrino 
has an anomalous magnetic moment, or at least a magnetic form 
factor, even if its magnetic moment is eero (on the mass 
shell). We also do not make, at this stage, a difference be- 
tween 'e and V 
(see Section V I )  
1-1 
The I-I meson, behaving very much like the electron, can 
in turn form magnetic pairings and resonances with the stable 
particles, forming the so-called llstrangell hadrons. In fact, 
it w i l l  turn out that the number of )1 
mesons in hadrons is 
exactly equal t o  the ltstrangenesslt quantum number of hadrons. 
These apparently new types of hadrons are more unstable and 
decay into ordinary hadrons if the I-I inside the hadron decays. 
During strong interactions, I-I is stable, hence strangeness 
is conserved (see also next section). The p meson, rather than 
being a ItredundantI1 particle ("the world would be the same 
if )1 did not exist"( !)) now plays an essential role in 
building up the hadrons. This process is then continued with 
the 7-excitations, etc. 
122 
A.0, 
BAFtUT 
Tv. 
CONSTRUCTION OF HADRON STATES AND BUILT-IN 
CONSERVATION LAWS 
There is a very simple relationship between lepton 
quantum numbers and quark quantum numbers. If we compare the 
t r i p l e t  8 = (V, e',P 
') 
with the quark t r i p l e t  q = (u, d, s), 
we have 
where BL stands f o r  the lepton number and Bq f o r  the baryon 
number. This we have called the "shifting principle": shifting 
two-thirds of the lepton number into the e l e c t r i c  charge 
yields quark quantum numbers from those of leptons,, Hence 
the sum of electric and ferrnionic number is constant: 
It is then straightforward t o  construct the meson quantum 
numbers as ( L z )  states from the known (qe) configurations, 
both pseudoscalar and vector mesons. 
In the case of baryons, the proton is always a f i n a l  
decay product of a l l  baryons. The baryons cannot be construc- 
ted as (888) states, because then, i n  ana_logy t o  (qqq), 
L would be equal t o  3 and B = 0, but as $a states giving 
t o t a l  baryon number B = 1 and lepton number L zero. This 
assignment is i n  agreement with the meson theory of nuclear 
interaction, as we s h a l l  see. 
The conservation of lepton and baryon numbers and charge 
are automatically built-in in t h i s  model, because p, e and 
V 
are absolutely stable. The only dynamical processes are the 
zcl these conserve Q, B and L. (see also Section V )  
Strangeness 
ir production and exchange and rearrangement of cor,stituents 
A physiaal interpretation of the mysterious internal 
quantum numbers, l i k e  isospin and strangeness, emerges from 
the model. A s  we have noted, the P number is equal t o  the 
strangeness number S. Hence the number of all quantum nwn- 
bers is reduced by 1: 
S = N 
- N . 
u+ 
p- 
STABLE PARTICLES AS BUEDING BLOCKS OF MATTER 
123 
The Isospin and its Physical Interpretation 
The isotopic spin quantum number essentially counts the 
number of stable constituents (p, e and V ) .  In order t o  see 
t h i s  more precisely, we first define the t h i r d  component of 
isospin and the isospin creation and annihilation operators 
The empirical Gell-Ka.nn-Nishijima formula is now derived and 
automatically also built in the model: 
because 
N L =  1 % f o r  a l l  states 
L 
(i.e. 
N + + NP+ * Nv = N - + N 
+ Nv). 
e 
e 
P- 
we+ 
a. 
b. 
FIGURE 3e The Meson Octet 
124 
A.O. 
BARUT 
A. 
6. 
FIGURE 4. The Baryon Octet 
FIGURE 5. The Baryon Decouplet. The nearly hear 
mass fonrmla of about theV mass is a con- 
sequence o f  nearly zero-energy band states 
in t h e  magnetic potential well. 
STABLE PARTICLES AS BUILDING BLOCKS OF MATTER 
125 
Figs. 3, 4 and 5 show the hadron multiplets in minimal 
realizat_ion. 15) We can of course add t o  each hadron lepton 
pairs (RR) of the same species without changing the quantum 
numbers. For example, the physical proton can be thought of 
as having a 4 cloud: 
Pphysical ={&(e-e' 
Vc) ] 
( 8 )  
as can be seen by applying I- t o  it o r  I+ t o  the neutron 
state. 
A full physical interpretation can be given t o  the con- 
cept of i s o s p b  as the quantum-mechanical exchange process of 
the lepton pair (e' 7) between two systems, exactly l i k e  
the exchange effects in 
molecule. To see t h i s  we go t o  the 
two-nucleon problem, where the notion of isospin has histori- 
cally originated. The states of definite isospin are 
1 
In the 
tons and we have the symmetric (I = 1 )  and antisymmetric 
(I = 0 )  states with respect t o  the exchange, which are 
eigenstates of the t o t a l  Hamiltonian. We could make a similar 
isospin t r i p l e t  and singlet in atomic physics with 
P P , ~  (P 
+ np), 
nn (1 = 11, and 
(p. - np) 
(1 = 0). 
0 
I3 = 0 state, (ec) is exchanged between the two pro- 
1 
1 
Here (p, H) is an isospb-doublet (13 = 4- % 
Q = I3 -t % . Also I+ 
= ap a$ . Similarly, if we look at two- 
pion states of definite isospin 
P P ~  
fi (HP + PHI 
H; 
sym., ~2 ; 
(HP - PHI 
H 2  antisym.. 
and -4 ) and 
or, pion-nucleon states of definite isospin 
126 
A.O. 
BARUT 
we see that the isospin is identical t o  the symmetric and 
antisymmetric exchange, or rearrangement, of constituents. 
Isospin conservation is always used or tested in the reac- 
tions of two or more hadrons when stable constituents can 
be exchanged between the two hadrons,as between two atoms. 
It is convenient but not necessary t o  assign an isespin t o  
individual hadrons, l e t  alone t o  the constituents of h a h n s ,  
although the third component of isospin can be assigned t o  
the constituents via the GeU-Mann-Nishijima formula. The 
conservation of the third component of isospin is equivalent 
t o  the conservation of the number of stable constituents, 
because the only processes occuring at the fundamental level, 
according t o  the present model, are the rearrangement of 
constituents when two hadrons interad, and pair production 
and ynihilation of stable particles, The conservation of I 
or I in strong interactions, on the other hand, is the con- 
servation of symmetry properties of stable leptons (e5) under 
axchange between the hadrons. 
The physical intuitive meanings given to the abstract 
internal quantum numbers of hadrons is a significant feature 
of the present theory : The constituents no longer carry 
mysterious properties such as strangeness, isospin,cham, 
etc. The only charge is the electric chargeo 
Relation t o  Quark Assimments 
The relation of our constituents t o  quark constituents 
is very simple. For mesons t RX -f qs, and for baryons : if 
we think of the proton as (uud), then our assignments be- 
come the same as the-three quark assignment 
qq sea terns). Such terms are introduced i n  the quark model 
anyway. Hence grouptheoretical results of the quark model 
remain intact in this model as well, 
ditional definite (qq) terms of the same 
STABIX PARTICLES AS BUILUING BLOCKS OF MATT1sR 
127 
If we continue this correspondawe (or shift) between 
quarks and leptons, then the next I1excited1* neutrino with the 
quantum numbers of VV 
called llchamedtl quark and the next leptons 
and vT 
t o  
the other two new quarks, b and t. It is not known at pre- 
sent Ff V 
or VT 
are massless o r  absolutely stable. Accor- 
ding t o  t i e  experimental Limit so far, vP 
is heavier than 
the electron1 Because there is such a close symmetry between 
leptons and hypothetical quarks, it is most natural simply 
t o  i d e n t w  them. 
would correspond precisely t o  the so- 
Nucleon Structure From Deer, Inelastic Scatterina Dtp eriments 
It is important t o  remark that from deep inelastic e- 
lectron-nucleon scattering experiments one can infer two so- 
lutions for the charges of the constituents of the nucleon 
(assumed t o  be point-like at high energies) 16). h e  solu- 
tion gives for the proton constituents the charges +1, +l, 
-1, and for neutron constituents the charges +1, -1, 0. This 
is $I agreement i n  our model with the physical proton being 
(pe e-) and neutron being (pe-v). The second solution gives 
the fractional quark charges. ollly the further assumption 
of additivity of the magnetic moments of quarks and equal 
additive quark masses then selects the second solution. How- 
ever, 
moments also have orbital contributions, and constituent 
masses are unequal. Magnetic moments must be calculated from 
the wave functions of the magnetic bound states. Thus it is 
not true, as generally advertised, that "deep inelastic ex- 
periments give ttproof" of the existence of quarksat. 
our dynamical physical bound state model, magnetic 
V. 
STRONG AND WEAK INTERACTIONS 
A l l  strong interactions including nuclear forces are, 
according t o  the present theory, of magnetic type and are 
further determined by the composite structure of the hadrons. 
Specifically there are two fundamentalr,rocesses at short 
distances when hadrons collide t i )  Rearrangement of con- 
stituent stable particles, i i )  pair production (or annihila- 
tion) of leptons (and subsequent rearrangement). It is possible 
t o  give diagrams forevery strong process using i )  and i i ) .  
The ideas of the old meson theory, the many models of meson 
exchanges or Regge-pole exchanges f i t  naturally and emerge 
as approximate schemes from this theory, as w e l l  as the 
128 
A.O. 
BARUT 
ideas of the S-matrix theory and nuclear democracy: 
different rearrangements of constituents with real or vir- 
tual lepton pairs obviously imply that hadrons can be 
thought t o  be b u i l t  of other hadrons. In particular, the 
meson cloud around the nucleon is an immediate approxi- 
mation here, but not in the quark model. The sign of the neu- 
tron-proton mass difference is correctly explained by the 
theorem of positive binding energy of magnetic resonances. 
(see Section 11) 
Nuclear Model 
We propose here a new model of the nucleus, which seems 
t o  combine two apparently contradictory features of the 
nucleus. On the one hand, the nucleus consists of closely 
packed large nucleons with an occupancy between 60 and 90%, 
o r  may even have a crystalline structure. On the other hand, 
the nucleons seem t o  be moving freely inside the nucleus, as 
the s h e l l  model or other Fermi gas models are implying. These 
two features are reconciled i n  the present theory as follows, 
The stable protons form the closed packing or even the crystal- 
line skeleton of the nucleus. On top of it the stable lepton 
pairs (e- 3) acting like-a boson are hopping from one proton 
t o  another. When an (e- V )  is attached t o  a proton, it then 
becomes a neutron. Thus moving (e- V ) l s  w i l l  appear exactly 
as moving neutrons, or moving protons in- the opposite direc- 
tion. We can then study the motion of (e- V) pairs i n  the 
periodic potential of t h e  l a t t i c e  of protons. 
Weak Interactions 
The weak interactions of theB-decay type ace due t o  
barrier penetration, e .g. n( pe- v) d e c a y  or 1-I (e VV )-decay. 
In fact, a theory of the neutron with an equation of type 
(1) - (2) correlates (in t h i s  approximation) the lifetime 
of the neutron, the n-p mass difference (which is positive- 
and can be estimated as the excess magnetic energy of ( e - V )  
bound t o  the proton) and t h e  magnetic moment of the neutron 8 ) .  
Hence, indirectly, the Fermi constant G is related t o  the 
fine-structure constant a . All other decay modes of hadron can 
be understood as a (a) barrier penetration between two w e l l s  
of the potential (see Fig. l ) ,  (b) 1-1 decay inside the hadron 
(suppressed by the Cabibbo angle as compared with the free 
decay) and (c) barrier penetration with or without u decay, 
Different decay channels result in different rearrangements 
of the constituents. Finally, a weak scattering process such 
STABLE PARTICLES AS BUILDING BLOCKS OF MATTER 
129 
as e V+e vshould be related t o  the anomalous magnetic 
moment of the neutrino. This possibility remains t o  be 
verified when we shall have more experimental data on the 
angular and energy dependence of this process. 
V I .  
SOME FURTHER APPLICATIONS: 
PHYSICS AND CP VIOLATION 
As an example of the intuitive value of the model we 
c nsider its application t o  the remarkable physics of the 
K mesons. 
8 
According t o  Fig. 3, KO and 'iT0 mesons are (ell') 
and 
(e+P'), 
respectively, i.e. the magnetic analogues of muonim 
and antimuoni 
(Such states have also been called super- 
positronium (3;- ) or supermuonium (e-cl +).) They are ob- 
viously charge conjyates of each other. I f  one of the states 
is produced, say e T  , and we view P+ as (e+vv), then v3 
a magnetic potential as shown in Fig. 6. When (v;) 
is 
attached t o  e+ we have a KO, when it is attached t o  e' 
we have a KO. Under these circumstances, we know from gene- 
r a l  quantum mechanics that the observed eigenstates of the 
energy are the s w e t r i c  and antisymmetric comb_inations with 
respect t o  &he (vv) exchange, namely Ks = KO f $, and 
KAS = KO - KO, which are also eigenstates of CP. In fact, the 
problem is exactly the m e  quantm-nechanically as i n  the 
ammonium (NH3) laser l77, where N oscillates between two po- 
sitions i n  a potential as in Fig. 6. We therefore have the 
mambimous prediction that the antisymmetric state is 
heavier than the symmetric one. In our case m(KL) > m(KS). 
This is, t o  my knowledge, the first theory of the sign of the 
KL-Ks 
mass difference. Moreover, the Dennison-Uhlenbeck mass 
formula 18) gives for the mass difference Am/m = 1bA2, 
where A is the barrier penetration factor in the potential 
(Fig. 6). We do not know A, but we can obtain it f r o m  the 
decay rate rs of Ks into T' + r+ (e'g+ 
e+V ), which uses 
the same potential barrier. This gives Am=rs/2. Experimentally 
we have f o r  the KL-Ks 
mass differenceam= O.477rs . 
The two decay modes of KS are given by twoowRys of 
rearranging the constituents, namely:n-T+ and T T . However, 
KL cannot decay in this way because of CP invariance. But an 
additional lepton pair production gives all the decay channels 
of KL. The rate is then down by (.a) 
due t o  t h i s  pair produc- 
pair can be exchanged, i.e. 
oscillate between e' 
and e L 1 ~ 1  
.) 
130 
A.O. 
BARUT 
tion, which agrees with experiment. 
occurs sofar only in the K’ 
mesons. CP violation in our 
picture means a small violation of the symmetric and anti- 
symmetric combinations & and KAS introduced above, There is, 
in fact, a feature in the model, which brings an asymmetry. 
In the above discussion we have not made a distinction be- 
tween ve and v . If we do make a distinction, then we have 
(e-Fe&e+ 
) cokbination f o r  Fo and (e-3 vee+ ) combination 
f o r  K . Hence an extra interaction must’convert 
i n t o  -c Ve 
, which provides a further asymmetry tetween 
K1 and k2 leading t o  KL and Ks. We can further predict that 
CP violation should also occur in the neutral mesons built 
from ( e-T+ and e+T- ) and ( LIT+ 
and U+T- 
). 
Finally we discuss a mechanism o f  CP violation which 
FIGURE 6. 
The effective magnetic potential barriqr 
f o r  ( v3 ) - exchange between e- and e , 
and the two symmetric and antisymmetric 
states i n  t h e  - KO system. 
STABLE PARTICLES AS BUILDING BLOCKS OF MATTER 
131 
V I I  CONCLUSION 
High-energy physics according t o  the present theory 
can be considered as an extension of atomic and molecular 
physics. The Coulomb forces being replaced by the short- 
ranged strong magnetic forces. The only additional particle 
not present in atomic physics is the neutrino, which is i n  
fact a limiting case of the electron. There is then a 
welcome continuity and simplicity in the physics, which 
was perhaps lost by the abstract concepts and free in- 
ventiveness of particle physics. No new part'cles, or no 
new interactions or forces are introduced 19j except the 
stable ones and the electromagnetic field. In t h i s  sense 
it is a truly already-unified theory with one coupling 
constant e . The only parameter so far, in principle, is 
the neutrino magnetic moment. All other llparticlestl are 
transitory; they come as resonances and eventually decay 
into the absolutely stable particles. The division of forces 
in nature into strong, weak and elementary was a temporary 
one; there is no need for such a division. 
Although much detailed quantitative work must be done, 
and is being done, we have shown that, conceptually and 
logically, it is possible t o  understand the world of 
fundamental particles and their interactions from the very 
simple framework of stable particles and stable electro- 
magnetic forces. Our guiding principle has been the same as 
that of Lord Kelvin under similar circumstances: "I want 
t o  understand light as well as I can, without introducing 
things that we can understand even less of." 
There are a number of very simple and fundamental quan- 
t i t i e s  i n  particle physics, such as ( i )  absolute masses of 
hadrons, e.g. 
the neutron-proton mass difference, (ii) the 
dipole form factors of the nucleons, (iii) scattering lengths, 
(iv) magnetic moments of hadrons, which have been passed over 
as uncalculable by the QCD perturbation theory, for example. 
The present framework seems t o  be particularly w e l l  suited 
t o  calculate these basic dynamical parameters. And this will 
furtber t e s t  and determine the direction of the theory, 
APPENDIX I. MODELS OF MAGNETIC INTERACTIONS 
Model 1. Pauli Eauation 
For a zonrehzi$.s i c  charge 5 moving in the vector 
potential A =y2(axr/r 5 )of another charge e2 with magnetic 
moment p2 the Pauli equation 
(c-elX) 2+ele2 /r ] Y=EY 
for stationarg states, with 
e h  -L 
2
2
4
 
mc 
c) 
i- 
A.V = -2 5.t , A =p2/r 
L 
reduces t o  
mcr 
, 7 , 7  
S.L + - 
+ - - E ) Y = O  
ele2 
2 4  
r 
ntiicr 
2mc r 
Introducing 5 = + 5 and expanding i n  spherical har- 
monics t o  separate the angular variables, we obtain the ra- 
dial muation 
(2) of the $exto It is 
important not t o  neglect in this equation the A -term, con- 
trary t o  the usual perturbative calculations, because othelr- 
wise the 1/$- term would dominate as r +. 0, and the Hamil- 
tonian i n  an exact treatment 
essentially self'adjoint,. The 
pulsive makes the problem well-defined and soluble. 
is negative 00 
for R = J+ ~f 3 < 0, or R S T - ~  ~f el> 0, We 
expect therefore resonances for tJ+, R -1 >, 
(J-3/2,R *), .. 
for el <o, and (J=3/2, 
~=l),(J=ij/2, R~Z),..~ 
for el >o. 
Model 2. Klein-Gordon Chartzed Particle in the Field of a 
Mametic Moment 
be well-defined and 
term which is always re- 
For a given sign ofk, sayp > 0, the l/2-term i n  (AI.1) 
The Hamiltonian is given by 
S T W  PARTICLES AS BUILDING BLOCKS OF MATTER 
133 
In the absence of 
1, we are lead t o  2 
t e same final equation (AI.Z), 
except 
that the eigenvalue I s  now 
and by proceeding exactly as in Model 
where E is the eigenvalue of eq.(AI,2), 
i,e. the nonrelati- 
vistic energy. 
Model2. The Dirac Particle 
quations containing a scalar potential v ~ ,  
an electric (COU- 
lomb) potential Ve and a magnetic potentla1 Vm : 
We start from the most general coupled r a d h l  Dirao 6.- 
df 
K-1 
dr 
- = -  
f + (m + V - E)g + V,g + Vmf 
it3 
dr =-1(+1 g + (m + Vs + Elf - V,f - V,g 
Fram these equation 
obtain a second order Sturm-LiouvXUe 
eigenvalue equation for" 
Y" + ( E ~  - m2 - veff)y = 0 , 
where 
Note that the potential V 
momentum dependent. It mu@be 
evaluated at each E and K 
and the the eigenvalue problem for bound states and reso- 
nances must be solved at these values of E and K 
is both energy(E) and angular 
For the n o d  Dkac particle in the Coulomb field we 
have Vs=O and Vm"o, 
and the effective potential is given by 
3 
- K(K+1)-a2 
~ 
E2F:cCX(K+1) 
2 a2 
I 
2 
+
2
 
2 
r [m+E)r-&aI 
r [(m+E)r-&a] 
2 
r 
Veff - 
where E =: sign (e e ). Here the particle itself carries a nor- 
m a l  magnetic mome&,2with 
@, and the other particles is a 
134 
A.O. 
BARUT 
fixed charge, so that t h i s  model is dual t o  the models 1, 
and 2., where the magnetic moment w a s  fixed at the center, 
Model 4, S~in 3 Particle with anomalous Mametic Moment 
in the Coulomb Field 
This case leads t o  a surprising new additional effecto 
In the general effective potential (AI.7) we have now 
v =e e /r , 
V = ae e f 2 m r  , 
where a is the anomalous n&netic moment in addition t o  
the normal magnetic moment e. 
This f 
coupling of the relativistic particle,%he 
efeective poten- 
tila now becomes (for E -1) 
2 
e 
1 2  
1 2  
ows from the Pauli 
K ( K + ~ ) - c ~  2
3
 
a 
E 1 + I_[-(K+~) 
+ 
- 
3 
1 ] 
h2(y) 
2 
2 ~ m y  2.- 
Y 
Y 
'eff 
- 
1 
1 
-2(K+1) 4- - 
where 
Y 
This potential has at most five real zeros (see Figel), 
giving in general the three potential wells. Depending on 
E and K, of course, not a l l  the wells will be pronounced 
at the same time, 
Model 5. Piron-Reuse Relativistic Particle 
Here one uses a covariant wave equation of the form 
ay 
ih - 
= KY 
, 
a-c 
where T is an invariant evolution parameter, and 
n 
Here g ,g ,g are 
relativistic sain 
stationary radial 
being =%,& 1, 
constants (the g-factor of the particle 
nu is a timelike unit vector and Wu the 
fourvector. In the Coulomb field the 
equation coincides exactly with eqo(l) 
STABLE PARTICLES AS BUILDIXG BLOCKS OF MATTER 
135 
of the text. 
Model 6, Inclusion of Recoil and S ~ i n S ~ i n  
Terns 
Spin-spin interactions can be taken into account as 
follows, In model2 1, and 2. we must add t o  the Hamiltonian 
the energyA - u1.B2 of the magnetic moment of particle 1 in 
the field B2 produced by particle 2. This gives the additio- 
nal term 
2 
3; .lo" .2-2 a" 
1 
2 
1' 
+ % p  
p ij .$ s3(r> 
>
A
 
3 
3 
1 2 1  2 
1-I .B = -1-I 
1-I 
l 2  r 
1 
In models 3. and 4. we Tit" t e Dirac equation in the mag- 
netic potential A = Fi202x?/rf of the second particle, i.e. 
A
A
 
e2 
a.r 
A . A  
G xr 
1 1 2 r 3  
r 
+ Blm+a-(- 
i B l y  - B P l  B2> , 
A 
2 
ele2 
2m r2 
H = a. (p -e 1-1 ->+ - 
where the last term is as i n  the previous equation, This in- 
teresting Hamiltonian which t o  our howledge has not been 
studied before, has now been completely separated and the 
results w i l l  be presented shortly, 
Model 5. has also been extended t o  two-particle systems. 
We have also studied relativiytic two-body problems in the 
socalled one-time formalism 7 . To t h i s  list of models one 
must add the various potentials obtained from the BetheSdL- 
peter type of equations which a l l  now should be treated non- 
perturbatively. 
APPENDIX 11. ANALYTIC PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF HIGH ENE;RGY 
NARRaW RESONANCES 
The importance in quantum mechanics of exactly soluble 
bound state eigenvalue problems is wellknown, These problems 
involve, in our terminoloa, electric or scal;ar potentials. 
It turns out that a class of magnetic potentials are also 
exactly soluble, t h i s  time as an eigenvalue problem f o r  nar- 
m resonances of co lex energy. Since all hadrons and lep- 
tons (except p, e, v 7 are unstable, these soluble cases will 
be as basic t o  our theoSy as the Coulomb case is for atomic 
theory, or the oscillator problem f o r  nuclear and molecular 
theory. The result is embodied h the following2' 
Theorem : The reduced e i g e n d u e  prablm, eq.(l>, with a 
potential 
2 
2(M+1) 
1 
3 
Y 
Y 
Y 
V 
+ -  4 
V(y) = 2 
- - 
is exactly soluble i n  the space of functions defined by 
ih r 
u(rC0) =o, u(r) 
e . 
The resonance quantization condition is given by 
det A "0, 
2 
2' 
where the (M+l)x(M+l) m a t e  A 5s , with D = M +M+ZiA-v 
D 
2 
0 
-2ihM 
D-2M 
4 
0 
-2ih(M-1) 
D+2(1-2M) 
6 
0 
A =  
-2ih 
M-M(l-M) 
There are, for a given M, M+1 complex eigenvalues, 
In the spin-orbit potentials, M has precisely the meaning 
of the Dirac quantum number K (or J? 
in nonrelativistic case). 
For M=O, we have one purely imaginary eigenvalue A = iv2/2 
For W, we find from the 2x2 determinant 
A = - i ( F )  * (2 (v2-2) >'5 . 
If v ~2 = K( K+I ), the eigenvalue is zero, i.e. 
zero 
solu$ion i n  agreement with the axact dFrect solution 
v2-2 
-78t'W . 
APPENDIX 111. NEUTFUNO BOUND STATES 
We evaluate the limit of Model lC0, App.1, 
when 
e 
+- 0, 
m +- 0, in such a way that ael/2m = 1-1 = anomalous madetic 
moment of the neutrino is different from zero. The effective 
potential reduces t o  (with formfactor Fm included) 
2 2  
where y = r/I ep I , 
E = sign(e p ) and eigenvalue 1 2= I ey I E . 
This equation has an exact zero-energy solution . The nom- 
lizable eigenfunctions are such that two of the four compo- 
STABLE PARTICLES AS BUILDING BLOCKS OF MATTER 
137 
nents must vanish, foe. 
In addition, spin-spin tern mst be added to this solution. 
APPENDIX IV. BARRIER PENETRATION 
If we approximate the potential in eq.(2) by two square 
wells, one positive and one negative, i.e. 
1 
o,C r<r 
V ( r )  ;I". f o r  
rl< r<R 
0 
f o r  
r & R ,  
then the phase shift corresponding t o  eq.(l) can be calculated 
exactly. Note t h a t  the angular momentum barrier is in Voo 
The result is 
6 = -AR + tan 
a 2 = V 2 - x ,  
2 
K 2 = V 1 + A  
2
2
 
0 
where 
and 
a 
-tanKr - t anhar 
Y = K  
1- 
tanKr tanhar 
a 
1 
1 
As a function of energy(i.e.A 
), the phase shift indeed 
jumps suddenly at ES;E 
by about 
then calculate the pakial wave cross sectionUe= 
which has two zeros very close t o  each other andkear 6. 
If we add this 
of a l l  others fog 
we obtain the effect of barrier penet- 
ration on the total cross section which is shown in the lower 
c m e  in Fig. 2. 
as shown i n  F 9 2 .  We 
sin2& 
d i a l  wave cross section to the backgmud 
138 
A.O. 
BARUT 
APPENDIX V, ANALYTICITY I N  ANGULAR MCB.IEPJTUM AND ElEGGE POLE3 
It is known that the analytic properties of the scatte 
ring amplitude i n  the left half angular momentum plane, Re 
< -6, depend essentially on the behavior of the potential 
a t  short distances. Even though the relativistic effective 
potential is energy dependent we can study analyticity in 
R for each fixed E. For potential of the type 
00 
e-xr 
v = - + - + - + l o  
A
B
C
 
(x)- 
dx 
r4 
r3 
r2 
0 
r 
Predazzi and Reggez2 have shown that the regular solution 
is an entire function of both of the coefficients 8 and C, 
but not of A at A+. 
The latter is because if A is negative 
we have an attractive singular case. Hence there is no pertur- 
bative expansion of the regular solution i n  the coupling cons- 
tant A, This is in agreement with our statement that the re- 
sonance solution cannot be obtained in perturbation theoryo 
The physical reason of the analyticity in C, h nee in R (R+l), 
which is independent of R .  It follows further that the S- 
Watrix for fixed energy is meromorphic i n  R ,  and therefore 
the scattering amplitude can be expressed as a sum Regge 
poles only, with no backgroud integral o r  Regge cut terms, 
or i n  (%), is that f o r  smaU r, the term A/r 8 dominates 
- i 7 r  ( anfl ) 
f(E,e)=2n 
(2an+l)B P 
(cose)e 
i n ~ r a  
n E n  
n 
The backgroud near a resonance pole w i l l  come from the con- 
tribution of all other f a r  away poles. (see also Fig.2 and 
App.N.) 
We have here a realization o the principle of max- 
imdl analyticity in angular momentum. 33 
In addition the magnetic potential result in a diffe- 
rential cross section which increases as 
reement with the high energy two-body cross sections. 
log (s/so) & ag- 
STABLE PARTICUS AS BUILDING BLOCKS OF MATTER 
139 
REFERENCES 
1, 
20 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8, 
9. 
V.F.Weisskopf, 
PhYsikalische Blatter,&3-12 
(1979) j 
also CERN preprint, Sept. 1979 
M e G e l 1 4 a n n ,  Carbondale and Jerusalem Einstein Centennial 
Symposia 1979 
J,D,Bjorken, Proc. Intern. Conference on Neutrino 79, 
Bergen, Norway, June 1979 PNevertheless, even while be- 
ing swept along by the present excitement, I do feel we 
- 
must resist the bias, search for alternatives, and check 
with great care that we are on the right track.11 
See the historical account, L.M.Brown,lt!Che idea of net&- 
rho", Phmics Todas, 2, 
23, Settember, 1978 
A.O,Barut, 
in Structure of Matter, Proc.Rutherf0x-d Cen- 
tennial Conf erence,l971 ,Ed. B .G.Wybourne 
(Univ. of Canter- 
bury Press, 1972) ,p , 
69 
A.O.Barut 
and 
J.Math. Phm, 
AeO,Barut and 
A. 0 , 
Barut and 
A . 
0. &rut and 
J,Kraus, Phys.Rev, 
161 (1977) 
R.Raczka, Acta PhyS.POlOn, B10, 687-703 
G.Str.obel, to be published, 
(1979) 
C.Piron and FeReuse, Helv.Phys.Acta_,fil, 
I46 (1978) 
F.Reuse, Helve Ph.vs, dcta, % 157 (1978) 
10, A, O.Barut, Vkgnetic Resonances between massive and mss- 
less spin 3 particles", ICW Trieste, preprint IC/?9/51, 
J.Math. 
Physo (in publication), 
11. R.W.Gurney, 
Nature, 123, 565 (1929) 
12. A,O,Barut, Physics Letters, m, 310 (1978); See also 
the remark due to H,C.Corben quoted in A. Schild, P m .  
- 
Rev. u, 
2762 (1963); G.Rosen, 
Nuovo C i m ,  32,1037 (1964) 
l3* A.O.Barut 
and J,P.Crawford, 
PhyseLetters,82B,233 (1979) 
l.4. S,L.GlashaW, 
Comments Nude Part. Phvs. & 105 (1978) 
15, AoOo13arut, "Le tons as (quarks'1t, Univ. of Geneva preprint, 
UGVA-DFT l978/&-175, 
in Proceedings of the Texas Confe- 
rence on Group Theory and Mathematical Physics, Sept.1978, 
Sminner Lecture Notes i n  Physics, Vol. 44, 490-98 (1979) 
16, L.Berkelman, in Orbis Scientiae Proceedings, Coral Gables, 
1979 
17, C.H.Tames 
and A.L.Schawlow, 
in Microwave Spectroscopy, 
18, D.M,Dennison 
and G.E.Uhlenbeck, 
Phys.Rev. ,!&313 
(1932) 
19, P,A.M,Dirac, 
The Develolvnent of Quan tun Theory (Gordon 
and Breach,l97l),p460 : When one thinks back t o  these 
days, one finds that it hs really remarkable how unwilling 
people w e r e  t o  postulate a new particle. This applies 
both t o  theoretical and experimental workers. It seemS 
that they would look f o r  any explanation rather than pos- 
tulate a new particle. It needed the most obvious and 
unassailable evidence t o  be presented before them before 
they were reluctantly forced to postulate a new particle, 
The climate has completely changed since these early days. 
New particles are now being postulated and proposed con- 
tinually i n  large numbers. There are a hundred or more 
in current use today. People are only t o  keen t o  pubfish 
evidence f o r  a new particle, whether this evidence comes 
from experiment o r  from ill4stablished theoretical ideas.It 
20, A.O.Barut, 
M.?3errondo and G, Garch-Calderh, ltNarrow Re- 
(McCraw H a ,  19551, p.300. 
sonaces as an eigenvalue problem and ap lications t o  Mag- 
netic Resonances", Trieste preprint, ICp?9/79, submitted 
t o  J. Math, Phys. 
21. S.Fliigge, Practical @antum Mechanics, Springer Verlag, 
22. E.Predazzi and T. Regge, Nuovo Cim, 
P a  222 
518 (1962) 
23. .G.F.Chew 
and S.Frautschi, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2, 394 (1962) 
24. A.O.Barut 
and A.Hacinliyan,"A Dynamical Model for the 
Two-component Pomerontl, (to be published) 
