Foundations of Physics, Vol . 28, No. 3, 1998
Asim Barut: A Personal Tribute
I met Asim Barut in the Fall of 1984 at the University of Colorado at
Boulder, where I was a second-year graduate student in the Mathematical
Physics PhD program. The encounter was purely happenstance; he was
teaching a graduate course in statistical mechanics that I was taking that
semester. Up until that time I had been concentrating on my courses in
quantum mechanics and particle physics, and it looked as if I was going to
go into high-energy theory, perhaps even superstrings. One semester with
Asim changed all that for me.
What impressed me the most was his style of doing physics, which
came across clearly in that stat-mech class. He would take a simple model
of a physical problem, and then squeeze it for all it was worth. I was
amazed by his clear and methodical approach as he took us through first
the one- and then the two-dimensional Ising model of a thermodynamic
spin lattice. It was this steady hand and clearness of purpose that guided
all of his work. By the end of the semester, I was hooked. Abandoning
superstrings forever, I asked Asim if I could do my PhD with him on the
foundations of quantum electrodynamics. That began a friendship that
lasted 10 years until his untimely death in 1994. Asim was a teacher,
a friend, and a colleague± ± and he had a lasting effect on me that I will
never forget.
In 1986± 1987, I spent a year with Asim in Trieste, Italy, at the Inter-
national Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP), an institute of which Asim
was a co-founder and a place where he spent many a summer and sabbati-
cal. I remember that in the summer he would go every evening for a swim in
the sea around the beautiful Castle of Miramare. Out he would go, paddling
slowly and surely past the rocks and through the waves± ± and he would
cover this amazingly enormous distance. I think his swimming style in the
unpredictable sea mirrored his approach to theoretical physics. After the
swim, we would meet at the Adriatico guest house for dinner, followed
often by long discussions out on the balcony overlooking the sunset over
the Adriatic Sea. We would talk about everything from physics to politics,
357
0015-9018/98/0300-0357$15.00/0 Ñ
1998 Plenum Publishing Corporation
from philosophy to religion. Asim always had a unique viewpoint and a
simple way to look at things by cutting through the gobbledygook.
Asim was interested in the foundational questions of physics, in par-
ticular those of quantum mechanics and quantum electrodynamics. He
served on the editorial board of this journal, Foundations of Physics, for
many years. He was not afraid of looking at alternative ways of doing
things, even if those ways seemed slightly heretical to the rest of the physics
community. He always tried to construct simple models of seemingly com-
plex phenomenon. He developed an alternative theory to the standard
model of composite hadronic particles that was not based on quarks but
rather on a simple model based on leptons bound together by magnetic
resonances at short distances. Simple algebraic formulas predicted quite
accurately the masses of all the known hadrons. Another area of interest,
in which I helped to contribute, was to see how far one could go in under-
standing quantum electrodynamics without second-quantization of the
electromagnetic field. In the spirit of the work of Jaynes, but far outstripping
Jaynes’s neoclassical theory, the Barut self-field approach to quantum elec-
trodynamics was able to arrive at the correct first-order expressions for
spontaneous emission, the Lamb shift, the electron’s gyromagnetic ratio,
and even the Unruh effect.
As one might imagine, some of Asim’s work sparked quite a bit of
controversy. In particular, the self-field approach to QED drew harsh
criticism from some of the ``high priests’’ of QED, as Asim liked to call
them. In spite of this, I never saw him lose his temper or lose his way. He
was kind and gentle in his recognition of their criticisms, as well as in the
tone of his response. He never had an unkind word to say about anyone,
in spite of the virulence of some of his critics. Kindness radiated from the
man, kindness and a timeless sense of wisdom. He was a very thoughtful
teacher, and his door was always open to any student. Sometimes the
students would ask about homework, and sometimes about the nature of
the universe. He would always answer clearly and with great thoughtful-
ness± ± working with the student to develop the answer. No question was
ever dumb or silly to Asim.
I last saw Asim in September of 1994 in Edirne, Turkey, where I was
attending one of the many NATO Advanced Study Institutes that he had
organized over his career± ± this one was on Electron Theory and Quantum
Electrodynamics : 100 Years Later . He was very ebullient and upbeat, show-
ing me the grounds and facilities at the International Centre for Physics
and Mathematics, where the conference was being held. He was director of
this new center that he had been instrumental in founding, with support
that he had tirelessly lobbied from the Turkish government. Having
recently retired from the University of Colorado, he had high hopes for
358
Asim Barut: A Personal Tribute
seeing his new center through to grow and blossom into a Middle Eastern
companion to the ICTP in Italy. Alas, this was not to be. He died unexpec-
tedly a few short months later of heart failure, in Denver on December 5th,
1994. He was 68 years old.
It seems like only yesterday that I was asked to contribute an article
to special issues of Foundations of Physics that was in honor of Asim’s 65th
birthday. Those issues appeared in 1993. Now, five years later, I have the
sad task of assembling the 35 or so wonderful papers that now appear in
this special set of memorial issues of Foundations of Physics which is to
honor him in death. I would like to thank all of Asim’s friends and
colleagues who have contributed to make this a truly exceptional special
volume that honors a truly exceptional scientist and man, our friend and
colleague, Asim Orhan Barut. He will be greatly missed by us, one and all.
Jonathan P. Dowling
U.S. Army Aviation & Missile Command
Missile Research, Development , and
Engineering Center
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama 35898-5000
359
Asim Barut: A Personal Tribute
