C. H. Bennett 
Logical  Reversibility of Computation* 
Abstract: The usual general-purpose computing automaton (e.g.. a Turing machine) is logically irreversible- its transition function 
lacks a single-valued inverse. Here it is shown that such  machines  may he  made logically reversible at every  step, while retainillg their 
simplicity and  their ability to  do general computations.  This result is  of great  physical interest because it makes  plausible the  existence 
of thermodynamically reversible computers which could perform useful computations at useful speed while dissipating considerably 
less than kT of energy per logical step. In the first stage of its computation the 
logically reversible automaton parallels 
the corre- 
sponding irreversible automaton, except that it saves all intermediate results, thereby avoiding 
the irreversible operation of erasure. 
The  second  stage  consists of printing out  the  desired  output.  The third stage then  reversibly disposes of all the undesired  intermediate 
results by retracing the  steps of the first stage in backward order  (a  process which is only  possible because  the first stage  has been car- 
ried out  reversibly),  thereby restoring the machine (except for  the  now-written output  tape)  to its original condition. The final machine 
configuration thus  contains the desired  output  and a reconstructed copy of the  input, but no  other undesired data.  The foregoing results 
are  demonstrated explicitly using a type of three-tape  Turing machine. The biosynthesis of messenger RNA is discussed as a physical 
example of reversible computation. 
Introduction 
The usual digital computer program  frequently  performs 
operations that seem to 
throw away information 
about 
the computer's history, 
leaving the machine in a state 
whose immediate predecessor is ambiguous. Such  opera- 
tions include erasure or overwriting of data, and entry 
into a portion 
of the program addressed by several dif- 
ferent transfer instructions. 
In other words, the typical 
computer is logically irreversible - its  transition  function 
(the partial  function that maps each whole-machine state 
onto its successor, if the state has a successor) lacks a 
single-valued  inverse. 
Landauer [ I ]  has posed the question of whether logi- 
cal  irreversibility 
is an unavoidable feature of useful 
computers, arguing that it is, and has demonstrated the 
physical and philosophical importance of this question 
by showing that whenever a physical computer throws 
away information about its  previous state it must gener- 
ate a corresponding amount of entropy. Therefore, a 
computer must dissipate  at  least  kTln 2 of energy (about 
3 X 10"' joule at room temperature)  for  each bit of in- 
formation it erases  or  otherwise  throws away. 
An irreversible computer  can always  be made reversi- 
ble by having it save all the information it would other- 
wise throw away. For example, the 
machine might be 
given an extra tape 
(initially blank) on which it could 
record each operation 
as it was being performed, in 
sufficient detail that  the 
preceding state would be 
uniquely determined by the present state and the 
last 
record on  the tape. However,  as  Landauer pointed out, 
this would merely postpone the 
problem of throwing 
away unwanted information, since 
the tape would have 
to be erased before it could be reused. It is therefore 
reasonable to demand of a useful reversible computer 
that, if it halts, it should have  erased all its  intermediate 
results, leaving behind only the desired output and the 
originally furnished  input. 
(The machine  must 
be al- 
lowed to  save  its  input-otherwise it could not be  rever- 
sible and still carry out  computations in which the input 
was not uniquely determined 
by the output.) 
We will 
show that  general-purpose reversible computers  (Turing 
machines) satisfying these  requirements 
indeed exist, 
and that  they need not be much more complicated than 
the irreversible computers  on which they are  patterned. 
Computations  on a  reversible computer  take  about twice 
as many steps  as  on  an  ordinary  one  and may require a 
large amount of temporary storage. Before proceeding 
with the formal demonstration,  the argument will be car- 
ried through at  the  present heuristic  level. 
the auspices of the US. Atomic Energy Commission while the author was employed 
*Much of the work on physical reversibility reported in this paper was done under 
by the Argonne National Lsboratory, Argonne, Illinois. 
525 
LOGICAL  REVERSIBILITY 
NOVEMBER 1973 
We begin with the reversible but untidy computer 
mentioned earlier, 
which has produced, 
and failed to 
erase, a long history of its activity.  Now, a tape full of 
random data  cannot be erased  except by an irreversible 
process: however, the history tape is not random-  there 
exists a subtle mutual redundancy between it and the 
machine that produced it, 
which may be exploited to 
erase it reversibly. For example, if at the end 
of the 
computation a 
new stage of computation were begun 
using the  inverse of the original transition function, the 
machine would begin carrying out the entire computa- 
tion backward, eventually returning the history tape to 
its original blank condition[2]. Since the forward com- 
putation was deterministic and reversible, the backward 
stage would be also. Unfortunately, the backward stage 
would transform  the  output back  into the original input, 
rendering the overall computation completely useless. 
Destruction of the desired output can  be  prevented sim- 
ply by making an  extra  copy of it on a separate  tape, af- 
ter the forward stage, 
but before the backward stage. 
During this copying operation (which can be done 
re- 
versibly if the  tape used for  the  copy is initially blank), 
the recording of the history tape is suspended.  The back- 
ward stage will then destroy only the original and  not the 
copy.  At  the end of the comiputation, the  computer will 
contain  the  (reconstructed) original input  plus the  intact 
copy of the output; all other storage will have been re- 
stored to its original blank condition. Even though no his- 
tory remains, the computation is reversible and deter- 
ministic, because  each of its  stages has  been so. 
One disadvantage 
of the reversible machine 
would 
appear to 
be the large amount of temporary storage 
needed for the history-for 
a v-step first stage, v rec- 
ords of history would have  to be  written. In a later  sec- 
tion it will be argued that by performing a job in many 
stages rather than just three, the 
required amount of 
temporary storage  can  often  be  greatly reduced.  The final 
section discusses the possibility of reversible physical 
computers,  capable of dissipating  less  than kT of energy 
per  step, using examples  from  the biochemical apparatus 
of the genetic code. 
Logically reversible Turing machines 
This section formalizes the argument 
of the preceding 
section by showing that, given an  ordinary 
Turing 
machine S, one can 
construczt a reversible 
three-tape 
Turing machine 
R, which emulates S on any standard 
input,  and which leaves  behind,  at  the end of its  compu- 
tation, only that input and the 
desired output. The R 
machine’s computation proceeds by three stages as de- 
scribed above, the third stage serving to dispose of the 
history  produced by the first. The remainder of this sec- 
tion may be  skipped by those uninterested in the details 
of the proof. 
526 
C. H. BENNETT 
The ordinary type 
of one-tape Turing machine 
[3] 
consists of a control unit, a readlwrite  head, and an infi- 
nite tape divided into squares. Its behavior is governed 
by a finite set of transition formulas (commonly called 
quintuples) of the read-write-shift type. The quintuples 
have  the form 
AT --z T’ cr A’, 
(1) 
meaning that if the  control unit is in state A and  the head 
scans the tape symbol T ,  the head will first write T’ in 
place of T ;  then it will shift left one square, right one 
square,  or remain where it is, according to  the value of 
w(-, +, or 0, respectively); finally the control unit will 
revert to state A’. In the usual generalization to n-tape 
machines, T ,   T ’ ,  and (T are all n-tuples within the quin- 
tuple. 
Each quintuple defines a (partial)  one-to-one mapping 
of the present whole-machine state (Le., tape contents, 
head  positions,  and  control state)  onto its successor  and, 
as  such, is deterministic  and  reversible. Therefore a Tur- 
ing machine will be  deterministic if and only if its  quintu- 
ples have non-overlapping domains,  and will be  reversi- 
ble if and  only if they have non-overlapping  ranges. The 
former is customarily guaranteed 
by requiring that the 
portion to  the left of the  arrow be  different for  each  quin- 
tuple. On the other hand, the 
usual Turing machine is 
not reversible. 
In making a Turing machine reversible, we will need 
to add transitions that closely resemble the inverses of 
the transitions it already  has. 
However, because the 
write and shift operations do not commute, the inverse 
of a read-write-shift quintuple, though it exists, is of a 
different type; namely,  shift-read-write. In  constructing a 
reversible machine it is necessary  to include quintuples 
of both  types,  or  else  to  use a  formalism in which transi- 
tions and their inverses have the same 
form. Here the 
latter  approach is taken - the reversible  machine will use 
a simpler type of transition formula in which, during a 
given  transition, each  tape  is subjected to a read-write  or 
to a  shift operation  but  no  tape 
is subjected to both. 
DeJnition: A quadruple (for an n-tape Turing machine 
having one head per  tape) is an expression of the form 
A [t,,  tz,. . ., t,] -+ 
[ f l ‘ ,  fZ’, . . ., t,’]A’, 
(2 1 
where A and A’ are positive integers (denoting internal 
states of the  control unit  before  and after  the transition, 
respectively); each t, may be either a positive integer 
denoting a symbol that  must be read  on  the kth tape  or a 
solidus ( / ) , indicating that  the kth tape is not read  during 
the transition; each t,’ is  either a  positive  integer  denoting 
the symbol to be written  on  the  kth  tape  or a member of 
the  set (--, 0, +) denoting a left, null, or right shift of the 
kth tape  head.  For  each  tape 
k ,  ?,‘E (-, 0, +) if and only if 
IBM J. RES. DEVELOP. 
t k = / .  Thus  the machine  writes on a tape if and  only if it 
has  just read it, and shifts 
a tape only if it has not just 
read it. 
Like quintuples, quadruples define mappings of the 
whole-machine state which are one-to-one. Any read- 
write-shift  quintuple can be  split into a read-write and a 
shift, both expressible as quadruples. For example, the 
quintuple (1) is  equivalent  to  the 
pair of quadruples 
where A“ is a new control-unit state different from A and 
A‘. When several quintuples are so split,  a  different  con- 
necting state A” must be used 
for each, to avoid intro- 
ducing  indeterminacy. 
Quadruples have the 
following additional important 
properties, which can  be verified by inspection. Let 
be two n-tape quadruples. 
1 )  a and p are mutually inverse (define inverse map- 
pings of the whole-machine state) if and only if A = 
B‘ and B = A ’  and, for every k ,  either ( t ,  = 11, = / 
and t,‘ = - 
14,’) or (tk # / and t,’ = 14, and t ,  = u,‘). 
The inverse of a quadruple, in other words, is ob- 
tained by interchanging the initial control state with 
the final, the  read  tape  symbols with the  written, and 
changing the signs of all the shifts. 
2) The  domains of a and p overlap if and only if A = B 
and,  for  every k, (t, = j or ulC = / or t, = 14,). Non- 
overlapping of the domains requires a differing initial 
control state or a differing scanned symbol on some 
tape read by both quadruples. 
3) The ranges of a and p overlap if and only if A’ = B’ 
and,  for  every k ,  (t, = I or u, = I or t,‘ = u,’). The 
property is analogous to the previous one, but de- 
pends on the final control state  and  the  written  tape 
symbols. 
A reversible,  deterministic  n-tape  Turing  machine 
may now  be defined as a finite set of n-tape  quadruples, 
no  two of which overlap either in domain or range.  We 
now wish to show that such machines can be made to 
emulate ordinary (irreversible) Turing machines. 
It is 
convenient to impose on the machines to be emulated 
certain format-standardization requirements, which, how- 
ever, do not significantly limit their computing power [ 4 ] .  
NOVEMBER 1973 
Definition: An input or output is said to be standard 
when it is on otherwise blank tape and contains  no 
embedded blanks, when 
the tape head scans the blank 
square immediately to  the left of it, and when it includes 
only letters belonging to the tape alphabet 
of the ma- 
chine scanning  it. 
Definition: A standurd Turing muchine is a finite set of 
one-tape quintuples 
AT + T ‘  u A‘ 
satisfying the following requirements: 
1) Determinism: No two quintuples agree in both A 
2) Format: If started in control state A ,  on any standard 
input, the machine, if it halts, will halt in control state 
A, (f being the  number of control states), leaving its 
output in standard format. 
3) Special quintuples: The machine includes the follow- 
ing quintuples 
and T .  
A ,  b -+ h + A ,  
A,, 
b + b 0 A,, 
and control states A ,  and A, appear in no  other quintuple. 
These  two  are  thus  the 
first and  last  executed respectively 
in any terminating  computation on a standard input. The 
letter b represents a  blank. 
The  phrase “machine M, given standard input  string I ,  
computes standard output string P” will be abbreviated 
M: I -+ P. For an n-tape  machine  this 
will become 
M: (Il; I,; . . ‘; I,) -+ (P,; P,; ‘ .  .; P,,), 
where I, and P, 
are the standard 
input and the standard output 
on the 
kth tape. A blank tape will be abbreviated B. 
The main theorem  can now  be stated: 
Theorem: For every standard one-tape Turing machine 
S, there  exists a three-tape reversible,  deterministic Tur- 
ing machine  R such  that if I and P are strings on  the al- 
phabet of S, containing no embedded  blanks,  then S halts 
on I if and only if R halts  on ( I ;  B ;  B ) ,  and S: I -+ P if 
and only ifR: (I; B ;  R )  -+ (I; B ;  P ) .  
Furthermore, if S has f control states, N quintuples 
and a tape alphabet 
of z letters, including the blank, 
R will have 2f+ 2N + 4 states, 4N + 2z + 3 quadruples 
and tape  alphabets of z, N + 1 ,  and z letters, respective- 
ly. Finally, if in 
a particular computation 
S requires u 
steps and  uses s squares of tape, producing an  output of 
length A, then R will require 4v + 4A + 5 steps,  and  use 
s, u + 1, and A + 2 squares on its three tapes, respec- 
tively. (It will later be 
argued that where 
u>> s, the 
total space requirement can 
be  reduced 
to less than 
2 6 . )  
Proofi To construct  the machine R we begin by  arrang- 
Each  quintuple is now broken  into a pair of quadruples 
ing the N quintuples of S in some order with the stan- 
as  described earlier. The mth quintuple becomes 
dard quintuples  first and last: 
1 )  
A , b  + h + A ,  
m )  
A j  T - T’ u A f  
N )  
A,,h 
+ b 0 A,. 
Aj T ”-z T‘A,’ 
{Ad 4 uA,. 
The newly added states A,,!‘ are different from the 
old 
states  and  from  each other: each A‘ appears in only one 
(9) 
pair of quadruples. 
Table 1 Structure and operation of a three-tape reversible Turing machine. The  computation  proceeds in three  stages using different 
sets of quadruples  and control states, linkage  occurring  through states A, and C,. 
On  the right the  contents of the tapes  are shown  sym- 
bolically at  the beginning and end of each stage. The  underbar  denotes  the posltlon of the  head.  The initial state is A and,  for a  termi- 
nating computation, C ,  is  the final state. 
Srcrge 
Quadruples 
Contents o j  tape 
Working 
History 
Outp1rt 
tupe 
tupe 
tupe 
- 
INPUT 
- 
+ [ h  + h]A1’ 
- 
A I’ [ I  h /] 
[+ 1 O]A, 
Retrace 
C,[/ 
1 / I  + [-b OIC,’ 
C,’[b / b ]  + [b - b ] C ,  
- 
INPUT 
- 
- 
OUTPUT 
emulates. 
“The labels 1) , . . rn) . . , N )  are not part of the machine. They indicate correspondence to the quintuples of the original irreversible machine, which the reversible machine 
528 
“In the second stage the small braces indllcate sets of quadruples, with one quadruple for each nonbldnk tape letter x. 
C. H. BENNETT 
IBM J .  RES. DEVELOP. 
Two extra tapes are 
then added, one for the history 
and  one  for  the  duplicate  copy of the  output.  The  ouput 
(third)  tape is left blank and null-shifted for  the  present, 
but the history (second)  tape  is used to  record  the index 
m as  each transition  pair is executed. 
The mth pair of quadruples now has  the  form 
I 
Aj[T/bl + [T‘ + b]A,‘ 
A,,,’[/ b /I + [urn OIA, . 
( 1 1 )  
Notice  that  the history (second)  tape is out of phase 
with the  other  two - it is written  on while they are being 
shifted and vice versa. This phasing is necessary to as- 
sure reversibility-it 
serves to capture the 
information 
that would otherwise  be  thrown  away when the specific 
control  state A,’ passes  to  the  more 
general state A,. The 
+ shifting of the history tape  assures  that a blank square 
will always  be  ready  to  receive  the  next m value. If the 
computation of S does not halt, neither will that of R, 
and the machine will continue printing on the history 
tape indefinitely. On the other hand, if (on a standard 
input) S halts, R will eventually execute  the  Nth pair of 
quadruples, finding itself in state A,, with the  output in 
standard  format  on  tape 1. The history  head will be scan- 
ning the number N which it has just written at the 
ex- 
treme right end of the history on tape 2. Control then 
passes  to  the  second stage of computation, which copies 
the  output  onto  tape 3 (see  Table 1 ) . The control  states 
for this stage  are  denoted by B’s and  are  distinct from all 
the A-type control states. Notice that the 
copying pro- 
cess can be done reversibly without writing anything 
more  on  the history tape.  This  shows  that  the generation 
(or erasure) of a duplicate copy of data requires no 
throwing away of information. 
The third stage  undoes  the  work of the first and con- 
sists of the  inverses of all first-stage transitions with C’s 
substituted  for A’s. In  the final state C,, 
the  history  tape 
is again blank and the other tapes 
contain the recon- 
structed input and  the desired output. 
As Table 1 shows, the total number of control states 
is 2N + 2f+ 4 ,  the number of quadruples 4N + 2z + 3, 
and  the  space  and time requirements  are  as  stated  at  the 
beginning of the proof. The non-overlapping of the do- 
mains and ranges of all the  quadruples  assures  determin- 
ism and reversibility of the machine R. In  the first stage, 
the  upper  transitions of each pair do not overlap in their 
domains because of the postulated determinacy of the 
original Turing machine S, whose quintuples also began 
AjT-+. The  ranges of the upper quadruples (as well as 
the  domains of the  lower)  are  kept from  overlapping  by 
the uniqueness of the states A,‘. 
Finally, the ranges of 
the lower quadruples  are  saved  from overlapping by the 
unique output m on  the history tape.  The  state A, causes 
no trouble, even though it occurs in both stage 1 and 
NOVEMBER 1973 
stage 2, because by the definition of the machine S it 
does not occur  on  the left in stage 1 ; similarly for  state 
C,. The non-overlapping of the stage 2 quadruples can 
be verified by inspection, while the determinism and 
reversibility of stage 3 follow from  those of stage 1. 
Discussion 
The argument developed above is not limited to three- 
tape Turing  machines,  but can  be applied to any sort of 
deterministic automaton, finite or infinite, provided it 
has sufficient temporary storage to record the history. 
One-tape reversible machines 
exist, but their frequent 
shifting between  the working and history  regions on  the 
tape necessitates as 
many as Y2 steps to emulate 
a v- 
step irreversible computation. 
In the case that 
S is a universal Turing machine, R 
becomes a  machine for executing  any computer program 
reversibly. For such a  general-purpose  machine it seems 
highly unlikely that  we  can avoid having to include the 
input as part 
of the final output. However, there are 
many calculations in which the output uniquely deter- 
mines the  input,  and  for  such a problem one might hope 
to build a specific reversible computer  that would simply 
map inputs  onto  outputs, erasing  everything  else. This  is 
indeed  possible,  provided we have  access  to  an ordinary 
Turing machine which, given an output, computes the 
corresponding input. Let S, be the (irreversible) Turing 
machine that  computes  the  output from the input and S, 
be  the  one  that  computes  the  input  from  the  output.  The 
reversible computation  proceeds 
by seven  stages  as 
shown in Table 2, of which the first three employ a re- 
versible form of the S, computer  and,  as in Table I ,  serve 
to map the input onto the input and output. Stage four 
interchanges  input and  output.  Stages five and  seven  use 
a reversible  realization of the S, computer;  stage five has 
the sole purpose of producing a history of the S, compu- 
tation (i.e., of the  input  from  the  output) which, after  the 
extra  copy of the input has been erased in stage six, is 
used in stage seven to destroy itself and the remaining 
copy of the  input, while  producing  only the desired output. 
We shall now return to the more 
usual situation, in 
which the  input must be  saved  because it is not a known, 
computable function of the  output. Performing a compu- 
tation reversibly entails only a modest increase in com- 
puting time and machine complexity;  the main drawback 
of reversible computers appears thus to 
be the large 
amount of temporary  storage they require  for  the history 
in any long, compute-bound job (i.e., one  whose number 
of steps, v, greatly exceeds the number 
of squares of 
memory used, 
s). Fortunately, the 
temporary storage 
requirement  can be cut  down by breaking the  job  into a 
sequence of n segments, each one 
of which would be 
performed and retraced (and the 
history tape thereby 
erased and made ready for reuse) before proceeding to 
Table 2 Reversible computer for  a specific problem in which the input is a known, computable function of the output. 
- 
Stage 
1 .  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Action 
_" 
~~ 
~~ 
Forward S, computation 
copy output 
Retraced S, computation 
Interchange output with input 
Forward S, computation 
Reversible erasure of extra copy of input 
Retraced S, computation 
the next. Each segment would leave  on  the working tape 
(tape 1 ) a restart  dump that would be  used as  the  input 
of the next segment; but to preserve 
reversibility it 
would also have to leave (on tape 3, say) a copy of its 
own input, which would in most cases simply be the 
preceding restart dump. At the  end of the  computation 
we would have, in addition to  the original input and de- 
sired output, all the n - l intermediate  dumps  (concate- 
nated, e.g., on  tape 3 ). These intermediate results, which 
would not have 
been produced had the job not been 
segmented, either can be accepted as permanent (but 
unwanted) output, in exchange for the n-fold reduction 
of the history tape, or can themselves 
be  reversibly 
erased by first making an  extra  copy of the  desired final 
output (putting it, say, on a previously unused part of 
tape 3 ) ,  then seversing the whole n-segment cornprrtrt- 
tion.  This  reversal is possible because  each  segment  has 
been  performed  reversibly. 
The  sequence 
of restart 
dumps thus functions as a kind of higher-level history, 
and it  is erased by a higher-level application of the  same 
technique used to  erase  the primary  histories. At  the  end 
of the computation, the 
machine will contain only the 
original input and the desired nth segment 
output, and 
every step of the original irreversible computation will 
have been  performed twice  forward  and  twice  backward. 
For a job with v steps and  a restart  dump of size s, the 
total  temporary 
storage  requirement 
(minimized by 
530 
choosing n = 67.;) is 2
6
 
squares, half on  the history 
OUTPUT 
 
HISTORY 
1 
- 
OUTPUT 
 
HISTORY 
1 
OUTPUT 
INPUT 
- 
OUTPUT 
OUTPUT 
- 
INPUT 
INPUT 
 
HISTORY 
2 
INPUT 
INPUT 
 
HISTORY 
2 
- 
tape and half on the dump tape. A (tGK)-fold reduc- 
tion in space can thus be bought by a twofold increase in 
time  (ignoring the time  required to write  and  read restart 
dumps) without any unwanted output. By a systematic 
reversal of progressively  larger  nested 
sequences of 
segments one might hope  to reach an  absolute minimum 
temporary  storage requirement growing only as log v, for 
sufficiently large v, with the time increasing perhaps as 
i', because of the linearly increasing number of times 
each  segment would have  to be retraced. 
It  thus  appears  that  every  job 
of computation can be 
done in a logically reversible manner, without inordinate 
increases in machine complexity, number of steps, un- 
wanted output,  or  temporary 
storage  capacity. 
Physical reversibility 
The existence of logically reversible automata suggests 
that physical computers might be made thermodynami- 
cally reversible, and  hence  capable of dissipating an  ar- 
bitrarily small amount of energy per step if operated 
sufficiently slowly. A full treatment of physically reversi- 
ble computers is beyond the  scope of the  present  paper 
[ 5 ] ,  but it is worthwhile to give a brief and non-rigorous 
introduction to how they might work. 
An obvious approach to the 
minimizing the energy 
dissipation is to design the  computer so that it can  oper- 
ate near thermodynamic equilibrium. 
All moving parts 
would then, at any instant, have near-thermal velocity, 
C. H .  BENNETT 
IBM J. RES. DEVELOP. 
and the desired logical transitions would necessarily be 
accomplished by spontaneous thermally activated mo- 
tion over  free energy barriers not much higher than kT. 
At first sight this 
might seem impossible-in existing 
electronic computers,  for example, even when a  compo- 
nent being switched is itself nondissipative (e.g., a mag- 
netic  core),  the switching  process depends  on  temporari- 
ly applying a strong external force to push the compo- 
nent irreversibly over a high free energy barrier. How- 
ever,  nature provides a beautiful example of a thermally 
activated “computer” in the biochemical apparatus re- 
sponsible for  the replication. transcription and  translation 
of the genetic code [6]. Each of these processes 
in- 
volves a long, deterministic sequence of manipulations 
of coded information, quite analogous to a computation, 
and  yet, so far as is known, each is simply a sequence of 
coupled, thermally activated chemical reactions. In bio- 
chemical systems. enzymes 
play the essential role of 
selectively lowering the activation barriers for the de- 
sired transitions while 
leaving high barriers to obstruct 
all undesired transitions - those which in a computer 
would correspond to errors. Although the environment 
in which enzymes normally function is not at chemical 
equilibrium,  many  enzyme-catalyzed  reactions are freely 
reversible, and one can find a set of equilibrium reactant 
concentrations  at which both forward and  reverse reac- 
tions occur equally  rapidly, while competing  uncatalyzed 
reactions  have negligible rates.  It is thus not unreasona- 
ble to  postulate 
a  thermally  activated 
computer in 
which, at equilibrium, every logically allowed transition 
occurs equally  often  forward and  backward, while illogi- 
cal transitions hardly 
ever occur. In the 
following dis- 
cussion chemical  terminology 
will be used, without 
implying that thermally  activated 
computers must  be 
chemical systems. 
The chemical  realization of a logically reversible  com- 
putation is a chain of reactions,  each coupled only to  the 
preceding one and the 
following one. It 
is helpful to 
think of the computing system as comprising a major 
reactant (analogous to 
DNA) that encodes the 
logical 
state, and minor reactants that react with the major one 
to change the 
logical state. Only one molecule of the 
major reactant is present, but the minor reactants  are all 
present  at definite concentrations, which may be manip- 
ulated to drive the 
computation forward 
or backward. 
If the minor reactants  are in equilibrium, and  the major 
reactant initially corresponds to the initial state of a v- 
step computation, the system will begin a random walk 
through the chain of reactions, and after about v2 steps 
will briefly visit the final state.  This  does  not  deserve  to 
be called a computation; it would be legitimate to insist 
that the system proceed through the chain of reactions 
with some positive  drift  velocity and,  after sufficient time, 
have a high probability of being in the final state (if 
the  computation  has  one).  The  former  requirement  can 
be  met by adjusting the chemical  potentials of the minor 
reactants so that each forward 
step dissipates a little 
energy E ;  the latter can be met by dissipating a trivial 
extra amount during the  last  step.  (If all steps had equal 
dissipation, E < kT, the final state  occupation probabili- 
ty would be only 
about elkT. By dissipating an extra 
kT In (3 kT/e) of energy  during the  last  step, this  proba- 
bility is  increased  to  about 95 %. ) Given a uniform rate r 
for all forward reactions, an energy dissipation 
E < kT 
per  step 
will buy a drift  velocity 
(i.e., computation 
speed) of Te/kT steps  per second. On  the  other  hand,  for 
E > kT, backward steps will be effectively suppressed 
and the computation speed 
will approach the forward 
reaction rate 1’. The chemical system is thus a thermo- 
dynamically reversible 
computer of the type we have 
been  seeking. 
If we attempt to apply the preceding argument to a 
logically irreversible computer,  we  can  see  that  here  the 
reactions  form a  branching structure, with a main trunk 
corresponding to  the desired computation  path, and  side 
branches  corresponding  to  incorrect  or  “extraneous” 
reverse computations. The states on the side branches 
are valid predecessors of the final state but not valid 
successors of the initial state. A few such extraneous 
states would pose no problem-a 
small driving force 
would still suffice to push the system into the desired 
final state.  Temporary 
backward excursions  onto  the 
side  branches would occur, but would not  lead to  errors, 
contrary to what one might expect. Since no state of a 
deterministic computer can have more than one 
logical 
successor,  the  erroneously reversed operations would be 
corrected  as  soon  as  the  computation  proceeded 
forward 
again, and  the  desired  path would be rejoined. The real 
problem comes from the enormous number 
of extra- 
neous  predecessors; typically they outnumber  the  states 
on  the intended  computation  path by hundreds of orders 
of magnitude. This is because, in irreversibly  pro- 
grammed computations, one can usually proceed back- 
ward along an extraneous path for many steps, making 
further wrong choices along the way,  before  arriving at a 
state  that  has  no  predecessors. 
If a thermally activated computer with many extra- 
neous  states is operated  close  to equilibrium, the  system 
will spend only a minuscule fraction 
of its time on the 
desired path of computation, let  alone in the desired final 
state. An acceptable computation 
rate requires 
I )  that 
finite (but time-consuming)  backward 
excursions be 
largely suppressed, and 2 )  that infinite ones be com- 
pletely suppressed.  This 
in turn  means 
(roughly 
speaking) that the dissipation per step must exceed kT 
In m, where m is the mean number of immediate prede- 
cessors 1 )  averaged over states near the intended path, 
or 2) averaged over all accessible  states, 
whichever is 
531 
NOVEMBER 1973 
LOGICAL  REVERSIBILITY 
greater.  For 
a  typical  irreversible 
computer, which 
throws away about one 
bit per logical operation, )n is 
approximately two, and thus kT In 2 is,  as  Landauer has 
argued [ 1 1, an  approximate lower  bound on  the energy 
dissipation of such machines. For a logically reversible 
computer, however, m is exactly one by construction. 
The biosynthesis  and  biodegradation 
of messenger 
RNA may be viewed as  convenient examples of logical- 
ly reversible and irreversible computation, respectively. 
Messenger  RNA, a  linear  polymeric  informational mac- 
romolecule like DNA, carries the genetic information 
from one  or  more genes of a DNA molecule,  and serves 
to  direct  the  synthesis of the proteins encoded by those 
genes. Messenger RNA is synthesized by the enzyme 
RNA polymerase in the presence of a double-stranded 
DNA molecule and a supply of RNA monomers (the 
four nucleotide pyrophosphates ATP, GTP, CTP, and 
UTP) [7]. The  enzyme  attaches  to a specific site on  the 
DNA molecule and moves along, sequentially incorpo- 
rating the  RNA monomers; into a single-stranded RNA 
molecule whose nucleotide sequence exactly matches 
that of the DNA. The pyrophosphate groups are re- 
leased into the surrounding solution as free pyrophos- 
phate molecules. The  enzyme may thus be compared  to 
a simple  tape-copying Turing machine that  manufactures 
its output tape rather than 
merely writing on it. Tape 
copying is a logically reversible operation, and 
RNA 
polymerase is both  thermodynamically 
and logically 
reversible. In the cellular environment the reaction is 
driven in the intended  forward  direction of RNA synthe- 
sis by other  reactions, which maintain a low concentra- 
tion of free  pyrophosphate, relative to  the  concentrations 
of nucleotide pyrophosphates [ 81. A high pyrophosphate 
concentration would drive  the 
reaction backward, 
and  the  enzyme 
would carry  out 
a sequence-spe- 
cific degradation of the RNA, comparing each nucleo- 
tide with the  corresponding 
DNA nucleotide  before 
splitting it off. This  process, which may be termed logi- 
cally reversible erasure of IRNA, does not normally oc- 
cur in biological systems-instead,  RNA is degraded by 
other enzymes, such as 
p~olynucleotide phosphorylase 
[9], in a logically irreversible manner (i.e., without 
checking  its 
sequence against DNA). Polynucleotide 
phosphorylase catalyzes the reaction of RNA with free 
phosphate (maintained at high concentration) to form 
nucleotide phosphate monomers. Like 
the polymerase 
reaction, this reaction is thermodynamically reversible; 
however, because of its logical irreversibility,  a  fourfold 
greater phosphate concentration 
is needed to drive it 
forward  than would be required for a logically reversible 
phosphorolytic degradation. 
The extra driving force is 
necessary to suppress the 
undesired synthesis of non- 
sense  RNA by random polymerization. 
In biological systems,  apparently,  the  speed and flexi- 
bility of irreversible erasure outweigh its extra cost in 
free energy (kT In 4 per nucleotide in this case).  Indeed, 
throughout the genetic apparatus, energy is dissipated  at 
a rate of roughly 5 to 50 kT per step; while this is ten 
orders of magnitude lower than in an electronic com- 
puter, it is considerably  higher  than  what would theoreti- 
cally be possible if biochemical systems did not  need  to 
run at speeds close to the 
kinetic maximum -presum- 
ably to escape the harmful effects of radiation, uncata- 
lyzed reactions, and  competition  from other organisms. 
Acknowledgment 
1 thank Rolf Landauer for raising the question of re- 
versibility of computation in the first place and  for stim- 
ulating discussions of my models. 
References and notes 
1 .  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
R. Landauer, IBM J .  Res. Develop. 3, 183 (1961). R. W. 
Keyes  and 
R. Landauer, IBM J .  Res. Develop. 14, 152 
(1970), investigate a specific model computer  whose  energy 
dissipation  per step is about kT. 
R. W. Keyes 
[Science 168, 796 (1970)], in summarizing 
Landauer’s argument [I], commented that a saved history 
might be used to reverse the steps of the original computa- 
tion, but  that this was not  practical in a  general purpose com- 
puter. He did not explicitly point 
out that a reversible ma- 
chine  can  be  made  to  erase its own history (an ability  which, 
we  have  argued, allows it to  be useful as a general purpose 
computer). 
For a good  informal  exposition of Turing machines see  Chap- 
ter 6 of M. L. Minsky, Computation: Finite and In$nite Ma- 
chines, Prentice-Hall, lnc., Englewood Cliffs, N. J., 1967. 
By the addition of a few  extra  tape symbols  and  quintuples, 
an  arbitrary  Turing machine can  be  made  to obey these for- 
mat  requirements while  computing  essentially the  same func- 
tion as it did before. See M. Davis, Computability and Un- 
solvubility, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1958, 
The author is currently preparing a paper on physically re- 
versible  model computers. 
For a good  introduction to this subject  see  James D. Watson 
Molecular Biology of the Gene (2nd  ed.), W. 
A. Benjamin, 
Inc.,  New  York, 1970. 
Ibid., p. 336 ff. 
Ibid.. p. 155 ff. 
Ibid., p. 403. 
pp. 25 -26. 
Received April 12, 1973 
C .  H .  Bennett is located  at  the IBM Thomas J .  Watson 
Research Center, Yorktown Heights, New York 10598. 
532 
C. I*. BENNETT 
IBM J. RES. DEVELOP. 
