111
Single Molecules, Cells, and 
Super-Resolution Optics
Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2014
by Eric Betzig
Janelia Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
19700 Helix Dr., Ashburn, VA 20147, USA.
O
ne of the nicest things about winning the Nobel Prize is hearing from all 
of the people in my past and having the time to reflect on the important 
role they’ve each played in getting me to the happy and fulfilling life I have now. 
To all of my friends and colleagues from grade school up to my peers who nomi­
nated me for this honor, you have my deepest thanks.
I was first introduced to super-resolution back in 1982 when I went to Cor­
nell University for graduate school and met my eventual thesis advisors, Mike 
Isaacson and Aaron Lewis. Mike had recently developed a means of using elec­
tron beams to fabricate holes as small as 30 nanometers (Figure 1A). He and 
Aaron figured that if we could shine light on one side of the screen, then the 
light that initially comes out of the hole from the other side would create a sub-
wavelength light source that we could then scan point-by-point over a sample 
and generate a super-resolution image [1] (Figure 1B). The ultimate goal was to 
try to create an optical microscope that could look at living cells with the resolu­
tion of an electron microscope. I wanted to become a scientist to do big, impact­
ful things, and that certainly fit the bill, so I said, “Please sign me up.”
At the time, many people told us that this idea would never work, either 
because it violated Abbé’s law, or even worse, the Uncertainty Principle. I didn’t 
find their arguments compelling, but all doubt was removed from my mind in 
1984 when we learned about the work of Ash and Nicholls. In 1972, they used 
112
The Nobel Prizes
FIGURE 1.  Apertures and near-field optics. (A) Electron beam-fabricated apertures in a 
silicon nitride membrane, with diameters as shown. Column at left shows light transmis­
sion through these apertures [1]. (B) The concept of near-field scanning optical micros­
copy (NSOM) as a path to super-resolution [2]. (C) 50 nm aperture in a tapered glass 
pipette coated with opaque aluminum [3], made using techniques developed for patch 
clamp recording [4].
FIGURE 2.  Breaking the diffraction barrier in the near field. (A) Microwave resonator 
with sub-wavelength aperture as used by Ash and Nichols in 1972 [5]. (B) Resolved grat­
ings having periods of 1/30, 1/40, and 1/60 (top to bottom) of the 3 cm microwave wave­
length. (C) Images of letters having linewidths of 1/15 of the wavelength.
3-centimeter microwaves and were able, by near-field techniques, to get resolu­
tion of 1/60 of the wavelength λ in test patterns in a beautiful paper in Nature 
[5] (Figure 2). In fact, the idea for near-field microscopy goes back even further, 
to E.H. Synge in 1928 [6], and many people have independently come up with 
the idea since.
The first far field demonstration of breaking the Abbe limit of λ/(2NA) (NA 
being the numerical aperture of the objective) in the far field goes back even 
further, to the work of Lukosz [7]. By introducing grating masks at planes con­
jugate to the object and the image, he was able to image test patterns at three 
times Abbe’s limit [8] (Figure 3A). This was the forerunner of what is known 
today as structured illumination microscopy. Lukosz’ demonstration was at very 
Single Molecules, Cells, and Super-Resolution Optics
113
low NA, so the features were still much larger than the wavelength of light, but 
it nevertheless demonstrated that Abbé’s law was not inviolate.
In fact, far-field super-resolution has a very long history, particularly in the 
semiconductor business, where the nonlinear interaction of light with photo­
resist has been a staple of making linewidths far smaller than the Abbé for a 
generation (Figure 3B) [9]. Even more impressive, though, is how visible light 
is used to inspect semiconductor wafers, and how by having a priori knowledge 
of the pattern you hope to create, developing a model for the diffraction of light 
from that pattern, and comparing the actual data you get against the model, 
people today are able to measure features in the pattern down to about 1/1000 
of the wavelength of light (Figure 3C) [9]. This is used day in and day out in high 
volume semiconductor manufacturing.
So really, at some level, super-resolution is not new at all, and there are peo­
ple in Silicon Valley who are probably laughing at us here today for thinking 
that we’re the guys who invented this, when it has been a staple for such a very 
long time. Nevetheless, in my mind Ash and Nichols deserve the lion’s share of 
the credit for being the first to not just push slightly beyond the NA-dependent 
Abbé limit of λ/(2NA), but to shatter the diffraction barrier completely by going 
way beyond the seemingly more fundamental limit of seeing beyond half the 
wavelength of light, and getting to λ/60 with the near-field technique.
Speaking of shattering, the types of apertures we were making in those thin 
membranes would break all the time; they were hard and time-consuming to 
make, and they were costly. So eventually we abandoned that and, using an idea 
FIGURE 3.  Breaking the diffraction barrier in the far field. (A) Diffraction-limited (top) 
and super-resolved test patterns in 1D (middle) and 2D (bottom) as seen by Lukosz in 
1967, using linear grating or square grid masks inserted in the image path [8]. Resolu­
tion is increased to three times the Abbé limit. (B) Exploiting nonlinearity in photoresist 
development and double patterning to create features beyond the Abbé limit during the 
production of integrated circuits [9]. (C) Exploiting the a priori knowledge of a desired 
circuit pattern, and comparing the distribution of scattered light from the actual pattern 
to the predicted distribution, to measure features sub-nm features to sub-Å precision in 
high volume semiconductor manufacturing [9].
114
The Nobel Prizes
from my fellow grad student Alec Harootunian, we instead pulled glass micro­
pipettes, similar to the method that was developed just a few years before in 
patch clamping for single ion channel recording. We would then coat these with 
aluminum to create an opaque structure, except for the little hole at the end that 
would then be our aperture [3] (Figure 1C).
So with that, I built the monstrosity you see here (Figure 4A), which was my 
first near-field optical microscope. I cringe now at how complex and crazy this 
thing was, but at least it gave me the ability to learn the system-engineering skills 
I would need to become a true engineering physicist, and eventually I was able 
to surpass the diffraction limit [10] (Figures 4B,C [11]) with this microscope 
that I built for my Ph.D. thesis.
That microscope was frankly a pain in the ass to work with, and reliably the 
resolution gain was about a factor of two beyond Abbé’s limit. But it was good 
enough to get me my dream job at Bell Labs. I started trying to develop the tech­
nique further and, for the first two years, progress was really slow. But thanks to 
the patience and encouragement of my boss, Horst Störmer, I eventually came 
to realize that that pipette probe was not a really good design, because the light 
that was sent down the taper was largely retro-reflected back before it ever got to 
the tip, and the little bit of light that did make it to the tip was in electromagnetic 
modes that didn’t couple well to the aperture.
Postdoc Jay Trautman and I, then, instead created a probe that consisted 
of an adiabatically-tapered optical fiber, which would guide the light very ef­
ficiently to the tip region, and then efficiently couple that light to the evanescent 
modes in the aperture (Figure 5A,B). This made a probe that was 10,000 times 
brighter than the earlier ones, and also then allowed us to routinely get to about 
50-nanometer resolution [12] (Figure 5C). In the following year I also invented 
a means to dither the probe back and forth sideways—oscillate it—and then as it 
would come close the surface, the oscillation would be damped. By that, I could 
regulate the distance of the tip from the sample [13] (Figure 5D).
FIGURE 4.  My first near-field microscope. (A) The microscope itself. (B) Test-pattern 
comparison of diffraction-limited imaging versus super-resolved NSOM. (C) Another 
resolved test pattern, i.e., an early lesson in learning how to sell my work [11].
Single Molecules, Cells, and Super-Resolution Optics
115
With these two innovations, near-field became fairly routine. In 1992, we 
had the world record for data-storage density, when we could read and write bits 
as small as 60 nanometers in a magneto-optic material [15] (Figure 6A). We also 
demonstrated super-resolution photolithography (Figure 6B) and nanoscale 
spectroscopy [16], and exploited various contrast mechanisms [14], including 
FIGURE 5.  Making NSOM a real tool. (A) Electron micrograph and (B) Optical micro­
graph of an adiabatically tapered, aluminum coated single mode optical fiber used as a 
near-field probe [14]. (C) Resolution comparisons with the probe. Left to right: electron, 
conventional optical, and near-field optical micrographs [12]. (D) Schematic diagram of 
shear force feedback for regulating, at the nm scale, the distance from the aperture at the 
end of the probe to the specimen [13].
FIGURE 6.  The golden age of NSOM. (A) Single bits of information (top) in a magneto-
optic film recorded and read out by NSOM, compared with bits (white) recorded with 
conventional optics [15]. (B) Near-field photolithography [14]. (C) Fluorescence imag­
ing of phase transitions in phospholipid monolayers [17]. (D) Histological stained sec­
tion from the monkey hippocampus [14].
116
The Nobel Prizes
refractive index, absorption (Figure 6C), polarization, and fluorescence [17] 
contrast (Figure 6D). In fact, to this day, near-field remains the only diffraction-
unlimited technique which can use the full panoply of optical contrast mecha­
nisms and isn’t dependent on a switching mechanism in fluorescence.
Nevertheless, the mechanism that’s probably most important for biology is 
fluorescence, because it offers protein-specific contrast. In 1993, we were the 
first to demonstrate super-resolution fluorescence imaging of cells when we 
looked at the actin cytoskeleton in the flat lamellar region of fixed fibroblasts 
[18] (Figure 7). What was particularly exciting about this, though, was that the 
signal-to-noise ratio we achieved on these single actin filaments, coupled with 
our knowledge of the aperture diameter, suggested that it should be possible to 
image single fluorescent molecules. This was a very hot topic at the time, be­
cause just a few years previously W.E. Moerner [19] and Michel Orrit [20] had 
broken to this ultimate level of sensitivity at cryogenic temperatures, and several 
groups, such as those of Dick Keller [21] and Rudolf Rigler [22], had already 
shown at room temperature in solution that you could see bursts of fluorescence 
from single molecules.
The key to these later experiments was the idea that you had to restrict the 
excitation volume to reduce the background. That’s what near-field excels at—
confining the excitation volume. As soon as Rob Chichester and I decided to 
try to look at single molecules, on our very first try we got really great results. 
But the weird thing was, instead of seeing a bunch of round spots, they would 
instead look like these crazy arcs or ellipses or other things, and these would 
FIGURE 7.  Super-resolution fluorescence imaging of cells. Conventional widefield (left) 
and super-resolved NSOM (right) images of cytoskeletal actin in the same region of a 
fixed mouse fibroblast cell [18].
Single Molecules, Cells, and Super-Resolution Optics
117
change as we changed the polarization of the light [23] (Figure 8A). I still re­
member running excitedly to Horst’s office and trying to understand this, and 
together with his help, realizing that what we were seeing was the interaction of 
the electric dipole moment of the molecule with the evanescent fields inside of 
the near-field aperture (Figure 8B,C). And that was what was giving rise to these 
patterns.
And so, what that means is that we could turn the experiment around and 
think of the molecule as the light source and the aperture as the sample. By 
choosing molecules that were oriented along the x, y, and z axes, we could then 
map out the nanoscopic electric fields inside the aperture (Figure 9A, center 
column). We then compared this to a theory for near-field diffraction that Hans 
Bethe had developed back in 1944 [24] and were able to show very good agree­
ment (Figure 9A, other columns). Once we had that, then we could use Bethe’s 
model to predict what kind of pattern we would see for any orientation of mole­
cule, compare that to our data, and hence find the dipole orientation (Figure 9C) 
FIGURE 8.  Single molecule microscopy at room temperature. (A) Three views of the same 
field of carbocyanine dye molecules on PMMA as imaged by NSOM with three different 
polarizations as shown at top. (B) 1D schematic of the interaction of the electric field 
e emerging from the near-field aperture with the electric dipole moment p of a single 
molecule. (C) Resulting intensity I(x) ∝ ⎪e(x) ⋅ p⎪2 recorded as the aperture is scanned 
across the molecule [23].
FIGURE 9.  Mapping nanometric electric fields and measuring single dipole orientations. 
(A) Electric field components (rows) predicted near a sub-wavelength sized aperture at 
different distances (columns) from the aperture, compared to experimental components 
(center column) measured with single molecules. (B, C) Orientations of single molecules 
determined by matching measured to predicted emission patterns [23].
118
The Nobel Prizes
of every molecule in the field of view (Figure 9B). And given that information, 
we were then able to fit these crazy shapes to the theory and find the positions of 
these molecules down to about 12 nanometers in x and y, and about 6 nanome­
ters in z. This became very influential for what was to happen later.
In another pivotal experiment, I joined forces with my best friend and col­
league at Bell, Harald Hess. Harald had made a name for himself at Bell a few 
years earlier by building a world-class cryogenic scanning tunneling microscope 
with which, among other things, he discovered the core states at the centers of 
the vortices in the Abrikosov flux lattice of type-II superconductors. Harald’s 
and my interest was to combine my near-field probe with his low-temperature 
scope to be able to study excitons, which are the sources of light generation in 
semiconductor heterostructures, such as in this laser pointer, that won the No­
bel Prize in 2000. Our goal was to combine the high spatial resolution obtain­
able with my near-field probes with the high spectral resolution we could get in 
Harald’s rig by running near absolute zero (Figure 10A).
When we did this [25], we were surprised to find that the normally smooth 
spectrum that you see instead would break up into these crazy sharp lines. And 
furthermore, as we drove the probe even small distances from point to point, 
this spectrum would change completely (Figure 10B). What we eventually real­
ized is that we were seeing that the excitons could not emit anywhere, but were 
confined to only certain specific points of exciton recombination, and the color 
of the light emitted at one of these points was based on the local thickness of 
the quantum well at that point. What was probably more important later on was 
that even though there might be a dozen or more of these emitting sites under­
neath our tiny near-field probe, we could still study them individually because 
they glowed in different wavelengths. So if we built up this higher dimensional 
FIGURE 10.  Near-field cryogenic spectroscopy of quantum wells. (A) Experimental sche­
matic, showing a near-field probe (left) exciting a multiple quantum well structure (bot­
tom), with the resulting emission measured at a spectrometer (right). (B) Comparative 
near-field and far-field spectra at a single point (top), and spectral changes with position 
(bottom). (C) Images of emission from single exciton recombination sites isolated form 
one another in a 3D space of position x,y and wavelength λ [25].
Single Molecules, Cells, and Super-Resolution Optics
119
space of x, y and emission wavelength, we could study them individually (Figure 
10C).
By this time in 1994, the limitations of the near-field technique were incred­
ibly obvious. Some of these were just engineering challenges, but some were 
truly fundamental. The foremost of these is that the near-field is ridiculously 
short. It was clear that, because of this short depth of focus, there was no way 
I was going to realize my ultimate dream of looking at live cells with the reso­
lution of an electron microscope, so I got very frustrated. At the same time, 
though, near-field got to be a big fad, and like all scientific fads, you get a lot of 
people jumping into the field. They publish sloppy results, sweep all the prob­
lems underneath the rug, and over-hype the capabilities. All of that made me 
very uncomfortable. And the third thing that tipped the balance for me was Bell. 
You had to work really hard to succeed at Bell, but by 1994 you could sense the 
changes that were happening in the company, and they would no longer value 
basic science in the way they used to. All these things together took two young 
and innocent guys like me and Harald in 1989 and turned us into two stressed 
and worn-out guys just five years later.
So with all of that combined, I said, “Screw it, I’m sick of science. I really 
hate academia. I quit.” So that’s just what I did. I really had no idea what I was 
going to do next. But after a few months of trying to flush near-field microscopy 
out of my head, I was walking my daughter around in a stroller and it hit me—I 
don’t know how or where from—that you could combine that single-molecule 
FIGURE 11.  The concept of super-resolution localization microscopy. (A) A field of close-
packed molecules unresolved, because their diffraction-limited images overlap. (B) The 
same molecules, after their mutual isolation in a higher dimensional space. (C) Super-
resolution map of molecular positions after localization of each isolated molecule [26].
120
The Nobel Prizes
experiment I did with the spectroscopy experiment Harald and I did to come up 
with a different far-field way of doing super-resolution imaging.
The idea is that if you have a bunch of molecules that are too close together, 
their diffraction-limited spots overlap (Figure 11A). We’ve already heard about 
this in W.E.’s talk. However, if you can find some way in which they differ from 
one another—and it can be anything—then you can isolate them in a higher di­
mensional space (Figure 11B). But once they’re isolated, you can find the centers 
of each one of their diffraction-limited spots to much better than the width of 
the spot, and hence, you plot all the coordinates of the molecules (Figure 11C).
I published that idea in 1995 [26]. In 1999, van Oijen and colleagues first 
demonstrated this by spectral isolation at low temperature and resolved seven 
molecules in one diffraction-limited volume in 3-D [27]. In the 2000s, several 
groups extended this to room temperature, by various means—photobleaching 
[28,29], lifetime [30], or blinking [31]. This was really a general concept I was 
trying to get across here.
The problem with all of these methods, though, is based on something called 
the Nyquist criterion (Figure 12). If you want to make any microscope image of 
FIGURE 12.  The Nyquist criterion and the labeling density problem. With many local­
ized molecules per period, any spatial frequency is easily detectable (center left), but 
when the number drops to two per period or less, the frequency might be missed. As a 
result, resolution in localization microscopy is limited more by density of single molecule 
labels than by the precision their localization (top right). The minimum number of local­
izations required per diffraction-limited region increasing rapidly with dimensionality 
(lower right).
Single Molecules, Cells, and Super-Resolution Optics
121
a certain resolution, you have to sample every resolution element divided by 
two. For example, if I sample only once every half period of this sine pattern 
(Figure 12), I can miss it completely (Figure 12, lower left). What that means is 
that if you want to get 20 nm resolution in two dimensions by this method, you 
have to have the ability to see one molecule on top of 500 that could be glowing 
at the same time. And none of the methods I just described were at the point of 
having that much isolation in that third dimension to get very much beyond the 
diffraction limit. I didn’t have a really good idea in 1995 about how to get around 
this problem, other than running at cryogenic temperatures with a near-field 
microscope. That was going to be a hero experiment, and I was sick of science, 
so I just published the idea and left it at that.
Eventually I ended up working for my Dad’s machine tool company in 
Michigan, where I did a number of things, but my baby, the one I’m proudest 
of, was a servo-hydraulic machine tool that married old hydraulic technology 
to modern control algorithms and the sort of energy storage principles that you 
find in hybrid cars today. It would move 4 tons at 8gs of acceleration and posi­
tion it to 5 microns, while collapsing the size of the machine from the size of this 
stage to something about the size of a car, making it much cheaper, much faster, 
much more productive. I spent four years developing that idea, and three years 
trying to sell it, and in the end I sold two. So what I learned is that I may be a bad 
scientist, but man, am I a worse businessman.
By 2002, I said, “Dad, I’m tired of wasting your money. You know, I’m sorry, 
this just isn’t going to work.” And so I quit. As usual, I had no plan B. This was 
the darkest time in my life, because not only had I pissed away my academic 
career, I had also blown up my backup plan of following in my Dad’s footsteps. 
I’m 42 years old with two young kids and no job and no prospect of a job.
But I did something smart. Harald had also gone into industry, where he was 
considerably more successful than I was, working for a startup in San Diego. So 
I reconnected with him and we just started getting together in different parts of 
the country, like the national parks, and just talked . . . What’s the meaning of 
life? How can we have an impact before we die? What’s interesting? What we 
realized is that while neither one of us fits well in the normal academic scheme 
of things, we both really love science and we love the ability to be able to pursue 
our curiosity. So we started trying to think about what we could do to have an 
impact in science again.
That caused me to start reading the scientific literature, which I hadn’t done 
for 10 years. The first thing I ran across was green fluorescent protein [32]. It was 
a revelation to me—a shock—because it was such a big problem in the near-field 
days, how to label cells to get high enough labeling density and specificity. The 
122
The Nobel Prizes
notion that you could coax a live cell with a little bit of jellyfish DNA to be able 
to get it to produce any protein you want with a fluorescent tag on it. My jaw was 
hanging down for a week in astonishment at this. Initially when I was casting 
around for an idea, I didn’t want to do microscopy, but as soon as I saw this I 
said, “Oh, shit, I’ve got to do microscopy again.”
While Harald and I continued to look around during my holiday from sci­
ence, science itself wasn’t standing still. Right after GFP appeared on the scene, 
a lot of people wanted to understand its photophysics, in part to be able to do 
mutagenesis to get different colors so they could do multicolor imaging.
Steven Boxer’s group in 1996 noticed that there isn’t just one absorption 
hump for GFP but two. And what was even crazier is that if you would excite 
at this near-UV peak for a while, it would go down, but the peak at 488 would 
go up [33] (Figure 13A). In other words, there was some kind of weird photo-
activation effect happening in GFP.
Then Tobias Meyer’s group actually exploited this for what was the first 
photo-activated pulse-chase experiment, where they used wild-type GFP and 
focused UV light to enhance the brightness of GFP in a certain part of the cell, 
and then watched how those proteins go to other parts of the cell [34] (Figure 
13B). The following year, W.E. was able to show the same phenomenon with Rob 
Dickson in GFP at the single molecule level [35] (Figure 13C). Then, around 
2000, George Patterson in Jennifer Lippincott-Schwartz’s group at NIH was very 
FIGURE 13.  The development of photoactivatable GFP. (A) UV-visible double absorp­
tion peaks of wt-GFP [33]. (B) Pulse chase experiment to trace the fate of wt-GFP lo­
cally photoactivated in one region of a cell [34]. (C) Energy state diagram from single 
molecule photoactivation of GFP [35]. (D) Improved on/off contrast ratio of PA-GFP 
[36]. (E) Pulse chase experiment of the relative rates of nuclear and cytosolic diffusion 
of PA-GFP [36].
Single Molecules, Cells, and Super-Resolution Optics
123
interested in following up on what Tobias had done. The problem was that the 
on/off contrast ratio for wild-type GFP was very low, so he applied directed 
mutagenesis and eventually came up with what was called PA-GFP [36]. With 
this, you could turn on the fluorescence of molecules with a much higher con­
trast ratio (Figure 13D), and use them in much better pulse-chase experiments 
(Figure 13E).
In 2005, Harald recommended that we go visit the National High Magnetic 
Field Lab that was headed by our buddy from Bell, Greg Boebinger, so that we 
could meet some guy named Mike Davidson. Mike was a microscopist who had 
made a fortune selling neckties that were emblazoned with photomicrographs 
of cocktail mixes, and he channeled that money into creating the website tuto­
rials for the major microscope companies. He made a lot of money from that, 
and then used that to follow his passion of doing live-cell imaging. Eventually 
he developed a library of 3,500 different fluorescent protein fusions. When we 
visited Mike, Harald and I learned about photo-activated GFP and the other 
photo-activated proteins that had come along. I vividly remember Harald and 
I sitting in the airport in Tallahassee and then both of us being thunderstruck 
when we realized that this idea of being able to turn on molecules one at a time 
was the missing link to make that idea I had pitched 10 years earlier to work.
I had been pursuing another microscope idea at the time [37,38]. We 
dropped that like a hot potato. We thought, this is easy—let’s do it and do it 
now. The problem is that Harald had quit his job a few months before. So now 
you have two guys who are unemployed—how the hell are we going to do this? 
It’s going to take too long to get a grant, too long to get VC funding. So because 
Harald doesn’t burn his bridges as effectively as I do, he was able to take a lot of 
FIGURE 14.  The development of PALM. (A) La Jolla Labs, also known as Harald’s living 
room. (B) The PALM team. Clockwise from upper left: Harald Hess, Mike Davidson, 
George Patterson, and Jennifer Lippincott-Schwartz.
124
The Nobel Prizes
his equipment from Bell. We pulled that out of the storage shed, and put $25,000 
each of our own money into it. Normally you would do it in the garage like Jobs 
and Wozniak, but we were able to put it together in Harald’s living room (Figure 
14A) because he wasn’t married. So there was nobody in the way to prevent that 
from happening. But we knew we had to work fast because this idea was going to 
be ripe and in the air, so we worked around the clock day and night in order to 
do this—or at least Harald worked day and night. I found the couch sometimes 
too comfortable, so Harald would tease me and keep taking pictures of me while 
I was asleep.
We were still missing one thing, though, as you had two physicists who were 
totally naïve about biology. We needed a good partner in that regard. So, shortly 
after the visit to Mike Davidson, I gave a talk at NIH that I wangled after con­
tacting another Bell Labs friend, Rob Tycho. In the talk, I pitched the other 
microscope idea, but I asked—when I’m there could I please, please, please meet 
George Patterson and Jennifer Lippincott-Schwartz?
I took George and Jennifer to lunch and I swore them to secrecy and told 
them the idea that Harald and I were working on. Many people would have 
blown us off because we were two crazy guys who hadn’t published a paper in 
10 years. Jennifer doesn’t think that way, and I owe a lot of my success to her as 
well as Harald. She said, “Fantastic, bring it here.” Great! Now we had the team 
we needed (Figure 14B). After building the instrument in Harald’s living room, 
we packed it up and started working in the darkroom in Jennifer’s lab, which 
was a lot less comfortable.
We started doing experiments very quickly after we brought it in. George 
did all the cell culture, transfections, and molecular biology to try out a whole 
bunch of different protein fusions. We turned down the violet light so low that 
a few molecules at a time would come on. If we summed up those spots, we got 
the diffraction-limited image. But instead, if we found the center of each spot 
first and then plotted those, we started building the PALM image (Figure 15A). 
After 20,000 frames, we went from the diffraction-limit to a super-resolution 
image [39] (Figure 15B). With high enough labeling density you can get down 
to 20 nm resolution in your living room by this technique. It’s a fairly simple 
method.
In a way, Harald and I got lucky, because it wasn’t certain that we’d be able 
to localize enough molecules to meet the Nyquist criterion at very high resolu­
tion. We got lucky in the sense that we found certain photo-activated proteins 
(Figure 16A) and caged dyes (Figure 16B) that had enormous on/off contrast 
ratios. There’s now a lot of work in this field, and I feel many people still don’t ap­
preciate how important that on/off contrast ratio is to get from smushy looking 
Single Molecules, Cells, and Super-Resolution Optics
125
FIGURE 15.  Photoactivated localization microscopy (PALM). (A) Repeated rounds of 
weak photoactivation with violet light activates different subsets of molecules in a speci­
men. Summing their diffraction-limited spots produces a diffraction-limited image (left 
column), but summing the measured centers of all such spots produces the super-reso­
lution PALM image (right column). (B) Diffraction-limited (upper left) and super-res­
olution PALM images in different regions, showing the distribution of transmembrane 
protein CD-63 in a 70 nm section cut through lysosomes in a COS-7 cell [39].
FIGURE 16.  The importance of high molecular on/off contrast. (A) PA-GFP (left), with a 
poor contrast ratio, yields poor resolution in a PALM image of a focal adhesion, due to 
imprecise molecular localizations from surrounding background. The photoactivatable 
fluorescent protein Eos (right), with a high contrast ratio, achieves better resolution [40]. 
(B) Diffraction-limited (left) and higher magnification PALM images (right) of islands 
of high contrast caged Q-rhodamine dye [39], demonstrating that PALM is not limited 
to just fluorescent proteins.
126
The Nobel Prizes
results like that to much crisper results because of the background problems that 
you face [40].
We went from the idea of PALM to having the data for our Science paper that 
got me on this stage today in six months. That’s what we could do because we 
were working alone in a living room, which is a very effective environment. But 
2005 was the luckiest year of my life, and not only because of PALM. In the same 
year, by a different, crazy set of circumstances, I got introduced to Gerry Rubin. 
HHMI (Howard Hughes Medical Institute) was starting to build a freestand­
ing research institution modeled on Bell Labs. The rebirth of Bell Labs caught 
Harald’s and my interest. Gerry was farsighted enough to hire two guys who 
hadn’t published a paper in 10 years—this was before the PALM paper came out. 
And so we went from rags to riches.
Once the institution (Janelia Farm) opened, we went and built the next gen­
eration scopes. I hired postdoc Hari Shroff, Harald hired Senior Scientist Gleb 
Shtengel, and then we went to work. In my group, we focused on applications 
for the first few years. With Jan Liphardt’s group at Berkeley, we looked at che­
motaxis receptors in E. coli [41] (Figure 17A), and were able to show that the 
various cluster sizes you see and their positions along the poles are completely 
predictable in terms of stochastic model of self-assembly, where the proteins are 
randomly inserted in the membrane and then diffuse until they stick to an exist­
ing cluster. We also showed that many proteins, such as those in focal adhesions 
that attach the cell to the substrate, might look colocalized at the diffraction 
limit are definitely not colocalized at high resolution [42] (Figure 17B). With 
Bob Tijan’s group at Janelia, we were able to show a mechanism of gene silenc­
ing, where core promoters (green) are spatially segregated from genes that hug 
up against the nuclear membrane [43] (red, Figure 17C). With Tom Blanpied’s 
group at Maryland we were able to look at live cultured neurons by sptPALM 
(single particle tracking PALM [44]) and show that the actin that gives rise to 
the shapes of dendritic spines is only polymerized at certain discrete locations 
[45].
At the same time, Harald, being the better physicist than I am, built the 
ultimate PALM microscope that uses a three-phase interfereometer he origi­
nally developed in industry to measure the fly height of recording heads above 
a magnetic disk, that has even better sensitivity in z than in x and y [46]. He 
and Gleb then worked with Clare Waterman’s group at NIH to unravel the en­
tire architecture of focal adhesion proteins vertically from the substrate up to 
the actin cytoskeleton [47]. In a recent paper with Jennifer’s group, they were 
able to resolve a question about ESCRT proteins which are involved in HIV 
Single Molecules, Cells, and Super-Resolution Optics
127
budding—whether these act outside of the bud or inside of the bud—and they 
showed that the latter is true [48].
Harald has a lot of background from his time in industry in electron micros­
copy, so he’s also worked at correlating electron microscopy with PALM in three 
dimensions—in one case, looking at mitochondrial nucleoids and their location 
inside of the mitochondria [49], and in another looking at clathrin-coated pits 
[50].
I think a lot of my success is attributable to the fact that I’m a pessimist. I like 
to focus on problems because I think problems are opportunities. Therefore, I’d 
like to say a bit about what are the problems with super-resolution microscopy 
instead of extolling its virtues. First is that, as I said earlier, based on the Nyquist 
criterion you need an insanely high density of labels [51] (Figure 12). These can 
cause overexpression of proteins to get to those levels (Figure 18A), or if you 
use exogenous dyes it’s hard enough to get enough specificity without a bunch 
of background (Figure 18B). Second, ninety-five percent of what we look at in 
super-resolution is fixed cells, but it’s known that chemical fixatives alter the 
FIGURE 17.  Applications of PALM. (A) Chemotaxis receptor clusters in E. coli [41]. (B) 
Two-color diffraction-limited and PALM views of the spatial relationship of vinculin and 
paxillin in focal adhesions [42]. (C) Spatial relationship of core promoters of transcrip­
tion (green) relative to the nuclear membrane (red) at different stages of myogenesis 
[43]. (D) Tracks of actin polymerization in dendritic spines of live cultured neurons [45].
128
The Nobel Prizes
ultrastruture at the nanoscale (Figure 18C), so we have to put an asterisk next to 
almost everything that we learn by chemical fixation. These problems must be 
confronted by all super-resolution methods, not just PALM.
In what I think was a very important innovation a year ago was to get around 
the labeling density problem, Jan Ellenberg’s group studied the nuclear pore. 
Even though it was difficult to get perfect labeling of every structure, by looking 
at thousands of these stereotypical structures, they could do particle averag­
ing techniques borrowed from cryo-electron microscopy, and then were able to 
determine the radial positions of several key proteins in the nuclear pore to less 
than 1 nm by super-resolution optics [52]. There was an ambiguity in the cryo-
EM data as to which way a subunit was oriented inside the pore, and that was 
addressed by super-resolution microscopy in this way. A really great example.
Of course, we heard in Sven Lidin’s introduction that that the real promise of 
super-resolution, though, is the ability and the hope to look at living cells. But it’s 
still largely a promise. Even though there have been technical demonstrations, 
there’s been very little in terms of, I’d say, real biology learned. One problem is 
that if you want to get to higher and higher resolution, you have to collect many 
more photons than you’ve ever had to do at the diffraction limit (Figure 19, 
second column). Another is that life evolved under a solar flux of one-tenth of 
a watt per square centimeter. The super-resolution methods we’re talking about 
FIGURE 18.  Problems in super-resolution. (A) Overexpression of the target protein can 
alter the physiological state of the cell [41]. (B) Exogenously-introduced dyes often have 
limited affinity for the desired target (left, actin cytoskeleton) and high residual back­
ground (right, focal adhesion). (C) Chemical fixation can alter the ultra-structure, as 
seen here in the endoplasmic reticulum, before and after fixation.
Single Molecules, Cells, and Super-Resolution Optics
129
today require intensities anywhere from a gigawatt per square centimeter to a 
kilowatt per square centimeter (third column). You have to ask yourself what 
are you doing to the poor cell when you’re trying to look at it live? Finally, the 
acquisition times of many of these methods (fourth column) are far slower than 
the rate at which dynamics is happening in cells, so you get motion-induced 
artifacts or can’t follow the thing you want to do.
The one technique which can do much better, because it doesn’t offer as 
much resolution gain, is SIM [54] (structured illumination microscopy). It usu­
ally gets only twice beyond the diffraction limit, but it really offers a lot of other 
benefits, particularly for live imaging [55] (Figure 20). It’s a shame that you can’t 
have four people win a Nobel Prize, because I think SIM is totally justified to be 
a part of this.
One of the pioneers of this technology was Swedish native Mats Gustafs­
son, who eventually became my colleague at Janelia, before passing away from a 
brain tumor in 2011. We’ve been working with Mats’ SIM technique for a while 
now, and eventually found ways to push beyond this 100 nm barrier, first to 80 
nm and, with nonlinear SIM [57], down to 60 nm, while still capable of looking 
FIGURE 19.  Problems in live cell super-resolution. Compared to diffraction-limited live 
imaging techniques, the various super-resolution methods [53] require: large increases 
in the amount of the fluorescence the specimen must produce (leading to rapid photo­
bleaching); much higher illumination intensities (leading to rapid phototoxicity); and 
much longer acquisition times (leading to motion-induced artifacts and restricting in­
vestigations to slow dynamic processes).
130
The Nobel Prizes
at the dynamics of living cells. I think PALM is a great tool to image structure 
at the nanoscale, but I think SIM is going to be the real winner for being able to 
look at the dynamics of living cells beyond the diffraction limit.
Despite this, it’s still true that no matter what you do, and no matter what 
method you want to use, the higher the spatial resolution you want to have, 
the more measurements you have to take, which takes more time, and means 
throwing more potentially damaging light at the cell. The moral of the story of 
SIM is that by backing off a bit in terms of the resolution we’re asking for, we can 
learn a lot more about cellular dynamics.
So, what if we back off all the way to the diffraction limit? Why would you 
want to do that? Well, the hallmark of life is that it’s animate. Every living thing 
is a complex thermodynamic pocket of reduced entropy through which mat­
ter and energy is flowing continuously. While structural imaging will always be 
important, a complete understanding of life requires high resolution imaging 
across all four dimensions of space-time at the same time. So another focus 
of my group has been to push in this direction of 4D imaging. Over the last 
10 years, there’s been tremendous growth in light sheet microscopy [58]. We’ve 
adapted to this concept the idea of using non-diffracting beams, and particularly 
optical lattices, which was the crazy idea I was working on before Harald and I 
dropped it for PALM. Adapted instead to light sheet microscopy, now we have 
a wonderful tool to look at high-speed 3D dynamics of everything from single 
molecules to whole embryos over four orders of magnitude of space and time 
by this method, noninvasively, for very long periods of time [59] (Figure 21).
FIGURE 20.  Structured illumination microscopy excels for live imaging. (A) 2D live SIM 
image of the endoplasmic reticulum in an LLC-PK1 cell, taken from a movie of 1800 time 
points at 0.75 sec intervals [56]. (B) 3D live SIM images of mitochondria in a HeLa cell, 
showing internal structure and the dynamics of fission/fusion events [55].
Single Molecules, Cells, and Super-Resolution Optics
131
That got us back, finally, to super-resolution, because in the same year that 
we published the PALM paper, Robin Hochstrasser’s group published a different 
way of doing single-molecule localization, which doesn’t involve photo-activa­
tion, but just the transient binding of molecules to cells [60]. The advantage of 
this method is you can have your whole imaging bath labeled with fluorophores 
that just keep coming, so you have an infinite army of molecules and can get 
higher and higher localization density. By pushing in that direction with our 
lattice light sheet, which allows us to get high signal-to-noise, single molecule 
imaging, even in the background of all of these molecules in the bath, we’ve 
been able to take 3-D localization microscopy up about two orders of magnitude 
in the number of localizations you can get. Plus we can look at much thicker 
samples than with wide-field localization, such as a whole dividing cell about 15 
microns thick, where we localized 300 million distinct molecules.
FIGURE 21.  Rapid, noninvasive 3D live imaging with lattice light sheet microscopy [59]. 
(A) Tracks denoting the plus ends of growing microtubules, color coded by velocity, dur­
ing different stages of mitosis, seen in relationship to chromosomes (orange). (B) Com­
putationally extracted slices at different time points through a dividing LLC-PK1 cell, 
showing the 3D spatial relationship of chromosomes (green), endoplasmic reticulum 
(magneta), and mitochondria (yellow). (C) Rapid 3D shape changes in the protozoan 
Tetrahymena thermophila at 0.31 sec intervals.
132
The Nobel Prizes
The final challenge going forward is how to take cell biology away from 
the cover slip. That’s not where cells evolved, we need to look at them inside 
the whole organism. The problem is that the light rays are scrambled as you go 
in, and so we’re now borrowing adaptive optics techniques first developed by 
astronomers to make ground-based telescopes have resolution as good as or 
better than the Hubble space telescope. Moving deep into the brain of a living 
zebrafish embryo with this adaptive optics technique, we see low resolution and 
weak signal with the adaptive optics off (Figure 22A). That’s what you would see 
with a normal microscope. Then, when we turn the adaptive optics on (Figure 
22B,C), we see the recovered performance when we correct for the aberrations 
and return to diffraction-limited resolution [61]. Such recovery is possible even 
FIGURE 22.  Adaptive optics enables deep imaging at high resolution. (A) Two-photon 
image of membrane-labeled neurons in the spinal cord of a live zebrafish embryo, 72 
hours post fertilization. (B) Same region after adaptive optical correction using direct 
wavefront sensing [61], demonstrating recovery of signal and spatial resolution. (C) 
Adaptive optical correction of a sparse subset of neurons over a large portion of the ze­
brafish brain. (D) In vivo two-photon lateral and axial views of neural processes deep in 
the mouse cortex, before (left) and after (right) adaptive optical correction using indirect 
wavefront sensing [63].
Single Molecules, Cells, and Super-Resolution Optics
133
in the scattering brain tissue of the mouse (Figure 22D) [62–64]. The ultimate 
goal of my group is to try to combine these technologies to be able to look deep 
in a multi-cellular context, to be able to look noninvasively and fast with meth­
ods like lattice light sheet, and then bring in super-resolution techniques such 
as SIM and PALM to then add the high spatial resolution on top of that. At that 
point, I’m done and I’m out of microscopy and I’ll be back into that black phase 
and trying to figure out something else that I want to do.
I’d just like to end with a couple of things. First, there are many, many people 
to thank, but the guy I have to single out is Harald (Hess). I would have flamed 
out of Bell Labs in my first few years if I hadn’t latched onto him as a friend and a 
mentor. There’s no way I would’ve had the courage to pursue PALM on my own 
without him by my side. One of the bittersweet things about winning this award 
is not having him here by my side up on the stage. But I feel this award is very 
much as much his as it is mine.
The last thing I would like to say is a lot of what you heard this morning, like 
in Shuji Nakamura’s talk and Stefan Hell’s talk, and my talk, is about taking risks. 
People are always exhorted to take risks, and that’s fine. But you’re hearing that 
from guys whose risks paid off. It’s not a risk unless you fail most of the time. 
And so I’d like to dedicate my talk to all of the unknown people out there in any 
walk of life who have gambled their fortunes, their careers, and their reputations 
to take a risk but, in the end, failed. I’d just like to say that they should remember 
that it’s the struggle itself that is its own reward, and the satisfaction that you 
knew that you gave everything you had to make the world a better place. Thank 
you for your time.
REFERENCES
1.	 Lewis, A., Isaacson, M., Harootunian, A., Muray, A., “Development of a 500Å spa­
tial resolution light microscope,” Ultramicroscopy 13, 227–232 (1984).
2.	 Betzig, E., Harootunian, A., Lewis, A., Isaacson, M., “Near-field diffraction by a slit: 
implications for superresolution microscopy,” Appl. Opt. 25, 1890–1900 (1986).
3.	 Betzig, E. Lewis, A., Harootunian, A., Isaacson, M., Kratschmer, E., “Near-field 
scanning optical microscopy: development and biophysical applications,” Biophys. 
J. 49, 269–279 (1986).
4.	 Hamill, O.P., Marty, A., Neher, E., Sackmann, B., Sigworth, F.J., “Improved patch-
clamp techniques for high-resolution current recording from cells and cell-free 
membrane patches,” Pflügers Arch. 391, 85–100 (1981).
5.	 Ash, E.A., Nicholls, G., “Super-resolution aperture scanning microscope,” Nature 
237, 510–512 (1972).
6.	 Synge, E.H., “A suggested method for extending microscopic resolution into the 
ultra-microscopic region,” Phil. Mag. 6, 356–358 (1928).
134
The Nobel Prizes
7.	 Lukosz, W., “Optical systems with resolving powers exceeding the classical limit,” J. 
Opt. Sci. Am. 56, 1463–1472 (1966).
8.	 Lukosz, W., “Experiments on superresolution imaging of a reduced object field,” J. 
Opt. Sci. Am. 57, 163–169 (1967).
9.	 Images courtesy of Dr. Mehdi Vaez-Iravani, Applied Materials, Inc.
10.	 Betzig, E., Isaacson, M., Lewis, A., “Collection mode near-field scanning optical 
microscopy,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 51, 2088–2090 (1987)
11.	 Betzig, E., Non-destructive optical imaging of surfaces with 500Å resolution, Ph.D. 
Thesis, Cornell University (1988).
12.	 Betzig, E., Trautman, J.K., Harris, T.D., Weiner, J.S., Kostelak, R.L., “Breaking the 
diffraction barrier: optical microscopy on a nanometric scale,” Science 251, 1468–
1470 (1991).
13.	 Betzig, E., Finn, P.L., Weiner, J.S., “Combined shear force and near-field scanning 
optical microscopy,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 2484–2486 (1992).
14.	 Betzig, E., Trautman, J.K., “Near-field optics: microscopy, spectroscopy, and surface 
modification beyond the diffraction limit,” Science 257, 189–195 (1992).
15.	 Betzig, E., Trautman, J.K., Wolfe, R., Gyorgy, E.M., Finn, P.L., Kryder, M.H., Chang, 
C.H., “Near-field magneto-optics and high density data storage,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 
61, 142–144 (1992),
16.	 Trautman, J.K., Macklin, J.J., Brus, L.E., Betzig, E., “Near-field spectroscopy of single 
molecules at room temperature,” Nature 369, 40–42 (1994).
17.	 Hwang, J., Tamm, L.K., Böhm, C., Ramalingham, T.S., Betzig, E., Edinin, M., 
“Nanoscale complexity of phospholipid monolayers investigated by near-field scan­
ning optical microscopy,” Science 270, 610–614 (1995).
18.	 Betzig, E., Chichester, R.J., Lanni, F., Taylor, D.L., “Near-field fluorescence imaging 
of cytoskeletal actin,” Bioimaging 1, 129–135 (1993).
19.	 Moerner, W.E., Kador, L., “Optical detection and spectroscopy of single molecules 
in a solid,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 2535–2538 (1989).
20.	 Orrit, M., Bernard, J., “Single pentacene molecules detected by fluorescence excita­
tion in a p-Terphenyl crystal,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2716–2719 (1990).
21.	 Shera, E.B., Seitzinger, N.K., Davis, L.M., Keller, R.A., Soper, S.A., “Detection of 
single fluorescent molecules,” Chem. Phys. Lett. 174, 553–557 (1990).
22.	 Rigler, R., Widengren, J., “Ultrasensitive detection of single molecules by fluores­
cence correlation spectroscopy,” BioScience 3, 180–183 (1990).
23.	 Betzig, E., Chichester, R.J., “Single molecules observed by near-field scanning opti­
cal microscopy,” Science 262, 1422–1425 (1993).
24.	 Bethe, H.A., “Theory of diffraction by small holes,” Phys. Rev. 66, 163–166 (1944).
25.	 Hess, H.F., Betzig, E., Harris, T.D., Pfeiffer, L.N., West, K.W., “Near-field spectros­
copy of the quantum constituents of a luminescent system,” Science 264, 1740–1745 
(1994).
26.	 Betzig, E., “Proposed method for molecular optical imaging,” Opt. Lett. 20, 237–239 
(1995).
27.	 van Oijen, A.M., Köhler, J., Schmidt, J., Müller, M., Brakenhoff, G.J., “Far-field fluo­
rescence microscopy beyond the diffraction limit,” JOSA A 16, 909–915 (1999).
Single Molecules, Cells, and Super-Resolution Optics
135
28.	 Qu, X., Wu, D., Mets, L., Scherer, N.F., “Nanometer-localized multiple single-mole­
cule fluorescence,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 11298–11303 (2004).
29.	 Gordon, M.P., Ha, T., Selvin, P.R., “Single-molecule high-resolution imaging with 
photobleaching,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 6462–6465 (2004).
30.	 Heilmann, M., Herten, D.P., Heintzmann, R., Cramer, C., Müller, C., et al., “High-
resolution colocalization of single dye molecules by fluorescence lifetime imaging 
microscopy,” Anal. Chem. 74, 3511–3517 (2002).
31.	 Lidke, K., Rieger, B., Jovin, T., Heintzmann, R., “Superresolution by localization of 
quantum dots using blinking statistics,” Opt. Express 13, 7052–7062 (2005).
32.	 Chalfie, M., Tu, Y., Euskirchen, G., Ward, W.W., Prasher, D.C., “Green fluorescen 
protein as a marker for gene expression,” Science 263, 802–805 (1994).
33.	 Chattoraj, M., King, B.A., Bublitz, G.U., Boxer, S.G., “Ultra-fast excited state dynam­
ics in green fluorescent protein: multiple states and proton transfer.” Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 93, 8362–8367 (1996).
34.	 Yokoe, H., Meyer, T., “Spatial dynamics of GFP-tagged proteins investigated by local 
fluorescence enhancement,” Nat. Biotech. 14, 1252–1256 (1996).
35.	 Dickson, R.M., Cubitt, A.B., Tsien, R.Y., Moerner, W.E., “On/off blinking and 
switching behavior of single molecules of green fluorescent protein,” Nature 388, 
355–358 (1997).
36.	 Patterson, G.H., Lippincott-Schwartz, J., “A photoactivable GFP for selective photo­
labeling of proteins and cells,” Science 297, 1873–1877 (2002).
37.	 Betzig, E., “Sparse and composite coherent lattices,” Phys. Rev. A 71, 063406 (2005).
38.	 Betzig, E., “Excitation strategies for optical lattice microscopy,” Opt. Express 13, 
3021–3036 (2005).
39.	 Betzig, E., Patterson, G.H., Sougrat, R., Lindwasser, O.W., Olenych, S., et al., 
“Imaging intracellular fluorescent proteins at nanometer resolution,” Science 313, 
1642–1645 (2006).
40.	 H. Shroff, H. White, E. Betzig, “Photoactivated localization microscopy (PALM) of 
adhesion complexes,” Curr. Protocols in Cell Biol. 4.21.1–4.21.27 (2008).
41.	 Greenfield, D., McEvoy, A.L., Shroff, H., Crooks, G.E., Wingreen, N.S., Betzig, E., 
Liphardt, J., “Self-organization of the Escherichia coli chemotaxis network imaged 
with super-resolution light microscopy,” PLoS Biol. 7, e1000137 (2009).
42.	 Shroff, H., Galbraith, C.G., Galbraith, J.A., White, H., Gillette, J., Olenych, S., 
Davidson, M.W., Betzig, E., “Dual-color superresolution imaging of genetically 
expressed probes within individual adhesion complexes,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 104, 
20308–20313 (2007).
43.	 Yao, J., Fetter, R.D., Hu, P., Betzig, E., Tijan, R., “Subnuclear segregation of genes and 
core promotor factors in myogenesis,” Genes Dev. 25, 569–580 (2011).
44.	 Manley, S., Gillette, J.M., Patterson, G.H., Shroff, H., Hess, H.F., et al., “High-denisty 
mapping of single molecule trajectories with photoactivated localization micros­
copy,” Nat. Methods 5, 155–157 (2008).
45.	 Frost, N.A., Shroff, H., Kong, H., Betzig, E., Blanpied, T.A., “Single-molecule dis­
crimination of discrete perisynaptic sites of actin filament assembly within den­
dritic spines,” Neuron 67, 86–99 (2010).
136
The Nobel Prizes
46.	 Shtengel, G., Galbraith, J.A., Galbriath, C.G., Lippincott-Schwartz, J., Gillette, J.M, 
et al., “Interferometric fluorescent super-resolution microscopy resolves 3D cellular 
ultrastructure,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 3125–3130 (2009).
47.	 Kanchanawong, P., Shtengel, G., Pasapera, A.M., Ramko, E.B., Davidson, M.W., 
Hess, H.F., Waterman, C.M., “Nanoscale architecture of integrin-based cell adhe­
sions,” Nature 468, 580–584 (2010).
48.	 Van Engelenburg, S.B., Shtengel, G., Sengupta, P., Waki, K., Jamik, M., et al., 
“Distribution of ESCRT machinery at HIV assembly sites reveals virus scaffolding 
of ESCRT subunits,” Science 343, 653–656 (2014).
49.	 Kopek, B.G., Shtengel, G., Xu, C.S., Clayton, D.A., Hess, H.F., “Correlative 3D super­
resolution fluorescence and electron microscopy reveal the relationship of mito­
chondrial nucleoids to membranes,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 6136–6141 
(2012).
50.	 Sochacki, K.A., Shtengel, G., van Engelenburg, S.B., Hess, H.F., Taraska, J.W., 
“Correlative super-resolution fluorescence and metal replica transmission electron 
microscopy,” Nat. Methods 11, 305–308 (2014).
51.	 Shroff, H., Galbraith, C.G., Galbraith, J.A., Betzig, E., “Live-cell photoactivated 
localization microscopy of nanoscale adhesion dynamics,” Nat. Methods 5, 417–423 
(2008).
52.	 Szymborska, A., de Marco A., Daigle N., Cordes, V.C., Briggs, J.A., Ellenberg, J., 
“Nuclear pore scaffold structure analyzed by super-resolution microscopy and par­
ticle averaging,” Science 341, 655–658 (2013).
53.	 Schermelleh, L., Heintzmann, R., Leonhardt, H., “A guide to super-resolution fluo­
rescence microscopy,” J. Cell Biol. 190, 165–175 (2010).
54.	 Gustafsson, M.G., “Surpassing the lateral resolution limit by a factor of two using 
structured illumination microscopy,” J. Microsc. 198, 82–87 (2000).
55.	 Shao, L., Kner, P., Rego, E.H., Gustafsson, M.G.L., “Super-resolution 3D micros­
copy of live whole cells using structured illumination,” Nat. Methods 8, 1044–1046 
(2011).
56.	 Image courtesy of Dr. Dong Li, Janelia Research Campus, HHMI
57.	 Rego, E.H., Shao., L., Macklin, J.J., Winoto, L., Johansson, G.A., et al., “Nonlinear 
structured-illumination microscopy with a photoswitchable protein reveals cellular 
structures at 50-nm resolution,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, E135–E143 (2012).
58.	 Huisken, J., Swoger, J., Del Bebe, F., Wittbrodt, J., Stelzer, E.H., “Optical sectioning 
deep inside live embryos by selective plane illumination microscopy,” Science 305, 
1007–1009 (2004).
59.	 Chen, B-C, Legant, W.R., Wang, K., Shao, L., Milkie, D.E., et al., “Lattice light sheet 
microscopy: imaging molecules to embryos at high spatiotemporal resolution,” 
Science 346, 1257998 (2014).
60.	 Sharonov, A., Hochstrasser, R.M., “Wide-field subdiffraction imaging by accumu­
lated binding of diffusing probes,” Proc Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 18911–18916 
(2006).
61.	 Wang, K., Milkie, D.E., Saxena, A., Engerer, P., Misgeld, T., et al., “Rapid adaptive 
optical recovery of optimal resolution over large volumes,” Nat. Methods 11, 625–
628 (2014).
Single Molecules, Cells, and Super-Resolution Optics
137
62.	 Ji, N., Milkie, D.E., Betzig, E., “Adaptive optics via pupil segmentation for high reso­
lution imaging in biological tissues,” Nat. Methods 7, 141–147 (2009).
63.	 Ji, N., Sato, T.R., Betzig, E., “Characterization and adaptive optical correction of 
aberrations during in vivo imaging in the mouse cortex,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
109, 22–27 (2012).
64.	 Wang, C., Liu, R., Milkie, D.E., Sun, W., Tan, Z., et al., “Multiplexed aberration mea­
surement for deep tissue imaging in vivo,” Nat. Methods 11, 1037–1040 (2014).
Portrait photo of Eric Betzig by photographer Alexander Mahmoud.
