Spatial Data-Management 
Dr. Richard A. Bolt 
Principal Research Scientist 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Acknowledgments 
1 
Realization of our spatial data- 
management project derives from many 
minds and hands. 
I 
The Architecture Machine Group at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
both as a collection of individuals and as 
a creative ambiance, generated the 
essential environment in which such an 
investigation could thrive. There does 
indeed operate the "spirit of a place," dif- 
ficult to define, undeniable when present. 
Systems implementation of spatial 
data-management system concepts was 
carried out under the leadership of 
Mr. William C. Donelson, who has per- 
formed throughout with exceptional 
initiative and ingenuity. 
The energy and vision of Dr. Craig Fields 
of the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency's Office of Cybernetics 
Technology provided extraordinarily vig- 
orous and profitable sponsor interaction. 
We are all appreciative of his perceptive 
support. 
My personal gratitude extends especially 
to Professor Nicholas Negroponte, Prin- 
cipal Investigator, whose elan and imagi- 
nation has touched every aspect of this 
enterprise, indeed made it possible. 
Richard A. Bolt 
Contents 
The Concept 
The Setting 
Finding Data 
Perusing Data 
What We Learned 
Future Directions 
Prologue 
Such startling advances and cost reduc- 
tions are occurring in microelectronics 
that we believe future systems will not be 
characterized by their memory size or 
processing speed. Instead, the human 
interface will become the major measure, 
calibrated in very subjective units, so 
sensory and personalized that it will be 
evaluated by feelings and perceptions. 
Is it easy to use? Does it feel good? Is it 
pleasurable? 
It is this interface that will bring com- 
puters directly to generals, presidents of 
companies, and six-year-old children. 
Thus, we ask the reader of this report to 
think about its contents in two ways. One 
is to judge the specific value of spatial 
constructs for nonspatial data. The other 
is to appreciate the general intention of 
making sound, visual, and tactile inter- 
faces to serve conjointly as the modes 
and media of interaction with a comput- 
ing resource, at once transparent and 
ubiquitous. Such quality is no longer a 
luxury but a requirement. 
Nicholas Negroponte 
I 
---A 1 
Theconcept 
The basis of spatial data-management is 
accessing a data item by going to where 
it is rather than referencing it by name. 
Consider what occurs when you retrieve 
a book in your home library. You look at 
the left-hand bookcase, second shelf 
from the top, say, and scan about two- 
thirds down the shelf for a certain book 
spine. Thus, the book is located not by its 
title but by its customary site in a space 
defined by other books and the book- 
case itself. 
Consider how people ordinarily find 
items on their desk tops: the appoint- 
ment book is up and to the right; the tele- 
phone is in the lower right corner; high 
priority memos are kept in an "in" box 
immediately to the left of the desk blotter; 
less urgent items are in the file folder, top 
middle of desk; and so forth. 
The person who uses this desk has 
organized the layout of items in a more or 
less systematic way. He or she refers to 
them constantly throughout the working 
day: reaching in that direction, that far, 
up, down, to the right, to the left. Through 
this activity, a mental image of the layout 
of the desk is elaborated in the "mind's 
eye." Additionally, through constant tac- 
tile interaction with the items, reaching for 
and touching them, a "motor memory" of 
where things are arises as well. A script 
for the act of retrieval becomes encoded 
into the musculature, as it were, accord- 
ing to where the item is located. 
The practical importance of this spatial 
principle of organization is illustrated 
when someone happens to disturb our 
familiar arrangement of things. Perhaps 
some well-meaning soul tries to tidy up 
our seemingly chaotic desk top. Rather 
than being a benefit, the now "well- 
organized" desk is for us an organiza- 
tional disaster: the former "messy" 
arrangement was a familiar and well trav- 
eled ground whereupon we could go 
directly to what we wanted. Such a loss 
of a familiar spatial layout can impress 
upon us the extent to which we take this 
subtle but powerful principle of organiza- 
tion for granted in our daily lives. 
An even more striking instance of the role 
of spatiality in common experience is the 
coherence and persistence of "imagery." 
Two individuals, arguing a topic in front of 
a blackboard, will refer each other to dia- 
grams, equations, and terms on the 
basis of where they had been written, 
even long after they have been erased! 
It is surprising how pervasive the under- 
lying notion of spatiality is, even in sym- 
bolic modes of thought. Consider a file of 
three-by-five notecards, organized 
alphabetically, but without letter tabs 
showing. "Filed under the letter R" trans- 
lates into a tactile estimate of how far 
down the row of cards we must reach. 
The same holds true for a dictionary with- 
out thumb indexes. When we want to 
look up a word beginning with the letter 
R, we "guesstimate" where we should 
open the pages of the book to begin our 
search. Thus, R is somehow a relative 
distance, as well as a letter. There is 
more spatiality implicit in what is ordinar- 
ily thought of as symbolic retrieval than 
we may realize. 
In summary, it is precisely the insight 
about how we tend to retrieve items from 
desk tops, from files and bookshelves, 
even from erased blackboards, that lies 
at the heart of the spatial data manage- 
ment concept: we find items on the basis 
of a more or less definite sense of their 
location in a familiar space, which space 
may be actually present or remembered. 
This well-evolved human ability to 
organize information spatially remains 
essentially untapped in the realm of 
computer-based information handling. 
Typically, in such systems, retrieval on a 
symbolic or name basis is the norm, and 
must be the norm because the conven- 
tional keyboard interface is too limited a 
channel, the wrong mode and medium, 
to begin to offer the user a direct, palpa- 
ble sense of spatiality. 
In the spring of 1976, the Architecture 
Machine Group at MIT proposed to the 
Cybernetics Technology Office of the 
United States Defense Advanced Re- 
search Projects Agency (DARPA) a pro- 
gram of research organized under the 
title "Augmentation of Human Resources 
in Command and Control through Multi- 
ple Media Man-Machine Interaction." 
Intrinsic to the ensemble of studies out- 
lined in the proposal was a study recall- 
ing the ancient principle of using spatial 
cueing as an aid to performance and 
memory: the "Simonides Effect." 
Simonides was a poet of ancient Greece 
famous for his ability to give long recita- 
tions entirely from memory. His secret, 
which as a teacher of rhetoric he shared 
with his students, was to tie each suc- 
cessive part of a to-be-remembered 
poem or speech to a specific locale 
within the mental floor plan of either an 
actual or imagined temple. Around the 
floor of the temple were statues, serving 
to augment the imagery of specific 
niches or corners. 
To commit to memory a long poem or 
speech, the orator would pause in his 
imagination before the threshold, and 
with this mental image in mind, commit 
the introductory remarks to memory. 
Then, for each successive subsection of 
the talk to be given, the orator would 
mentally walk from place to place within 
the temple, rehearsing the appropriate 
material before some specific piece of 
statuary. The resultant path about the 
temple would then serve as a mental 
schema to organize the speech upon its 
eventual recitation, the speech being 
retrieved and reconstructed during ora- 
tion by way of an imaginary tour from 
statue to statue around the temple floor. 
4nother study outlined in that same pro- 
posal looked to the exploitation of virtual 
spatiality as a matrix for organizing infor- 
mation: the "virtual bulletin board." This 
term refers to the formulation of an 
implicit space which occupies no "real" 
space but can nonetheless contain a 
great deal, as well as offer the same 
spatial organizational cueing as to the 
whereabouts of material that real work 
surfaces do. The tacit size of a "field" of 
information to be portrayed in computer 
graphics need not be limited by the size 
of the physical display. Since it is virtual, 
its apparent size and graphic organiza- 
tion are open to user definition in the 
unconstrained sense of Ivan Sutherland's 
characterization of a computer display 
as "a window on Alice's Wonderland" 
("Computer Displays," Scientific Ameri- 
can, June 1970). 
These two spatial themes specifically 
resonated with Dr. Craig Fields, Senior 
Program Manager in the Cybernetics 
Technology Office. As a result we started 
to explore the potentialities of a spatially 
oriented data management system, "a 
multidimensional window into data." The 
outcome has been that over the past two 
years, under the aegis of DARPA, the 
Architecture Machine Group has been 
experimenting with the creation of an 
information management system whose 
distinguishing characteristic is that it 
exploits the user's sense of spatiality for 
purposes of organizing and retrieving 
data: a spatial data-management 
system, or SDMS. 
This page: The monitor to 
the user's right as seen over 
the arm of the user's chair. 
Fingertips of user's hand are 
on the small joystick. On the 
chair's am, immediately in 
front of user's hand is a small 
touch-sensitive pad ready for 
capture of fingertip gesture 
input The other arm d the 
chair is similarly instrumented. 
Opposite page: The absence 
of any desk-like appur- 
tenances situated in front d 
the user lends a tone of imme- 
diacy and directness to inter- 
action with data. At the upper 
right comer of the large 
screen, one of the sound 
system'sspeakersisdearly 
visibk. 
The lapboard and stylus are 
not featured in these illustra- 
tions. For a view d them, see 
illustration at top d page 48. 
The Setting 
The setting of our experimental version of 
SDMS is a multiple media information 
place. It can be construed as an image 
of an office of the future. 
The physical aspects of our "media 
room" are easily described. The media 
room is about the size of a personal 
office. The focal point of the room is a 
wall-sized display screen. Directly in 
front of this large screen is an instru- 
mented Eames chair. On either arm of 
the chair is a small, pressure-sensitive 
"joystick." Adjacent to the joystick on 
each arm is a two-inch-square touch- 
sensitive pad. Also associated with the 
chair as complementary instrumentation 
is a ten-inch-square data tablet, with sty- 
lus; the tablet is upholstered to serve as a 
lap pad. This tablet bears added instru- 
mentation: a small microphone mounted 
at its top edge to allow voice input. 
Two small television monitors are situated 
one on either side of the chair. Each of 
these monitors is touch-sensitive so that 
the user can point to data or can input 
gestures indicating actions to be taken. 
Finally, eight loudspeakers provide 
sound output for the media room. Four of 
them are placed around the perimeter of 
the large-format display to the user's 
front. The remaining four are correspon- 
dingly arrayed to the user's rear. Octa- 
phonic sounds can be presented to 
the user as coming from various appar- 
ent directions in the space of the room, in 
coordination with actions on the visual 
display. The rate of playback is variable 
so that dynamic sound/motion effects, 
such as Doppler shifts, may be achieved. 
We call these "sound-synch graphics." 
Notice that there is a conspicuous, but 
not mandatory, absence of a keyboard. 
The configuration described is one 
which evolved through previous work for 
the Off ice of Naval Research (Contract 
number 0014-75-C-0460) and over the 
course of our experimentation, but this 
precise ensemble is certainly not the only 
one that might have been adopted. The 
kernel notion of managing data spatially 
is not necessarily tied to a room-sized 
terminal into which a user goes versus a 
desk-top arrangement in front of which 
he or she sits. 
A television projector in the 
room adjacent to the media 
room backprojects upon the 
large screen to the user's 
front 
The relaxed ambiance conveyed by the 
presence of a chair of the Eames genre 
in lieu of something more utilitarian is 
intentional. however. It reflects convic- 
tions and positions about the nature and 
tone of human-computer interaction that 
we have attempted to actualize in the 
media room setting. Just as the hands- 
on immediacy of touch-sensitive pads 
suggests a literal impatience with intan- 
gibles about data, so the decor as epito- 
mized in the selection of the style of chair 
rebuts the premise that system users 
must live in severe, ascetic settings. 
(See the Prologue to this report.) 
We have attempted to create an interface 
which is not a tiny, narrow-band "port- 
hole" into an information bank, that bank 
itself an abstractly addressed set of 
I 
intangibles. Rather, we have attempted 
radically to recast the setting as an "infor- 
mational surround" wherein the user is 
directly engaged with data bodied forth 
in vision, sound, and touch, data inhabit- 
ing a spatially definite "virtual" world that 
can be interactively explored and navi- 
gated. 
I 
Finding Data 
Spatial data-management involves the 
creation of a plausible and commodious 
"virtual" space at the computer interface, 
together with a way of getting around in 
that space quickly and easily. 
The spatial world of SDMS consists of a 
single plane. This surface, called "Data- 
land," is presented to the user in two 
aspects: 
1 
it is continuously visible to the user in its 
entirety in an "aerial," top-on view dis- 
played on one of the monitors, arbitrarily 
situated to the user's right, called the 
"world view" monitor; and 
2 
simultaneously, a small subsector of the 
Dataland surface is displayed on the ten- 
foot diagonal screen to the user's front, 
vastly enlarged and with appreciable 
gain in detail. 
- -  - 
The logical relationship between these 
two views is akin to a mapping key, which 
places a particular image within a larger 
locale. The large screen effectively func- 
tions as a "window" and, as we shall see 
later, a "magnifying glass" onto Dataland. 
The "world view" monitor serves specifi- 
cally as a navigational aid to the user in 
getting around Dataland. The large dis- 
play of whatever portion of Dataland is so 
"close up" that the user would get lost 
easily if there were not always on view a 
map of the entire Dataland world. A 
small, highlighted, "you-are-here" rec- 
tangle on that display shows the user at 
all times the position of the large-screen 
window on Dataland. 
Dataland as it appears on the 
"world view" monitor to the 
user's right. Notice highlighted 
"youarehere" rectangle sit 
uated wer a map of north- 
eastern United States located 
in upper-left region of Data 
land. "You-are-here" marker 
is translucent, under joystick 
control, and indicates the 
region of Dataland visible on 
the large screen to user's 
front 
To illustrate how an actual Dataland 
might appear to a user seated in the 
media room's control chair, let us assume 
a database already created. In practice, 
individuals would design and structure 
their own Datalands according to per- 
sonal preferences, tasks, and needs, just 
as the contents and organization of 
anyone's desk top come to reflect some 
combination of job requirements and 
individual taste. 
Illustrations on this page and 
the next depict relationship 
betweeen "world view" mon- 
itor and the Large screen. On 
Dataland view, this page, the 
transiucent "you-ate-here" 
marker resides aver lower- 
kfkmost item. The item, a 
calendar, appears on the 
large screen, much magni- 
fied and with finer detail 
(opposite page). 
Now, what is visible to the user on the 
surface of this example of Dataland? 
Items of various sorts may be seen. 
Some are small photographs: pictures of 
animals, of people, even a miniature 
LANDSAT satellite photo of part of New 
England. Other items look like small 
maps. We see what appear to be book 
covers, television sets, a business letter, 
even a small image of an electronic 
hand-held calculator. Yet other items 
resemble emblems or "glyphs," not dis- 
similar from business logos. 
How does one get around in such an 
I 
informational landscape? 
i' 
1 
User control of navigation around Data- i 
land is provided by "joystick" action. The 
! 
small joystick in the right arm of the chair 
permits a helicopter-like flight over the 
surface. The joystick itself does not 
deflect, but responds to pressure. It is 
"self-centering" in that it registers zero 
deflection when not touched. Push the 
stick "away" from you and the helicop- 
, 
tering motion over Dataland is north, or 
toward the top of the screen. Pull the joy- 
stick toward you and motion is south. 
Pressure to the right and left will direct 
you east or west. 
I 
The apparent rate of travel is proportional 
to the pressure the user exerts on the joy- 
stick. At maximum pressure, it takes 
about twenty seconds to travel across 
Dataland, as illustrated in this example 
database, from its eastern to western 
borders. 
During flight, the user is given visual 
feed back of two kinds: 
1 
movement of the material across the 
"window" of the large screen; 
2 
tracking of the path of the window by the 
highlighted rectangle on the auxiliary 
monitor. 
Let us say that you push the joystick to 
the right and away from you. This action 
will set you helicoptering across Data- 
land to the "northeast." On the big screen 
you will see material scudding by in a 
southwesterly direction; that is, the intui- 
tive sense of movement will be that of a 
window looking out over a world passing 
by below. Simultaneously, the highlighted 
rectangle on the auxiliary view at your 
right hand will track your northeastward 
progress. 
Complementing joystick control of flight 
over Dataland is "teleporation" by direct 
touch. Traversing relatively large dis- 
tances with the joystick can be frustrating; 
for the veteran user, this often represents 
"dead time." Accordingly, the user is 
given the option of indicating where he 
wants to go directly on the touch- 
sensitive "world view." The highlighted 
"you-are-here" rectangle will disappear 
from its current location, to reappear 
centered at the spot indicated by the 
finger touch. On the large screen, the 
"magnified" view of the old location dis- 
appears, to be replaced by the just- 
indicated locale. 
While its specific format is much a per- 
sonal matter, the graphic layout of Data- 
land can aid navigation significantly. 
First, the directness and simplicity of 
Dataland itself provides a unitary con- 
ceptual substrate: a large plane con- 
jointly given via two correlated views on 
the small and large screens. Second, the 
absolute and relative location of objects 
and items is evident within the frame of 
the Dataland world. Absolute locational 
cues are provided by the main "frame" of 
Dataland: the fact of edges, corners, up- 
down and left-right directionality. Any 
item is ~erceived and remembered in the 
contexi of and juxtaposed with certain 
other items. Third, the use of local back- 
ground colors affords a further visual 
sense of neighborhood, grouping certain 
items together. Color backgrounding 
can, of course, be "nested," color back- 
ground upon color background, as it is in 
our "rogues' gallery" of Architecture 
Machine Group personnel in the south- 
east corner of Dataland. Within the over- 
all rectangular area there is further group 
intraorganization indicated by back- 
ground colors. 
"Teleportation" about Data- 
land by direct touch: At top, 
user touch indicates item 
within a group with orange 
background as what he 
wants to go to on Dataland. 
This item, a "book cover", 
fills screen to user's front as 
user next indicates a location 
to the right and somewhat 
lower (middle). "You-are- 
here" marlcer immediately 
moves to this new locale, 
and large screen view now 
bears magnified view of the 
newly selected item, a sche 
rnatic floor plan of a 
museum. 
4 
Faceshichareunrecogniz- 
The level of visual detail in items pro- 
able and tiny on Dataland as 
I seen on the "WOII~ view" 
vided on the auxiliary world-map view 
1 
monitor become detailed and 
deserves ~ 0 ~ m e n t .  
In evervdav life, we 
1 , 
dear 
O" the whenzoomedinupon 
large SC~-. 
need some minimal amount of k u a l  
i 
detail to identify an item that we have 
never seen before. If an item is small in 
size, or small because distant, it can lack 
sufficient shape or figural detail to enable 
us to discern what it is. However, recog- 
nition of already familiar items requires 
less figural detail. We readily recognize 
friends way down a street, at distances 
where visual acuity is insufficient to pro- 
vide facial details. We recognize them on 
the basis of gait, relative size, general 
shape or "visual envelope," as well as by 
context, that is, by expecting a figure 
with such-and-such-color clothes to 
appear in such-and-such a place. 
Or, take the example of a Coca-Cola sign 
down the street. At a distance at which we 
cannot distinguish the individual letters 
of the sign, we yet recognize it as being a 
"Coke" sign. The fact that it appears over 
a drugstore or variety store supports 
contextually this act of recognition. 
A similar principle holds in the area of 
audition. On a certain popular television 
game show ("Name That Tune"), per- 
sons who are particularly well informed 
about popular music as well as alert can 
sometimes identify ("recognize") a song 
on the basis of no more than its first two 
or three notes. Consider, for example, the 
first two notes of the melody "Auld Lang 
Syne." The clue that the song about to be 
heard is associated with a holiday, the 
distinctive tonal interval of the first two 
notes of the song, can be sufficient to 
define the intersection of context (New 
Year's Eve) and tonalities, as, indeed, 
"Auld Lang Syne." 
The recognition situation, as opposed to 
the identification situation, is what we 
anticipate to be the operating condition 
for the typical user of SDMS. That is, the 
array of highly familiar items in Dataland 
is "searched," not by a deep visual anal- 
ysis of every item before one's view, but 
by relatively "shallow" visual processing, 
quite adequate for the recognition of 
familiar items in familiar places. 
If a user has been working with a certain 
personal Dataland configuration for 
some time, it is reasonable that all that 
should be needed on the auxiliary view 
of Dataland is sufficient detail to recog- 
nize items readily on that surface. With 
constant usage certain items could 
undergo further reduction in visual detail, 
even to the extent of becoming simple 
colored squares, circles, or triangles. 
This extreme represents a "cueing" situ- 
ation, rather than a recognition situation. 
Qualitatively, the figural resolution of 
items in Dataland as they appear on the 
world-map monitor fall in the intermedi- 
ate range on the spectrum: cueing, rec- 
ognition, identification. That is, they serve 
readily for recognition by an accustomed 
user, but not necessarily for identification 
upon a first-time look by a new observer. 
Perceptibility indeed differs somewhat 
from item to item. For example, the 
LANDSAT satellite image does look like 
some bit of geography; but it is not clear 
whether, from a farthest-out view, it is a 
LANDSAT view, a map, or a drawing. 
The user who knows what it actually is of 
course readily identifies it and refers to it 
as "the LANDSAT photo." Or, consider 
the set of photographs in the southeast 
corner of Dataland. They are sponta- 
neously classifiable as photos, but even 
for those who are personal acquaint- 
ances of the people pictured, the photos 
are ever so slightly too small and unde- 
tailed to permit positive identification 
without zooming in. Nonetheless, it is 
clear from "afar" to any observer that the 
items are in fact photos of faces. 
Sound, too, can be an invaluable naviga- 
tional aid. In SDMS, space as cued by 
sound can have an implicit extent much 
greater than that bounded by the visual 
"window" onto Dataland given by the 
large-screen view. Off-screen voices, 
becoming gradually audible as one 
approaches some item or area, can 
serve to orient and guide. 
Two examples of sounds that we have 
employed include: 
1 
an off-screen voice, in stereo, reciting 
"This is MIT.. .This is MIT.. . ," the voice 
leading the traveler in Dataland first to 
the vicinity of, and then to, a certain 
"glyph" bearing the initials MIT, which 
was the source of the sound; 
2 
a gray telephone with white touch-tone 
buttons (not activated for "dialing," but 
potentially so), which rings louder and 
louder upon approach. 
These and other sounds did much to 
create a sense of "region" and "neigh- 
borhood,'' a feeling of proximity, much as 
the bells, hammerings, traffic noise, and 
playground chatter of the real world fill 
things out. At moments in navigating 
across Dataland, depending upon the 
route taken, sound can be the sole direc- 
tional cue, should one momentarily not 
be consulting the "world view" auxiliary 
monitor but watching the large screen. 
We note in passing that the user is given 
interactive control of the loudness level of 
sound through gesturing upon either of 
the small, touch-sensitive pads on the 
arms of the chair. Circling with the finger- 
tip in a counterclockwise direction atten- 
uates the volume of sound, and a circling 
gesture clockwise causes volume to 
increase. 
With respect to navigation around Data- 
land, we have so far talked only about 
movement over the surface of the plane 
of data at a constant "altitude." How then 
does the user manage to get at the data 
detected at a distance? 
The Northeastern Coast ol 
the United SMes seen from 
afar. A satellite image of the 
New England d i n e  is 
inset at the edge. 
Zoomingin upon Dataland's 
map of Southeast Asia: sue 
cessive images on this page 
depict a monochromatic map 
becoming larger and "block- 
ier" in texture. The image 
then gains both clarity and 
cdor (opposite, top) for 
scrolling about (opposite, 
middle, and bottom). 
While the right-hand joystick guides lat- 
eral and up-down movements, the joy- 
stick mounted in the left arm of the media 
room's control chair permits the user to 
"zoom" in upon Dataland for a closer 
look. Pushing forward on the left-hand 
joystick will cause zooming in; pulling 
back will cause zooming out. Upon 
zooming in, the image of the item on the 
large screen gains in size dramatically. 
The relative size of the "you-are-here" 
highlighted rectangle on the "world view" 
auxiliary monitor grows correspondingly 
smaller, yet remains on view so that the 
user will always know his location in the 
spatial context of Dataland. 
For example, on the "world view" auxil- 
iary map, we can recognize a small, 
monochromatic map of Southeast Asia 
located in the western part of Dataland, 
at about mid-latitude. Coming in closer 
upon the map by pressing forward on 
the left-hand joystick makes detail more 
discernible, as well as causing the car- 
tography to gain color. 
Notice that the enlargement of the map 
image takes place in "stages." That is, 
the image upon zooming in becomes 
larger in discrete increments, simultane- 
ously more "blocky" in appearance. At a 
certain point in zooming in, the blocky 
image is replaced by a clear map image 
the same size and in the same register 
as the previous blocky one. 
The increasing " blockiness" of the image 
accompanying the increase in size dur- 
ing zooming in, requiring eventual 
replacement with a clearer image, is a 
consequence of the digital nature of the 
television image and of the way the 
"zoom" effect is achieved. 
In broadcast television, the "information" 
for the image, namely the brightness 
(luminance) and color (chrominance) 
information for each scan line compos- 
ing it, comes over the airwaves as an 
analogue signal. With digital television, 
however, the information which modu- 
lates the image either is generated by 
computer computations or comes 
directly out of the computer's memory 
store. The color television images dis- 
played in SDMS, with important excep- 
tions to be noted later, actually reside as 
stored information in an area of computer 
memory termed a "frame buffer." 
The digital color image in SDMS can be 
conceived of logically as composed of 
an array of tiny dots called "picture 
elements," or "pixels." Each pixel corre- 
sponds to certain numeric values locat- 
ed in addressable slots in the frame 
buffer. Given this mosaic, a ready way to 
blow up the image for a zoom-like effect 
is to repeat (in the sense of "displaying 
again") each picture element, in both the 
horizontal and vertical dimensions of the 
image, first once, then twice, then three 
times, and so forth. The repetition of 
pixels is patterned from center screen 
outward in emulation of a central-axis 
"optical" zoom. The result visually is a 
negatively accelerating rate of image 
expansion. 
The basic Dataland image, as seen from 
the highest "ceiling" or altitude, actually 
incorporates one "repeat" to begin with, 
partly to avoid the rather large visual 
"lurch" inherent in the quadrupling of 
image size that occurs when each pixel 
is first repeated once vertically and hori- 
zontally. One initial "repeat" makes for a 
smoother total effect even though only 
half of the television screen's real resolu- 
tion is being used. 
The increasing "blockiness" of the image 
upon zooming in derives precisely from 
the squarish pattern of repetitions of the 
individual pixels, the basic pixel being 
visually just a small dot of color. To coun- 
teract this side effect of the way we 
achieve zoom effects, the now larger and 
blockier image can be replaced by an 
image of the same size and in the same 
register, but with increased detail and 
clarity. 
In practice, the zoom procedure we have 
adopted calls for the replacement of the 
scaled-up, " blocky" image at about a 
repeat count of seven, so that the loss in 
clarity with increasing blockiness is not 
too great. With successive rounds of 
repeat count incrementing followed by 
image replacements, a zooming in proc- 
ess could be as "magnifying" as one 
wished, the practical limitation being the 
Other techniques of zooming are under 
investigation, in particular interpolative 
zoom, which removes blockiness and 
jumpiness but manifests the same deg- 
radation in resolution. 
On the large screen to the 
user's front, image of William 
Kelley of our laboratory's staff, 
at first small (opposite page), 
becomes larger and "block- 
ier" as the user zooms-in (top 
and middle, this page). At a 
certain point in approach, the 
blocky image is replaced 
(instantaneously) with a 
higher resolution image 
(bottom). 
At a distance, and at low 
resolution, this image on 
Dataland is clearly a letter. 
Letterhead logos, despite 
the coarseness of scale. 
generally can serve as 
reliable cues for sender's 
identity. 
While it might at first seem that such dis- 
continuities in image sharpness during 
zoom can only be disadvantageous, 
there are circumstances in which a lack 
of low-order visual detail followed by the 
sudden introduction of finer detail makes 
good sense in terms of information pre- 
sentation. 
In the upper right, or northeast, corner of 
Dataland is an area allocated to Architec- 
ture Machine Group "correspondence1' 
with our research sponsor, DARPA. 
In this area is a facsimile of a letter, com- 
plete with letterhead and signature. 
When approached, the letter indeed 
looks like a letter but is as yet unreada- 
ble. At a certain threshold nearness, the 
text suddenly gains in clarity and 
becomes perfectly legible. 
To zoom in upon an item of interest is to 
"address" that item for purposes of 
inspection. For some items, simply to 
come up to them will cause them to gain 
not only in size but in information: 
increased detail, finer delineation, color, 
and, in some cases, sound and move- 
ment. To a ~ ~ r o a c h  
them is to "activate" 
them. with other items, some further user 
initiative such as "touch selection" may 
be involved as a part of a more interac- 
tive process of perusal. 
Zoomingin upon the letter 
image results in legible text 
Perusing Data 
lnrmg J 
'9----- 
Logically distinct from finding a certain 
item in Dataland is perusing that item in 
place. Once the user has found the item 
and zoomed in on it, the specific form 
that perusal takes is conditioned by the 
nature of the data. 
In direct contrast to material that is "out 
there," visible, to be developed in full 
simply by approach, are materials which 
need to be "perused," where perusal 
means opening up a volume, starting a 
film clip, selecting part of a set of slides 
to be seen, and so on. The essential idea 
is that the user opens up and develops 
his interchange with the data more or 
less interactively, through direct touch in 
a "hands-on" manner. The dictionary 
sense of "perusal" is that of "survey or 
scrutiny, in some thoroughness or detail." 
It is this engaged quality of person-data 
interchange that we intend by this 
terminology. 
Our notion of perusal includes a class of 
"data types" which, when addressed, 
prove to be unusually rich in motion, 
color, and sound. One of these new data 
types is yet an old and familiar one: 
the "book." 
The user zooms in on what appears from 
afar to be simply a rectangle. At close 
enough range, the color patch gains 
detail in the form of some horizontal 
black rows of "characters" implying a 
printed title. Upon even yet nearer 
approach, the black figures give way to 
readable text, giving the title of the item, 
which is now clearly seen as implying a 
" book-li ke" image. 
The user, of course, knows that the rec- 
tangle is a "book," having put it there in 
the first place. However, if he is a sub- 
scriber to a computer-network-based 
"book of the month" service, and has 
perhaps requested or has a standing 
order for books, the book may be one he 
has yet to see, having just appeared on 
the Dataland surface in a certain area on 
the data plane serving as a "book drop" 
for incoming communications which are 
book-li ke. 
Upon nearest approach, when the image 
of the book is fully addressed in the vis- 
ual sense of filling the large screen, a 
"table of contents" for the book appears 
on the second and so far unused color 
monitor to the user's left. This table-of- 
contents view is one of a class of interac- 
tive "key maps" made available to the 
user as adjuncts to certain data types, to 
permit direct user interaction with the 
data to be perused. 
In this instance, the key map allows user 
access to the interior of the "book" on 
display, exactly as the table of contents 
of a "real" book lets the reader (a) know 
what the book offers by way of topics 
covered, and (b) serves as a "dispatch- 
ing" table to send the reader directly to 
the subsection of the book that is of most 
immediate interest. 
User interacts by touch with 
a "table of contents" key 
map for book-like data types. 
In doswp of this key map 
Wow, note touchable "tabs" 
aligned with heading taglines. 
i 
Upon touch indicating chap 
ter heading of SOUND (top), 
the heading expands (bot- 
tom) to offer subheadings 
under SOUND. 
Notice that the table of contents can 
"expand" to show a finer breakdown of 
content area when the user selects a 
major heading of interest. In concert with 
the activity on the key map monitor 
screen, the main large-screen view will 
"go to" the section of the book selected 
by the user through the interactive 
key map so that the user may read the 
material. 
There is yet further interaction with the 
data type of book: that of turning its 
pages. This action is initiated by a spe- 
cific user action: a page-turning gesture 
given as a right-to-left, top-to-bottom 
stroke on either of the touch-sensitive 
pads on the arms of the user chair. Any 
page can be turned back by a stroke 
across the pad in the opposite direction. 
The accompanying visual action is the 
display of an "animation" of a page actu- 
ally turning. The upper right-hand corner 
of the page on view progressively "lifts" 
away and sweeps leftwards across the 
screen, immediately revealing the new 
page below. 
- 
- - 
- - ~~ 
- -LT~ 
.- 
ASCII TEXT DISPLAY 
This is a page of ASCII text 
c' displayrd by t be new 85 foot system. 
r -  - 
g- fbb font master is stored "off screen' 
start* 
at page 0 of the extended 
- 
memory. k t b e  ASCII t e x t  is parsed, 
eacb character is "moved", via the 
-+g 
microcode. t o  t h e  appropriate spot i n  .g 
tbe c u r r e n t l y  visible space. 
- - 
The f o n t s  a r e  tvo bits per pixel. 
- -  
Associated with each font is a 
l o c a t i o n  t a b l e  giving its 
cooordinates on t h e  invisible 
read-image. 
Also v l t h  t h e  font 1s a 
oaa d i r e n s i o n a l  kerning table. The 
korning t a b l e  is stored i n  prograr 
r y d u r i n g t b e f o r m t t i n g p ~ e  
oL display. 
-: 
?bo page is flipped by scratc 
- -. 
The f o n t s  
Associated ui 
l o c a t i o n  t 
c o o a r d i n a b *  
read-image. 
one dimension 
kerning t a b l e  
Initial page of text (left, top) 
begins to "turn" (left, middle) 
upon user indication (a 
stroke of the finger) on 
touch-sensitive pad on arm 
of user chair. 
The next page of text is 
progressively revealed as 
the "page" edge sweeps 
leftwards, and is almost 
entirely on view near the end 
of the page animation 
sequence (right, bottom). 
The image of the "television 
set" serves as locak marker 
for television data types on 
Dataland. On the tube face of 
the set can be a "program 
guide", or, as in the example 
on the following pages, a pie 
torial label which becomes 
dynamic upon approach. 
The intent is not to give a nostalgic 
impression of the way books used to 
look, like the electric fireplace with plastic 
back-lit logs. The purpose is quite func- 
tional. First, the page is a unit of appre- 
hension of the book; it is a "bite-sized" 
chunk or packet of the material that one 
feels one can take in comfortably, in 
contrast to the stretching-ever-onward, 
rhythmless character of scrolled text. 
Second, the page serves as a progress 
marker through the text in a "milepost" 
sense. With continuous scrolling, such 
natural, discrete units of progress are not 
explicit in the medium, and, if felt neces- 
sary by the reader, must be effortfully 
abstracted, resulting in a more burden- 
some tone to the reading task. 
Thus, the "page-flipper" is not frivolous. It 
provides the user with feedback that a 
page has turned, the directionality of the 
animation corresponding to forward or 
backward. Specifically, it reinstates for 
the user, in the context of the reading of 
computer-television text, the functional 
equivalent of what the fact of the page 
gives to the reader of traditional paged 
printed media: the sense of knowing 
where you are in the material. More gen- 
erally, it is an instance of what we choose 
to term a "media fiducial," a marking 
system, or built-in feature of any medium 
that serves the function of letting you 
know "where you are" based on loca- 
tional cues arising out of the basic struc- 
ture of the medium itself. 
One radical departure from the ordi- 
nary concept of the book, except as 
adumbrated in such page-corner flip- 
animations as this report has in its upper 
left-hand page corners, is the fact that 
while some page illustrations will be still 
slides, other illustrations will be "movies," 
or animated diagrams, with or without 
sound accompaniments. The possibility 
of sound can, upon occasion, permit the 
book to comment upon its own text and 
illustrations, and even read itself to you. 
Another unusual data type residing in 
Dataland is that of television. An instance 
of this is the presence of a "glyph" on the 
Dataland surface which is the image of a 
Sony television. Zoomed in on, the televi- 
sion set becomes very large, its own 
screen filling the large screen directly 
before the user. What is at first a rather 
sketchy black-and-white image on the 
tube face of this "virtual television" is 
then replaced with live action: "Columbo," 
"The Sting," or a documentary on how to 
stop smoking. 
What may be seen on this television set 
in Dataland is anything that can be put 
on television, live or recorded, closed- 
circuit or broadcast. The user could, for 
example, indicate in the context of a ses- 
sion with SDMS that he next wants to view 
the twelve o'clock news, or see a rerun 
of some footage that was taped earlier. 
"television set" on Dataland 
(left column), enlarges the 
televisionset.ssw&to 
become effectivelv as lame 
as the screen to g e  user'; 
-t 
front (right column). The 
"Modcy" digital image 
i 
becomes replaced by a 
dynamic image in cdor 
from videodisc, launching 
into continuous live action 
! 
(oPPosite Page). 
1 
Since recorded sequences that might be 
viewed on the television are processes 
taking place over time, the key map for 
interaction with sequences on the virtual 
television set makes available to the user 
ways of controlling events that are 
oriented over a time span. 
An example of such a key map is shown 
in the accompanying illustration. Central 
to the key map is a "dial," whose circum- 
ference indicates the time span to be 
covered by the entire movie sequence, 
with a pointer hand showing the current 
time in passage. One revolution of this 
semantic clock can be seconds, min- 
utes, or hours. The total time-to-go is dis- 
played by a digital counter on the key 
map; minutes and seconds elapsed are 
also displayed digitally. 
Sliding-bar cursors toward the bottom of 
this key map allow the user to speed up 
or slow down the rate at which material is 
shown, as well as to have it shown in a 
forward or backward sequence. The 
material can be simply a "movie," in 
which case it probably makes little sense 
to show backward slow motion. But if 
the material happens to be an instruc- 
tional movie, for example, about how to 
tie a sailing knot, or do a sleight-of-hand 
card trick, then this interactive ability to 
regulate time can be invaluable. The 
material to be shown in such a format 
can be, in general, any material that can 
be viewed visually and sequentially: 
movies, television, animations, slide 
sequences, as well as any electronic 
product of television mixing and special 
effects. 
User interaction with "dial" 
key map: user sets pace to 
be somewhat slower than 
normal (top, left). Sequence 
is stopped (freeze frame) by 
putting finger on pointer of 
dial (middle), and resumes 
when finger is lmed (bottom, 
right). 
The visual repertoire of our virtual televi- 
sion screen, as well as other "slide col- 
lections" about Dataland, is markedly 
augmented by optical videodisc backup. 
Either side of this laser-scanned disk can 
hold up to 54,000 individual frames. Any 
frame can be individually addressed 
(freeze frame) or arbitrarily selected (ran- 
dom access), or sequences of frames 
can be exhibited forward or backward at 
varying rates. The optical videodisk as 
storage vehicle has a dramatic cost 
impact on SDMS, inasmuch as the 
player costs less than $2500. 
In a more general sense, the television 
"set" is an instance of any of a number of 
virtual "screens" which can reside in the 
geography of Dataland. The type of vis- 
ual symbology or imagery surrounding 
any such screen indicates its usage: a 
"drive-in screen for movies," for example. 
What we are discussing here is a general 
capacity for "filmic" €ypes of data, live 
and recorded, which are addressable in 
Dataland in user-designated locales. 
One of the most dramatic visual experi- 
ences on our experimental Dataland 
surface is that provided by LANDSAT 
- 
photographs of about four thousand 
square miles of the New England coast, 
from the Boston area up into Maine. 
In the northwest corner of our experi- 
mental Dataland, we have an image of the 
northeast sector of the United States, 
with an inset area of the New England 
coast. Upon traveling across Dataland to 
this patch of New England, it is possible 
to zoom in on any area. 
The perusal of the LANDSAT image has 
its own appropriate key map. It takes the 
form of a view on the key map monitor 
of, in this case, the entire sector of New 
England. The "key" consists of a high- 
lighted rectangle moving around this 
key map image, tracking the course of 
the joystick-guided view visible on the 
large screen. Like the world map view, it 
offers direct teleportation about the 
LANDSAT image through touch. 
Zoomingin upon satelliie 
image of Boston: In these 
views, approach is from the 
north over Cape Ann and 
Marblehead area. In first cd- 
urn, topto-bottom, blocky 
image is replaced with finer 
resolution view (middle), 
while image expands and 
travel proceeds southward. 
In top and middle panels of 
the second column, 
approach continues over the 
peninsula of Nahant, with yet 
another image replacement 
(bottom). 
Nearing Boston, the triangu- 
lar runway patterns of Logan 
International Airport come 
into sight at lower left (left 
column). Finally, central Bos- 
ton and Charles River basin 
appear (right column, top 
and middle). 
To this point, all images are 
retrieved from magnetic 
-a. 
The final image, a 
map, replaces the satellite 
imagery; it comes ofl the 
optical videodisc. 
As the user zooms in by a certain amount, 
the increasingly blocky material is 
replaced by a higher-resolution image in 
perfect registration. This replacement 
action is performed a number of times as 
one comes in on any portion of the New 
England area covered by the LANDSAT 
image and gives a dramatic impression 
of vast areas being contained within the 
confinespf Dataland. In the sequence of 
pictures shown (coming over Marble- 
head toward Boston), the final limit of res- 
olution is the resolution at which the 
original LANDSAT material was photo- 
graphed and digitized. Each point of 
source data in the stored image repre- 
sents about an acre in area. 
Should we zoom in on the city of Boston, 
we would find that the LANDSAT image 
of Boston is replaced at a certain level or 
altitude of approach by a map of Boston 
in the same size and register as the 
LANDSAT image it replaces. Then, as we 
zoom in on the Beacon Hill area of Bos- 
ton, the map image suddenly gives way 
to a set of slide views of the central city 
area. The slide collection contains over 
200 slides of Boston as seen from vari- 
ous vantage points. There is a key map 
which aids the user in perusing the col- 
lection of slides. 
(%se-up of slide collection 
key map used to access 
videodisc still frames. 
Region along spine af 
stacked "slides" permits 
sliding of cursor anow by 
fingertip. Alternately,the 
captions "Next slide" and 
"Previous slide" can be 
tapped for mby-one viewing, 
or continuously touched for 
rapid sequential showing. 
The interactive aspect of this key map is 
that the user can slide a colored-arrow 
"cursor" along the top edge of the diago- 
nal row of "boxes" representing slides 
about Boston available to be seen. The 
analogue for more conventional media is 
that of remembering a slide tray. Moving 
the cursor up and down causes slides to 
be flashed in succession on the large 
screen as indicated by the finger touch- 
ing and moving the display cursor. 
Perusing slides of Beacm 
Hill area of Boston: slides 40 
and 170 are shown being 
&ecw out for viewing. 
The "active process," in this 
case a calculator, is illustrat- 
ed by the photographic 
image on the large screen. 
The user can avail himself of 
a doser, touch-sensitive ver- 
sion, which can be invoked 
as a virtual machine. Other 
examples might include: a 
tdephone, a dictaphone, 
even a television. 
To recapitulate, the first key map was 
the "table of contents" of the "book," 
allowing the user access to selected sec- 
tions of the text. The second type of key 
map, exemplified by the time-counter 
dial associated with the "television set," 
enables user interaction with what are in 
essence processes over time. The third 
type, the LANDSAT image key map, 
functions with respect to the LANDSAT 
image as the "world view" auxiliary moni- 
tor functions with respect to Dataland at 
large: a "you-are-here" marker, respond- 
ing to user joystick navigation about a 
space. The key map associated with the 
"slide collection," residing at the map of 
Boston within the New England LAND- 
SAT image, exemplifies the fourth type, 
used to manage data types which are 
essentially characterizable by "number": 
some ordered series of items, any one of 
which the user may dwell on for some 
unspecified period of time. 
We expect the repertoire of key map 
types to grow along with enlargements of 
the repertoire of data types, as new data 
types require ordering by some principle 
not accounted for by any previously 
defined key map. 
Further among data types in Dataland 
that depart from the usual are those that 
are processes. That is, SDMS's Dataland 
has nodes on its surface, indicated by 
appropriate glyphs, which make certain 
functions available to the user. 
A specious example is the existence in 
Dataland of the image of a hand-held 
calculator. The user can zoom directly up 
to it. There then appears on the small key 
map monitor a copy of this calculator 
image. The user can directly touch the 
image surface on the monitor to input 
arithmetic problems, just as with an 
actual calculator. This particular example 
of a process, perhaps trivial or "cute," 
points the way to what will eventually be 
an interesting and powerful class of 
data types. 
When making graphical 
annotations user enters 
commentary and jottings 
with lapboard and stylus. 
Noted was the idea that "perusing" 
implies the scrutiny in detail of items. This 
scrutiny in detail as an interactive proc- 
ess surely will trigger in the user the 
impulse to annotate, to append jottings, 
to comment "marginally." The traditional 
properties of computer media typically 
frustrate this impulse, one so readily 
indulged in on paper. 
As an antidote to this shortcoming, we 
have introduced the capacity for making 
written annotations in "transparent ink," 
of varying line widths and colors. The ink, 
because transparent, does not obliterate 
material overwritten, and the notations 
made can be transient or permanent as 
the user wishes. 
Notes and commentary can be not only 
in written form, but auditory as well. The 
user can employ the stylus and tablet to 
indicate an "anchorpoint" on the Data- 
land surface for to-be-recorded voice 
notes. The notes are played back subse- 
quently upon coming within some critical 
range of the site of the recording. 
Sound can be itself a data type as well as 
a vehicle for annotations or navigational 
aid. An instance of sound as data in our 
initial SDMS prototype was a digitally 
stored speech of Jerome Wiesner, Presi- 
dent of MIT. A portion of this speech was 
activated and played back upon approach 
to an image of Dr. Wiesner, the volume 
increasing as one drew nearer by zoom- 
ing in, or fading to the left or right as one 
withdrew from facecenter toward the 
right or left, respectively. The speech 
sound was, in effect, synchronized with 
the location of the speech. 
An octaphonic sound capability permits 
the creation in the media room of a veri- 
table "cocktail party" of sounds and 
voices, any sound so re-created as to 
give it a spatially definite apparent 
source in the room. Endowing sound 
sources with specific locales effectively 
creates a set of "channels," aiding sepa- 
ration and identification of a number of 
simultaneously heard voices. The possi- 
bility of "browsing" through sets of 
auditory messages, redundantly cued in 
visual graphics, can make sound as a 
data type or means of annotation a rich 
offering to the user. 
The ensemble of data types and asso- 
ciated interactions enumerated here 
form an initial set and by no means 
exhaust the long-term potentialities of 
user-system interaction. Before we turn 
to a consideration of what the future may 
hold, however, let us set down some of 
our major findings thus far about using 
space to organize data. 
"Ink" is transparent, and 
does not obliterate material 
beneath. Note ink color 
options, and color-strip 
"highlighting" over address 
in letterhead and in salutb 
tion. Ink can be temporary, 
permanent, or placed in 
logically separable layers. 
What We Learned 
Diagramds~asalstmcture 
A major lesson of our experience in 
of Dataland in SDMS I, our 
initial SDMS prototype. 
attempting to use space to articulate 
information was the virtue of straightfor- 
ward simplicity in the presentational as- 
pects of the user's "virtual" spatial world. 
The system as outlined above did not 
spring into existence all at once but 
resulted from many years of Office of 
Naval Research research in television- 
based computer graphics and an initial 
version of a spatial data-management 
system, SDMS I, developed over the 
project's first year of DARPA support. 
SDMS I was a "2-112-D" spatial world: a 
set of 2-D data planes, so linked as to 
define a hierarchical, "laminar" space. 
The top level of this structure was Data- 
land itself: a large data plane with "items" 
of various sorts arranged on its surface, 
some grouped on common background 
colors. As described earlier, the large 
screen in front of the user functioned as a 
"window" onto Dataland, which appeared 
in its entirety on the small monitor. 
Importantly, the scheme of the data 
space in SDMS I included a system of 
"ports" on any data plane or layer, which, 
when zoomed in on, would give way to a 
next data layer, seemingly in back of or 
"beneath" it. In the accompanying illus- 
tration, we can see "ports" leading from 
the top Dataland layer to different, 
second-level data planes. One of the 
second-level data planes in the illustra- 
tion is a terminal node, but the other 
second-level data planes themselves 
have ports, each leading down to third- 
level data planes. The information con- 
tained on the lower planes was logically 
subordinate to the topic at the port 
through which the user dove. 
Travel around this system was up and 
down, chaining through the hierarchical 
structure of the nodes (ports) on the vari- 
ous data planes. One could travel deep 
down into a certain data structure and 
then "chain back" through the structure 
to get back to the point of entry. 
I 
Third bvel 
r Third Level 
Third Level 
Our SDMS I system was programmed to 
include up to twenty ports in any plane, 
and the "depth" of the structure in levels 
was in principle indefinite. As a practical 
matter, in our demonstration version the 
deepest "depth" in chaining down a hier- 
archy was about seven levels. 
The spatial structure of SDMS I, however, 
generated a frustrating design paradox 
for any comprehensive data-world image 
for display on the "world view" monitor. 
Although a number of candidate schemes 
for mapping views were advanced, 
including quite ingenious neural net-like 
schemes, some serious drawback 
seemed always to attend them. Those 
that were visually simple and easy to 
interpret were so at the expense of infor- 
mation content. Those that were compre- 
hensive became "baroque": the more 
accurately they portrayed the rather 
complex paths that some user might take 
through a data space consisting of 
nested planes, the more the mapping 
view violated the principle that a display 
system be visually straightforward and 
easily interpreted. 
The resolution of the dilemma was the 
insight that both the finding of items and 
the navigation in data space could best 
be served by a simple, single-plane 
Dataland. This sort of space seemed to 
offer all the primary benefits of locatabil- 
ity to be derived from the SDMS principle 
without having all the disadvantages of 
complexity that a laminar space might 
entail. 
Thus, in our second prototype, SDMS II, 
the nested laminar space of SDMS I 
was replaced by a single, very large 
data plane. When approaching an item 
through the joystick "zooming" action, 
the user does not "pop through a port" 
down to another level of data space to 
obtain further information. Rather, once 
the viewer has come up close upon the 
item, the action from his or her point of 
view is then to "peruse" the item in place, 
as it were, with respect to the greater 
space of Dataland. That is, the perusal of 
any item occurs without any sense of fur- 
ther "travel" in data space of the sort 
implicit in going down through ports to 
deeper layers of data. 
As a result, in SDMS II, locating an item, 
and perusal of that item once located, 
are, logically, two independent activities. 
In SDMS 1, these activities were con- 
founded each with the other, in that as 
you looked at more information, you also 
popped through down and deeper into 
"location space" as well. 
What about an SDMS in 3-D, with 3-D 
"flight"? 
At our project's inception, the possibility 
of creating a spatial data-management 
system in interactive 3-D space in the 
manner of a flight simulator was 
broached. The idea was an intriguing 
one: flying in and around a space of data 
items under the guidance of a variety of 
aviation-inspired navigational aids. For 
practical reasons, the idea was not pur- 
sued: acquisition of real-time flight simu- 
lation hardware, with visible surface por- 
trayal of a 3-D world in color, would have 
far exceeded cost parameters for our 
project. But, apart from costs, there are 
factors intrinsic to dynamic 3-D flight to 
be considered in relation to the ends to 
be achieved in an SDMS. 
While flight in simulated 3-D space can 
be dramatic and compelling, to the 
extent that 3-D flight is convincingly 
simulated, then to that extent the possi- 
bilities are expanded for becoming con- 
fused in that space. Spatiality, which in 
the SDMS context is supposed to be in 
the service of managing data, can then 
itself become so rich in directionalities 
that it generates sets of navigational 
issues which in their turn demand 
resolution. 
Beyond the issue of user orientation in 
real-time 3-D flight is the problem of the 
recognition of objects in a dynamic 3-D 
world. The ability to approach any item 
in a 3-D space, from any angle, can 
seriously compromise the ready inden- 
tification of that item. Things simply do 
not look the same from different angles. 
The perception that a certain item is the 
"same" when seen from varying aspects 
(perceptual "shape constancy") is 
robust, to be sure, but it can and will 
break down. 
Not only does the internal structure of a 
figure affect its recognition, but the "top," 
"bottom," and "sides" as determined by 
the viewer's relative orientation tend to 
condition how it is seen, and whether it is 
recognized or not. For example, even a 
2-D silhouette map of Africa turned 90 
degrees is much less readily identifiable 
as when seen in its usual north-south ori- 
entation (Rock, I., "The Perception of Dis- 
oriented Figures," Scientific American, 
January 1974). 
To have all items always "face front" 
independent of the user's relative path of 
approach in flight is not necessarily a 
cure for the object recognition problem. 
The appearance of items taken individu- 
ally is only a part of perceiving where you 
are and what you are looking at. Inter- 
item relational patterns, a significant con- 
textual basis both for recognizing things 
and for navigating in "neighborhoods" of 
things, become effectively different pat- 
terns when a grouping of items is 
approached from different directions. 
To summarize this point: the special vir- 
tue of a spatial data management system 
lies not in a sense of space and flight for 
their own sakes but in the invocation of a 
sufficient sense of space to activate 
the native, highly evolved capacity of 
humans to organize their perceptual 
experience spatially. The optimal space 
for an SDMS, then, is one that prompts 
spatial "schematizing" in the user, while 
minimizing the potential for disorientation. 
Experience indicates that the majority of 
guest users trying out their hand at "fly- 
ing" across Dataland for the first time 
invariably depend on the auxiliary view to 
navigate, using the large screen for 
"confirmatory" glances that they have 
arrived where they set out to go. The 
apparent aspect of Dataland is so large 
that this auxiliary view is vital for success- 
ful navigation, even for the constant, well- 
practiced user who may have, over time, 
gained a very detailed mental picture of 
the "lay of the land." 
It turns out to be the case that navigation 
over Dataland with the joystick is so 
eminently and inherently "response com- 
patible" that the novice user gains profi- 
ciency in flight in well under a minute. 
One of the prime attractions of such a 
;ystem is the readiness with which the 
rlew user becomes a competent driver. 
. kcompanying the rapid acquisition of 
"piloting" proficiency is rapid assimilation 
by the novice of the graphic imagery of 
the Dataland surface in a "spatial" way. 
Almost immediately, the new user begins 
to refer to items by describing them as 
"the letter to the right and north of the 
green square," or "the yellow rectangles 
in the southeast corner." Although, of 
course, this way of regarding data is 
intended in the system, the beginning of 
discussing data in this mode by novice 
users is gratifyingly spontaneous. 
Beyond sound as a data type and as 
an annotating modality, our work with 
sound as a "navigational aid" has built 
an appreciation of its utility for guidance 
and orientation, as well as for its enrich- 
ing function as a redundant cue for what 
is going on visually. Those occasions 
when our own experimental sound sys- 
tem has been temporarily down have 
convinced us that we would be loath to 
return to a totally silent data world. Con- 
clusion: sound, well-orchestrated, is cru- 
cial. A spatial data-management system 
must have it. 
While we learned much concerning spe- 
cific design features of our SDMS effort, 
realizations also emerged about further 
potentialities of the spatial theme. Some 
of these indications for future directions 
are set forth in the following section. 
Future Directions 
Progress in SDMS during our first two 
years of pursuing spatiality as a motif has 
encouraged us to chart a prospectus of 
next steps that is advisedly extreme in 
terms of positions taken. 
Future directions elucidated include those 
of: topical spatiality, gaze-contingent 
displaying, eye-gesture coordination, 
voice-driving with eye contact, exploit- 
ing the user's near-field, user position 
sensing through a space-sensored "lab 
jacket ." 
The idea underlying "topical spatiality" is 
simple: the topography of Dataland is 
organized on the fly, as a function of user 
selected axes. These axes are chosen 
by the user on the basis of what data 
dimensions are judged appropriate for 
some specific task. In other words, unlike 
the current arrangement, pictograms are 
not stored and left in one place, but form 
part of a changing 2-D space. 
As an example, consider data typical of 
a company's personnel file. Pictures of 
employees would reside on secondary 
storage media, and Dataland would 
have an indicative but blank array of rec- 
tangles. The user might then specify his 
horizontal axis to be a measure of age 
and the vertical axis as something like 
years of service, salary level, or manage- 
rial responsibility. Once selected, the pic- 
tures would be ordered on the fly in this 
2-D space, with overlap and clustering, 
most probably. The data would be 
searched with the knowledge that Mr. 
Smith (the company's founding father) is 
somewhere at upper right and the deliv- 
ery boy is in the southwest. 
We propose to implement a topical 
SDMS, within the existing system, using 
building types. The selection of data 
comes from our 54,000-different-frame 
videodisc that was made in collaboration 
with the MIT architecture slide library 
and contains about 20,000 slides of 
American Architecture. At this writing, 
those "frames" are additionally described 
in a data structure which includes state, 
county, city, architects' names, dates of 
construction, and twenty building types. 
The data lend themselves to traditional 
spatiality (i.e., they can be viewed on a 
map of the US), but they also fall onto 
nonspatial axes like date of construction, 
physical scale, degree of public access, 
and the like. In the case of date and size 
(X and Y, respectively), if we limit our 
selection to post-Civil War, we can look 
for the World Trade Center in the north- 
east and Grant's tomb at the lower left. 
This theme will include unclustering pro- 
cedures that provide the proper chang- 
ing, nonlinear axes while the user zooms, 
in order to "spread out" overlapping 
data. What we should learn are lessons 
concerning people's ability to create 
mental spaces and then to search them. 
A critical focus of further research 
involves a set of themes having to do 
with the active engagement of the user in 
the environmental space of the interface, 
expanding the spatial domain to encom- 
pass the real-space characteristics of 
user actions. The overall intention is to 
render the system cognizant of how the 
user is operating in his personal space, 
as this space intersects with the shared 
space of the interface: directionalities in 
looking, speaking, touching, gesturing, 
together with a system awareness of 
user position and proximities. 
Among these themes is the awareness of 
where the user is looking. Eye contact is 
an important adjunct in human interper- 
sonal exchange and, in general, a prime 
indicator of the focus of active awareness. 
The opportunity here is for, among other 
things, an eyecontrolled "virtual cam- 
era," that is, a display that points, pans, 
zooms, travels, as a function of where the 
user is looking. In the context of the 
imagery in SDMS so far discussed, pos- 
sibilities might include even the trivial 
example of a spatially dispersed set of 
items, perhaps faces, each of which 
"talks" when eye-addressed by the user, 
the directed gaze used by the system as 
an implicit "command" or act of selec- 
tion. Another example would be an 
image, say a map, which locally expands 
and gains detail as a function of the point 
and duration of "looks". 
Space-ranging techniques that permit 
the system to know where the useris in 
the space of the interface, plus the user's 
body attitude, have intrinsic uses. A sys- 
tem of body-borne space sensors, unob- 
trusively disposed about a sort of "lab 
jacket" as buttons, cuff links, or epaulettes, 
would establish a computer-interpretable 
dot figure demarking the momentary 
position and attitude of the user. Among 
other functions, such knowledge can 
help to reestablish tracking contact of an 
errant oculometer, making sensing 
where one is looking a more realistic 
proposition in a dynamic environment. 
The sense of space in and at the inter- 
face includes system awareness of the 
user near-field. The tone of appointments 
in the media room, especially the open- 
ness of the chair, invites the user to get 
up out of the chair the more immediately 
to engage himself with the data. Ges- 
turing, arm waving, pointing, especially 
in conjunction with line-of-sight indica- 
tions captured through unobtrusive eye 
tracking, would endow the immediate 
space between user and system with 
communicative meaning. 
With body sensing in the user near-field, 
pushing items of virtual data about in a 
now-tangible 3-D space arises as a pos- 
sibility. Or, traffic-patrol-like direction of 
items streaming by in patterns for on-the- 
fly perusal. The dynamics of orchestra- 
tion, literally like those of conducting a 
symphony, arise as realities, especially 
pertinent in an environment of spatially 
distinct sounds and voices in an octa- 
phonic surround. Pointing to virtual 
talkers with indications to speak, to hurry 
up, to pause, becomes repertorial for the 
user, now "fleshed out" at least minimally 
in dot form in the augmented space of 
the interface. 
bice direction with eye contact, a natu- 
ral combination in the extra system real 
world, persist in the realm of user-system 
interchange as a viable modality. The 
ability to voice-activate takes on more 
precise meaning and possibilities in con- 
junction with the ability to address by 
voice and eye simultaneously in a coor- 
dinated fashion. To be able to point by 
gesture as well defines yet an additional 
dimension of voice-and-eye dynamics. 
These themes, somewhat synoptically 
expressed, implicate actions in an 
explicit space, coextensive with the real 
room space at the user-system interface, 
a shared space which can be artfully 
integrated with the virtual spaces which 
have been the focus of this, our work, 
so far. 
At stake here is a user-system interface, 
a data space, so enriched and quick- 
ened that the human becomes more 
than a dimensionless point, the space at 
the interface something other than empty 
volumes. The long-term goal is the 
utmost in usability, where the user's nat- 
ural modalities and capacities for commu- 
nicative expression meet with perceptive, 
complementary system response. 
Copyright @ 1979 by the 
MassachusettsInstituteof 
Technology. All rights 
resewed. The contents of 
this publication may not be 
reproduced in any form with- 
out permission of copyright 
owner. 
Printed in the United States 
of America 
Library of Congress Number 
7878256 
The views and conclusions in this docu- 
ment are those of the author, and should 
not be interpreted as necessarily repre- 
senting the official policies, express or 
implied, of the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency, or the United 
States Government. 
Work Sponsored by 
Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency 
Office of Cybernetics Technology 
Command Systems Cybernetics Program 
Contract number: MDA903 - 77- C-0037 
Contract period: 1 October 1976 through 
30 September 1 978 
Work Performed by 
Architecture Machine Group 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Principal Investigator: 
Professor Nicholas Negroponte 
Distribution: 
Unlimited 
Key Words: 
Management Information Systems 
Computer Graphics 
Man-Machine Studies 
Communications Media 
Printing: 
This volume has been printed in an edi- 
tion of 4000 copies. Supplemental funds 
- I 
for printing have been obtained from: 
Off ice of Naval Research 
I BM Corporation 
'1I
Tektronix Corporation 
Bell Northern Research 
MIT Industrial Liaison Program 
Photography by Christian Lischewski 
Designed by Betsy Hacker, 
MIT Design Services 
Composed in Helvetica Light and 
Medium by Typographic House, Inc. 
Printed by Rapid Service Press 
Bound by Star Bindery 
