"Put-That-There": 
Voice and Gesture 
at the Graphics Interface 
Richard A. Bolt 
Architecture Machine Group 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 
02139 
ABSTRACT 
Recent technological advances in connected-speech recognition and position sensing 
in space have encouraged the notion that voice and gesture inputs at the graphics 
interface can converge to provide a concerted, natural user modality. 
The work described herein involves the user commanding simple shapes about a 
large-screen graphics display surface. 
Because voice can be augmented with 
simultaneous pointing, the free usage of pronouns becomes possible, with a 
corresponding gain in naturalness and economy of expression. 
Conversely, 
gesture aided by voice gains precision in its power to reference. 
Key Words: 
Voice input; speech input; gesture; space sensing; spatial data 
management; man-machine interfaces; graphics; graphics interface. 
Category Numbers: 
8.2, 6.9. 
The work reported herein has been supported by the Cybernetics Technology 
Division of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, under Contract 
No. MDA-903-77-C-0037. 
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is 
granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed 
for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and 
G9980 ACM 0-8979]-02]-4/80/0700-262 
$00.75 
262 
the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice 
is given that copying is by permission of the Association for 
Computing Machinery. 
To copy otherwise, or to republish, 
requires a fee and/or specific permission. 
INTRODUCTION 
Recently, the Architecture Machine Group at the Massachusetts 
Institute of 
Technology has been experimenting with the conjoint use of voice-input and 
gesture-recognition 
to command events on a large format raster-scan 
graphics display. 
Of central interest is how voice and gesture can be made to inter-orchestrate, 
actions in one modality amplifying, modifying, disambiguating, 
actions in 
the other. 
The approach involves the significant use of pronouns, 
effectively as "temporary variables" to reference items on the display. 
The interactions to be described are staged in the MIT Architecture Machine 
Group's "Media Room," a physical facility where the user's terminal is 
literally a room into which one steps, rather than a desk-top CRT before 
which one is perched. 
The Media Room Sketched in Figure i, is the size of a personal office: 
about sixteen feet long, eleven feet wide, and about eight feet from floor 
to ceiling. 
The floor is raised to accommodate cabling from an ensemble 
of mini-computers which drives displays and devices resident in the Media 
Room. 
The walls, finished in dark brown pile fabric, house banks of 
loudspeakers on either side of a wall-sized, frosted-glass projection 
screen, and on either side and a bit to the rear of the user's chair. 
The user's chair is a vinyl-covered Eames-type chair, exactly as comes from 
the furniture store, except for two types of instumentation based in its 
arms. 
Either arm bears a small, one-inch high joystick, of the non- 
displacing variety, sensitive to pressure and direction. 
Nearby each 
joystick is a two-inch on edge, square-shaped touch sensitive pad. 
F 
-:i 
I 
i~, 
L_..~ 
I 
." 
""- 
L-" 
"', 
"_-~ : 
= = .~ 
i 
r 
("::1 
I 
r.i 
i 
i i 
[I 
i i 
i i 
i I 
!/ 
iii 
I 
I, 
I i I 
L 
l 
.... i 
1 
! 
I 
i 
I 
I 
Figure 1 
Sketch of Media Room 
263 
The wall-sized screen, about eight feet to the user's front, is served by 
back-projection from a color TV light-valve projector situated in an 
adjoining room. 
Color TV monitors are situated on either side of the user's 
chair, each with its tube face overlain with a transparent, touch-sensitive 
pad. 
Apart from its role as an embodiment of the user terminal as an "informational 
surround [i]," the Media Room with its user chair has played a key role in 
our researches into a "Spatial Data-Management System, or SDMS [2]." 
The specific rationale for spatially indexing data derives from our everyday 
experience of retrieving items, say, from our desktop: 
the phone to the 
right and above the blotter; the appointment calendar in the lower right; the 
"in-box" nearby the ashtray at the lower left, and so forth. 
Retrieval is 
natural and automatic for these items, with even an apparently "messy" desk 
having a spatial logic well-known to its creator and user, the knowledge of 
where this and that item are located being encoded conjointly in mental and 
motor models of the layout of the desktop. 
The user of SDMS retrieves information not by typing names, i.e., alphanumeric 
strings on a keyboard terminal, but instead uses joystick and, occasionally, 
touch controls to navigate about in a helicopter-like manner to where specific 
caches of information reside in a rich graphics world of color and sound. 
The world of information in SDMS, dubbed "Dataland," appears in its entirety 
upon one of the color TV monitors near-by the user chair. 
A 
small 
transparent rectangular overlay, a "you-are-here" marker, can be moved and 
positioned about Dataland by the user's managing of the chair's right-hand 
joystick (or by direct touch on the TV screen, if desired). 
That sub-portion 
of the Dataland surface indicated by the "you-are-here" rectangle is portrayed 
with increased detail on the large screen, effectively a magnifying window 
onto Dataland. 
The left-hand joystick on the user chair enables the user to 
zoom-in upon information to get a closer look at any of a number of multi- 
media data-types (e.g., maps, electronic "books," videodisc episodes), and 
perhaps to peruse them with the aid of an associated touch-sensitive "Key- 
map" which comes up on the Other TV monitor by the user chair. 
The Media Room setting, in addition to its power to generate a convincing 
impression of interacting with an implicit, "virtual" world of data behind 
the frame of the physical interface, implies yet another realm or order of 
space rife with possibilities for interaction: the actual space of the 
Media Room itself. 
The sheer extent of the Media Room's physical interface creates a "real- 
space" environment. 
The user's focal situation amidst an ensemble of 
several screens of various sizes creates a set of geometrical relationships 
quite apart from any purely logical relationship between any one screen's 
content and that of any other. 
Properly orchestrated, the two spatial orders, virtual graphical space, and 
the user's immediate real space in the Media Room, can converge to become 
effectively one continuous interactive space. 
User awareness of this common space is implicit: 
the user points, gestures, 
references "up," "down," "...to the left of...," and so on, freely and 
naturally, precisely because the user is situated in a real space. 
Tapping 
this interactive potential is rooted in--two new technical offerings in the 
areas of: 
I) connected speech recognition; 2) position sensing in space. 
SPEECH AND SPACE: 
THE TECHNOLOGIES 
Two broad categories of currently commercially available speech recognizers 
may be distinguished: 
those which recognize discrete or isolated utterances, 
and those which recognize connected speech. 
With those speech recognition systems restricted to discrete utterances, 
parsing of the speech signal into word-by-word tokens, is not done. 
The 
human speaker must talk to the system in a "clipped" or word-by-word style. 
264 
The recognition of connected speech has been a classic challenge in the field 
of speech recognition generally [3]. 
The DP-100 Connected Speech Recognition 
System (CSRS) by NEC (Nippon Electric Company) America, Inc. is capable of a 
limited amount of recognition of connected speech [4]. 
No pause between words 
is necessary, and up to five words or "utterances" are permitted per spoken 
sentence. 
The recognition response time at the end of each sentence is about 300 
milliseconds. 
Output is a display of the text of the utterance on an 
alphanumeric visual display, and/or a set of ASCII codes (numbers or letters) 
to be received by a processor interfaced with the NEC system. 
The device's vocabulary, held in the recognizer's active memory as a set of 
word reference patterns, is a maximum of 120 words. 
With an optional 
"discrete utterance" mode, the size of the active vocabulary in the system's 
memory may be larger, about 1000 words. 
Except for the digits "one" to 
"ten," which must be spoken twice by the user when "training" the machine, 
each word in training mode need be spoken only once. 
The standard system 
comes with a lightweight, head-mounted microphone. 
We look forward to 
eventual use of a "shotgun" microphone in the Media Room, remote from but 
aimed at the speaker. 
A space position and orientation sensing technology suitable for our 
intentions was found to be made by Polhemus Navigation Science, Inc., of 
Essex, Vermont. 
This system, called ROPAMS (Remote Object Position Attitude 
Measurement System) is based on measurements made of a nutating magnetic 
field. 
Essentials of the system are as follows. 
Three coils are epoxied into a plastic cube, their mountings mutually 
orthogonal to correspond to x,y, and z spatial axes. 
Two such cubes are 
involved: 
one, about 1.5 inches on edge which acts as a transmitter, and 
another, 0.75 inches on edge, which functions as a sensor. 
The arrangement 
of coils in either cube essentially creates an antenna £hat is sensitive in 
all three orientations. 
The transmitter cube radiates a nutating dipole field pointed at the sensor 
cube. 
When the pointing vector is correct, the field strength received will 
be constant. 
When it is not, there will be an error signal consisting of 
the nutation frequency. 
This error is used to generate the output pointing 
angles, and to re-aim the transmitter. 
The orientation in space of the sensor cube is determined by transforming 
the differential signals from the three individual orthogonal coils in the 
sensor cube. 
The sensor cube's distance from the transmitter cube is 
computed by the i/R 3 fall-off of signal strength from the radiating dipole, 
or by triangulation with an additional radiator. 
The sensor cube is very lightweight, and although it has a small cord 
running out of it, it is not an especially troublesome item to handle. 
Such 
sensors can readily be wrist-mounted, worn as finger rings, 
mounted on the visor of baseball caps, or put on a sort of "lab jacket" in 
lieu of cuff and collar buttons or epaulets. 
COMMANDS 
Suppose the user seated before the Media Room's large screen, with a 
space-sensing cube attached to a watchband on his wrist, and that the system's 
microphone is ready and listening. 
Some commands from the system's current 
repertoireillustrativeof voice and pointing in concert are the following: 
"Create . . ." 
In our demonstration system, the large screen is initially either clear, or 
bears some simple backdrop such as a map. 
Against this background, simple 
items are called into existence, moved about, replicated, their attributes 
altered, and then may be ordered to vanish. 
The items used are basic shapes: 
circles, squares, diamonds. 
They are non- 
representational in that the thing is the shape. 
Variable attributes are: 
color (red, yellow, orange, green, b-lue. 
.), and size (large, medium, small). 
265 
For example, the user points to some spot on the large screen. 
A small, white 
"x" cursor on the screen provides running visual feedback for pointing. 
The 
user then says: 
"Create a blue square there." 
The size of the square is not given explicitly in this example command; the 
default size, "medium," is used. 
A blue square appears on the spot where the 
user is pointing. 
There is no default color; some color from the pre- 
progranuned parent ensemble of color names must be given. 
The same is true 
for shape. 
Where the feed-back cursor is residing on the screen at the time the spoken 
"there" occurs becomes the spot where the to-be-created 
item is placed. 
The 
occurrence of the spoken "there" is thus functionally a "when"; that is, it 
serves as a "voice button" for the x,y cursor action of the pointing gesture. 
Accordingly, a considerable pause before the occurrence of the "there" is 
permissible, i.e.: 
"Create a blue square . 
. there." 
The complete utterance in effect is a "call" to a Create routine, which 
routine expects certain parameters to be supplied. 
Before the user recites 
"there," the routine is parameter hung. 
The awaited parameter is input, 
completing the conjunction of x,y pointing input from the wrist-borne 
space sensor with the utterance "there." 
Figure 2 shows the user having created a number of items on the screen 
before him. 
"Move . 
." 
The user can readily move items about the screen, and has available a 
variety of ways in which to express the complete "move" command. 
Consider the user command: 
"Move the blue triangle to the right of the green square." 
This example conunand relies on voice mode only. 
Should, for example, there 
exist only one triangle on the screen at the time the command is given, the 
adjective "blue" bears no information, and could be omitted; the same logic 
applies for the qualifier green in "green square." 
We note in passing that in the phrase " 
. the green square," the attribute 
"green" as voiced is treated simply as part of the name of the item as 
originally created. 
That is, the color name is used 
in a nominal sense, as 
in Moscow's "Red Square," where "Red" is functionally part of a proper name, 
not a signal that we should expect a city square to be painted all in red. 
Apropos of color, 
a more ambitious "interpretive" approach might be to map 
the utterance "green" to pixel values, the matching mediated through the 
classical CIE color space, partitioned into a number of referenceable 
regions. 
The partitioning of the CIE color space on the basis of an ensemble of color 
names could be programmer determined on an ad hoc basis, or the partitioning 
might involve a quite sophisticated calibration on the basis of having 
subject observers name or classify displayed colors. 
The essential point is 
that the mapping from attribute-name 
to item-attribute 
can be well defined, 
even though it may be as complex as one cares to attempt. 
In any event, the result of the above command is that the blue triangle upon 
"hearing" its name, de-saturates as immediate feedback that it has been 
"addressed," disappears from its present site to re-appear centered in a spot 
to the right of the green square. 
The exact positioning "to the right" is programmer determined in our version; 
some reasonable placement is executed. 
The meaning, intent and interpretation 
of relational expressions in graphic space is a complex issue [5,6]; the 
266 
Figure 2 
Talking and pointing to items on the Media Room's large screen. 
Here, the 
items are circle and diamond shapes being moved about against a backdrop of 
a Caribbean map. 
A double exposure effect catches two images of the user's 
right arm, strapped to which is the smaller of the pair of space-sensing 
cubes (covered by the user's cuff). 
On a pedestal to the right of the user 
chair is a lucite block, and to the top of this block is attached the 
larger transmitter cube. 
267 
important thing is that the item is now where the user has ordered it to be, 
and he can make minor modifications in position later. 
Now, in our example action, the user might equally well have said: 
"Move that to the right of the green square." 
In this option, the user employs the pronoun "that," simultaneously pointing 
to what is intended, the pointing act being a motor analogue to the speech 
string: 
". 
. the blue triangle . 
" 
Notice that in this mode of giving the command, the user may not only omit 
the words "blue" and "triangle," he need not even know what the thing is, or 
what it is called. 
In our simple graphics world, what anything i_s, is-~n a 
subtle and interesting sense, where it is. 
"That" is thus defined as whatever is pointed out; effectively, it is 
"ostensively defined" 
[7]. 
For the namer, at least, the process is not 
unlike that of telling a small child what things "are": for example, 
pointing at a cat, and saying "cat" or "kitty." 
The meaning of the word is 
given by indicating what is the intended referent in the context of 
alternatives, namely, whatever else is in the scene. 
This process of "pronomialization" can readily be extended in our simple 
graphical example. 
The intended target spot to which the item is to be 
moved can be rendered as 
"Put that there" 
where there, now indicated by gesture, serves in lieu of the entire phrase 
". . . to the right of the green square." 
The power of this function is even 
more general. 
The place description ". . . to the right of the green square" 
presupposes an item in the vicinity for reference: 
namely, the green square. 
There may be no plausible reference frame in terms of already extant items for 
a word description of where the moved item is to go. 
The intended spot, 
however, may readily be indicated by voice-and-pointing: 
there. 
In this 
function, as well as others, some variation in expression is understandably 
a valuable option; thus, a mini-thesaurus of common synonyms, such as "move," 
"put," "place," etc., is built into the vocabulary. 
"Copy . . ." as a command is simply a variant of the move action, except that 
the image of the item to be moved also remains in place at the original spot. 
"Make that . . ." 
The attributes of any item in this graphic mini-universe that the user has 
called into existence by voice and gesture can be modified. 
Here, the 
attributes are those of color and size. 
For example, the utterance: 
"Make the blue triangle smaller" 
causes the referenced item to become reduced in size. 
The mode of reference 
in this instance is via voice alone, but the user could as well have said, 
pointing to the desired item: 
"Make that smaller . . ." 
The command: 
"Make that a large blue diamond" 
uttered while the user points at a small yellow circle causes the indicated 
transformation. 
Extrapolations readily suggest themselves, e.g., the command line: 
"Make that (indicating some item) like that (indicating some other 
item). 
268 
The second "that" is, functionally, a when to read the x,y coordinate of 
pointing. 
The item indicated when the second "that" is uttered becomes the 
"model" for change, and internally, the action is an expunging of the first 
referenced item, to be replaced in a "copy"-like fashion by the second 
referenced item. 
"Delete . . ." 
The "delete" command (synonyms: "erase; expunge; take out. 
," etc.) 
allows the user to drop selected items from display. 
As before, the "operand" of the command can be: 
". . . the large blue circle" 
or 
". 
.that" (pointing to some item). 
Again, variations and extrapolations of the basic notion suggest themselves: 
global expunging, "clear" or "delete everything," in order to wipe the graphical 
slate clean; or "Detete everything to the left of this (drawing a line 
vertically down the face of the screen)." 
NAMING 
Consider a blue square that is present upon the screen. 
The user points to 
it, saying: 
"Call that . 
the calendar" 
with the intention of later somehow elaborating the blue square at that node 
into a graphical "appointment book." 
The initial portion of this utterance, "Call that . . .," when processed by 
the recognizer unit results in codes being sent over to the host system 
signalling that a "naming" command has been issued. 
The x,y coordinates of 
what item is singled out by pointing are noted by the host system. 
The host system then immediately directs the speech recognition unit to 
switch from "recognition mode" to "training mode" so that the recognizer 
will add the latter part of the utterance, " 
. . the calendar," as a new 
entry in its file of word reference patterns. 
Upon completion of this 
action, the recognizer is directed to go back into recognition mode, to be 
ready for the next verbal input. 
As the communications for switching the recognizer under host-system control 
between recognition and training modes currently takes a finite amount of 
real-time, a brief pause (indicated in the command above by three dots) must 
occur in the spoken command line to accommodate the time taken for the mode 
shift. 
However, the user tends to pause at precisely that point in the 
command line anyway, waiting for momentary desaturation of the blue square. 
This quick desaturation of an addressed item was noted earlier in this 
paper as being the system's way of giving visual feedback that the user has 
indeed "contacted" the item. 
This spontaneous pause for feedback fortunately operates in this context to 
"mask" for the user the system's need for a pause in input. 
However, the 
obligation to pause represents to the system designer something of a break- 
down in the general convenience of continuous vs discrete speech input. 
An 
eventual strategy for relieving the necessity f--or a user pause in speech is 
the augmentation of the "intelligence" resident in a speech recognizer unit 
so that it to some extent interprets as well as recognizes. 
For example, upon the recognition of certain "key" words or phrases within 
the input utterance, the recognizer itself switches directly from recognition 
to training mode so that sub-portions of the input utterance are handled 
appropriately. 
269 
In the case of the "Call that . . ." or naming command, the action of the now 
"intelligent" recognizer would be in effect to truncate-off from the "front- 
end" of the original input speech signal that span of signal corresponding to 
successive recognized words of the command, the non-recognized residue of the 
speech line to be then assumed as the new name to be assimilated by the 
recognizer to its internal reference pattern lexicon. 
In order to maintain 
overall coordination with the host system, the recognizer would of course 
simultaneously transmit ASCII codes for recognized or learned words, together 
with any relevant "control" codes. 
While such a strategy may eliminate the need for a within-sentence speaker 
pause, the general problem of "coarticulation" remains: 
the phonemic properties 
of the speech signal for any word are influenced by what words are spoken 
with it, what particular words precede or follow the word in question 
(Cf. reference 3, p. 518). 
Thus, while not required to pause, the speaker 
yet must enunciate very clearly, particularly when about to utter the new 
name to be added. 
SUMMARY 
The foregoing rudimentary set of commands, concerning themselves with the 
simple management of a limited ensemble of non-representative objects, is 
intended to suggest the versatility and ease of use that can enter upon the 
management of graphic space with voice and gesture. 
More real-life examples 
of commanding about "things" in a more meaningful space come readily to mind: 
moving ships about a harbor map in planning a harbor facility; moving 
battalion formations about as overlays on a terrain map; facilities planning, 
where rooms and hallways as rectangles are tried out "here" and "there." 
The power of the described technique is that indications of what is to be 
done with these visible, out-there-on-view items can be expressed spontaneously 
and naturally in ways which are compatible with the spirit and nature of the 
display: 
one is pointing to them, addressing them in spoken words, not 
typed symbols. 
Further, the pronoun as verbal tag achieves in the graphical world the same 
high usefulness it has in ordinary discourse by being pronounced in the 
presence of a pointed to, visible graphic 
which functionally defines its 
meaning. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The programming and systems expertise of Chris Schmandt and Eric Hulteen 
underlay the implementation and development of the concepts described in 
this paper. 
Their efforts are duly appreciated. 
REFERENCES 
i. 
Negroponte, N 
The Media Room. 
Report for ONR and DARPA. 
MIT, Architecture 
Machine Group, Cambridge, MA, December 1978. 
2. 
Bolt, R.A. 
Spatial Data-Management.. DARPA Report. 
MIT, Architecture 
Machine Group, Cambridge, MA, March 1979. 
3. 
Reddy, D.R. 
Speech recognition by machine: a review. 
Proceeding of 
the IEEE, 64, 4 (April 1976), 501-531. 
4. 
Rohinson, A.L. 
More people are talking to computers as speech recognition 
enters the real world. 
(Research News) 
(First of two articles) 
Science, 203, (16 February 1979), 634-638. 
5. 
Sondeheimer, N.K. 
Spatial reference and natural-language machine control. 
International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 8, (1976), 329-336. 
6. 
Winston, P. 
Learning structural descriptions from examples. 
MIT Project 
MAC, TR-76, 1970. 
7. 
Olson, D.R. 
Language and thought: 
Aspects of a cognitive theory of 
semantics. 
Psychological Review, 77, (1970), 257-273. 
270 
