MOMENT MORE
10178 390
S0 012 048
AUTHOR
Bruner, Jerome S.
TITLE
Man: A Course cf Study. Occasional Paper No.
INSTITUTION
Educational Services, Inc., Cambridge, Hass.
SPONS AGENCY
National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C.
PUB DATE
Jdn 65
NOTE
29p.; For related documents, see SO 012 053 and SO
012 076
:
Document prepared through the Social
Studies Curriculum Program
EDRS PRICE
MF01/PCO2 Plus Postage
DESCRIPTORS
Childhood; *Curriculum Planning; Elementary
Education; *Human Development; Humanistic Education;
Interdisciplinary Approach; Language Development:
Social Development: *Social Studies Units; *Teaching;
*Themattc Approach
IDENTIFIERS
Man A CourSe of Study
ABSTRACT
Written in 19E5, the author describes the initial
stages in the development of the elementary level curriculum, Man:
A
Course of Study. The structure and form of the course and three
pedagogical techniques are discussed. The course is organized around
the humanizing forces of tool-making, language, social organization,
the management of man's prolonged childhood, and'man's urge to
plain. Plans for the section en language inClude a consideration
about what communication is, the design features of a language,
arbitrariness, acqUisition, and the role of language in shaping human
characteristics. The tool-making section is designed from a
philosophical approach; the object is to explore how tools kftected
man's evolution. The unit on social organization focuses on the
nature of structure in a society, roles filled by people, and the
world vibtr of a society. The childrearing unit centers arcuna
three
themes: the extent to which and the manner in which the long human
'childhood leads to dominance of stntiment in human life, the human
tendency toward mastery of skill for its own sake, and the shaping of
man by the patterning of childhood. The fifth unit concerns itself
with man's driue to explicate and represent his world through
symbolic syitems.. The three pedagogical techniqu%s emphasized to
achieve the goals of these units are contrastinO, using games,
and
stimulating self-consciousness about assumptions. The author states
his plan to create far more units than could possibly fit into a
school year in order to provide the teacher with flexibility in
planning.
(KC)
***********************************************************************
Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best'that can be made
*
from the original document.
***********************************************************************
"PERMISSION TO R.tPRODUCE THIS
MATERIAL HAS SEEN GRANTED BY
C
CA air 1E5
TO THE EDUCAliONAL RESOURCES
INFORMATION CENTER (EM)."
DEPARTNIBIT OP MALTA
EDUCATERNEWELPME
EATIONAL INISTITUIE
Tpus DOCUMENT 14AS MEW II=
DUCED EXACTLT AS 'RECEIVED
THE PERSON ON EISIOANiZATION
ATM) IT. POINTS OP VIEW CIE ENNIO*
STATED 00 NOT NECESSAVILV egontiti
sENT OP P KIM. NATIONAL IWITITUTE cik
EDUCATION POSsTION Oa POLKT.
Occasional Paper No. 3
Man: A Course of Study
by Jerome S. Bruner
The Social Studies Curriculum Program
Educational Services Incorporated
June 1965
miksai,
Introduction
"Man: A Course of Study" by Dr. Jerome S. Bruner is the third
in the series of Occasional Papers from the Social Studies Program
at Educational Services Incorporated. Like the earlier papers, it
was initially Written for use within the Program. Dr. Bruner las
charge of the Elementary Project of the Sock! Studies Program;
his paper served to clarify die direction of work for this Project.
We hope that the article will also be useful to persons not directly
connected with the Social Studies Program, in explaining the aims
and methods of our current efforts in the elementary grades.
Dr. Bruner, Director of the Center for Cognitive Studies and
Professor of Psychology, Harvard University, is currently on leave
from Harvard to be one of the co-directors of the Social Studies
Program at ESI, together with Professors Elting E. Morison of
MIT and Franklin K. Patterson of Tufts. "Man: A Course of
Study" has also been incorporated into the ESI 9uarterly Report,
Summer-Fall 1965.
PETER WOLFF
Editorial Director
Man: A Course of Study
by lero;ne S. Bruner
T
HERE is a dilemma in describing a course of study.
One must begin by setting forth the intellectual
substance.of what is to be taught, else there can be no
sense of what challenges and shapes the curiosity of the
student. Yet the moment one succumbs to the tempta-
tion to "get across" the iubject, at that moment the
ingredient of pedagogy is in jeopardy. For it is only in
a. trivial sense that one gives a course to "get something
across," merely to impart information. There are better
means to that end than teaching. Unless the learner
also masters himself, disciplines his taste, deepens his
view of the world, the "something" that is got across is
hardly worth the effort of transmission.
The .nore "elementary" iCeourse and the younger its
students, the more serious must be its pedagogical aim
of forming the intellectual powers of those whom it
serves. It is as important to justify a good mathematics
course by the intellectual discipline it provides or the
honesty it propotes as by the mathematics it transmhs.
Indeed, neither can be accomplished without the other.
Wi begin this article with an account of the sub-
stance or structure of a course in "social studies" now
in the prucess of construction. A discussion of pedagogy
follows. The aim of the exercise is to write a transi-
tional first draft of the course, a congnon focus for
those of us who have been trying to compose the
course, trying to teach parts of It to children in
the fifth grade. If the exercise is finally successfil, we shall
end with a completed coursewith the materials,-
guides, films, and the other things that must be in the
student's hands and on the teacher's shelf. There will
be drafts in between. The exercise, we hope, will
allow us to be clearer about what we are doing.
In
4
3
Structure
of the Course
OCCASIONAL PAPER NO. 3
the final section we shall consider how we propose to
get from a first draft such as this to a course that is
ready for teaching.
The content of the course is man: his natun as a
species, the forces that shaped andcontinue to shape his
humanity. Three questions recur throughout:
What is human about human beings?
How did they get that way?
How can they be made more so?
We seek exercises and materials through which otr pupils
can learn wherein man is distinctive in his adaptation to
the world, and wherein there is discernible continuity
between him and his animal forbears. For man repre-
sents that crucial point in evolution where adaptation is
achieved by the vehicle of culture ;Ind only in a minor
way by further changes in his morlihology. Yet there
are chemical tides that run in his blood that are as
ancient as tile reptiles. We make every effort at the
outset to tell the children where we hope to travel with
them. Yet little of such recounting gets through. It is
much more useful, we have found, to pose the three
questions directly to the children so that their own
views can be brought into the open and so that they
can establish some points of view of their own.
In pursuit of our questions we shall explore five mat-
ters, each closely associated with the ivolution of man
as a species, each defining at once the distinctivenesi of
man and his potentiality for further evolution. The five
great humanizing forces are, of cdurse, tool-making,
language, social organization, the management of man's
prolonged childhood, and man's urge to explain. It has
been our first lesson in teaching that no pupil, however
eager, can appreciate the relevance of, say, tool-making
in human evolution without first grasping the funda-
mental concept of a tool ofwhat a language is or a myth
or social organization. These are not obvious matters.
So' we ari involved in teaching not only the role of
tools or language in the emergenci of man, but as a
necessary precondition for doing so, setting forth the
fundamentals of linguistics or the theory of tools. And
iti as often the case as not that (as in the case of the
"theory of tools") we must solve a formidable intellec-
4
5
17.
MAN: A COURSE OF STUDY
tual problem ourselves in order to be 'able to help Our
pupils do the same.
While one readily singles out those five massive con-
tninnors to man's humanization, under no circumstances
Can they be put into airtight compartments. Human
kinship is distinFtively different from primate mating
patterns precisely because it is classificatory and rests
on man's ability to use language. Or, if you will, tool-
use enhances the division of labor in a society which
in turn affects kinship. And language itself is more
clearly appreciated by reference to its acquisition in the
uniquely human interaction between child and parent.
Obviously, the nature 4of man's world view, whether
formulated in myth or in science, depends upon and
is constrained by the nature of human language. So
while each domain can be treated as a separate set
of ideas, as we shall see, success in teaching depends
upon making it possible for children to have a sense
of their interaction.
Teaching the essentials of linguistics to children in the
Language
elementary grades has limits, but they are wider than
we had expected. There are certain pedagogic precau-
tions to be respected if ten-year-olds are to be capti-
vated by the subject. It must not, to begin with, be
presented as a normative subjectas an exercise in how
things should be written or said. It must, moreover, be
disassociated from such traditional "grammar" as the
child has encountered. There is nothing so deadening as
to have a
handle the "type-and order" problem
by "recognizing" one category of words as "nouns"
and parroting, upon being asived what he means by a
noun, that it is a "person, place, or thihg." It is not
that he is (Atha. "right" or "wrong," but rathat that
he is as smote from the issue as he would be if he
attemPtott to aecopt for grief over the assassination
of a President by citing the Constitution on the divi-
sion of powers. And finally, the discussion needs to
remain close to the nature of language in use, its likely
origin, and the functions to which it is put.
Whether it is true or not that a ten-year-old has a
complete grannnatical repertory, he is certainly capable
of, and delighted in, recognizing all linguistic features
OCCASIONAL PAPER NO. 3
when confronted with instances of them. The chief aid
to such recognition is contrastthe opportunity to ob-
serve the oppositional features that are so much a
feature of human language. What comes hard is to
formulate these featuies copceptually; to go beyond
the intuitive grasp of the native speaker to the more
self-conscious understanding of the linguist. It is this
taskgetting children to look at and to ponder the
things they can notice in their language long enough
to understand themthat is most difficult and it
should not be pushed to the point of tedium.
Our section on language includes a consideration of
what communication isby contrasting how humans
and animals manage to send and receive messages.
The early smsions have proved lively and in the
come of them nearly every major issue of linguis-
tics is raised and allosVed to go begging. This prelim-
inary exercise has the great virtue that it can be re-
peated on later occasions, when students have achieved
varying levels a sophistication, with the result that they
readily recognize how much progress they have made.
The opening session (or sessions, for students often
want to continue the arguments over animals and
humans) usually indicates which among 'several open-
ings can be best pursued in later units. The instance
which follows is influenced by far too little experience
to be considered the general rule, but it is at least one
example.
The discussion led naturally to the design features of
a language. We designed a language game based on
bee language, requiring the children to find hidden ob-
jects by using messages in this bee-like language. The
children are encouraged to design similar languages and
to improve on the design of the language used. They
take to this readily and are eager to discuss and make
clearer such design features as semanticity, voice-ear
link, displacement, and cultural transmission.
The
game, of course, is a lead into the demonstration of
bee language as presented in the von Frisch film (which
is not altogether satidactory). We were struck, how-
ever, at how much more it:iterated the children were
in talking about their own language than in discussing
bee language or von Frisch's analysis of it. It is as
6
7
MAN: A COURSE OF STUDY
if the bee linguistics were interesting as an introduction
into the closer analysis of their own language.
Our next objective is to present the powerful ideas
of arbitrariness, of productivity, and of duality of pat-
terning, the latter the exclusive property of human
language. We have approached arbitrariness hy the
conventional route of comparing how pictures, dia-
grams, charades, and words refer to things. There are
nice jokes to be used, as in the example given by
Hockett of the tiny word whale referring to a big thing,
while the large word microorganLOn refers to a tiny one.
With respect to productivity, we have had considerehle
initial success with two exercises. The first is with a
language containing four types (how, what, when,
where) with a limited number of tokens of each type
(e.g., by band, by weapon, by trap, as tokens of the
"how" type) and with a highly constrained set of orders
each referring to a different kind of food-related activity.
By this means we readily establish the idea of type and
circler as twn basic ideas. They readily grasp the idea of
substitutivity of tokens within a type. (Indeed, given
the interest in secret codes based on substitution of
words or letters for code breaking, they need little in-
struction on this score.)
Once the ideas of type and order are established,
we begin the following amusing exercises to illustrate the
interchangeability of language frames. We present:
1
2
3
4
5
,
The
man
ate
his
lunch
A
lady
wore
my
hat
This
doctor
broke
a
bottle
My
son
drove
our
car
and the children are now asked to provide "matching"
examples. They can do so readily. They soon discover
that so long as they pick words in the order I 2 3 4 5,
from any place in each column, something "sensible"
can be goteven if it is silly or not true Re, "My
doctor wore a car," or, "A lady fate a bottle," it is
at least not "crazy" like, "Man the lunch his ate."
The students need no urging to construct new frames
and to insert additional types into frames already set up
(like a new first column the tokens ef which include,
8
OCCASIONAL PAPER NO. 3
did, can, has, etc.). Interesting discoveries are made
such as the relative openness of some positions and
the closed nature of others. We hope to devise methods
to help the children discover some of the deeper fea-
tures of grammar, better to gasp what a language is
for example, that one can start with relatively simple
sentence frames, "kernel sentences," and transform
them progressively into negatives, queries, and passives
,or any two or even three of these, and that more com-
plex forms can be returned to simpler forms by apply-
ing the transformations in reverse.
Finally, a game has been devised (a game involving
signalling at sea) to illustrate duality of patterning, that
most difficult feature of human language. It involves
developing a language initially with a very limited set
of building blocks (as with hunmn languages, each of
which combines intrinsically meaninglen sound ele-
ments, phones, into a unique system that renders them
into meaningful phonemes, a change in one of which
will alter the meaning of a word so that, in English,
rob and lob are different words, but not so in Japanese
where /r/ and /I/ are allophones of the same phoneme
just as plosive /p/ (pin) and non-plosive /p/ (spin)
are "the same" for us but not for others). Three kinds
of word blocks can be arranged in a frame, making
twenty-seven possible "words" or lexemes. But there
must be rules as to which combinations mean things
and which do not. It is very quickly apparent to the
children that the blocks as such "mean" nothing, but the
frames door some do and some do not. We are in
progress of going from this point toward other aspects
Ail duality at this time.
It is a natural transition to go from syntax to the
question of bow language is acquired by%young humans
and other primates. We shall use the considerable
"resources provided by recent studies of language acciui-
sition to show the manner in which syntax emerges
from certain very elementary forms such as the pivot-
plus-open-class and the head-plus-attribute. The idea
of "writing a grammar" for any form of speech en-
countered will also be presented. In addition, the child-
adult "expadsion-idealization" cycle will be explored as
an example of a powerful form of social grouping that
8
9
MAN: A COURSE OF STUDY
is crucial for transmitting the language. For contrast,
we hope to examine the problems of language develop-
ment of Vicki, a chimpanzee raised by a family along
with their own child of like age. The subtle problem
of "traditional" and "hereditary" transmission is bound
to emerge.
Foal ly, and with the benefit of their newly-gained
insight into the nature of language, we shall return to
the question of the origins of human language and its
role in shaping human characteristics. We hope first to
cover the newly available materials on the universal
characteristics of all human languagesfirst getting
the children to make some informed guesses on the
subject. Then we shall consider the role of language
in the organization of the-early human group and the
effectiveness it might add to such group utivities as
hunting, given its design features and its universals. To
go from this point to a consideration of myth and its
nature is not a difficult step.
We have examined these matters in some detail here
(though not closely enough). Our hope is to give
the reader a concrete sense of how far we wish to go.
It is plain that the section on language can take as
much of a year as one wishes. We are overproduc-
ing materials to give us better some idea of what is
possible and how to combine what is possitile. Some
schools may want to devote much time to language,
and we hope to make it possible for them to do
so. But above a, we hope to provide enough variety
so that a teacher can choose an emphasis of his own,
whether it be to increase self-consciousness about lan-
guage or to impart a Ihelier sense of same distinctively
human aspect of human language. In the first stages of
our work, thE tendency is to concentrate more on "get-
ting the subject righr"in this cas linguisticsthan
on getting the whole course constructed. And just as
there is a tension between the requirement of the subject
itself and those imposed by the need to teach it to
children, so is there a necessary tension between the
parts of our course (the five topics) and the whole (the
nature and evolution of man), We shall return to this
matter in discussing the summer workshop in a later
section.
Tool Making
OCCASIONAL PAPER NO. 3
The section on language has required the collabor.a-
tion of a variety of linguists of different stripepure,
anthropological, psychologicaland of teachers, psy-
chologists, film-makers, artists, and children. At that,
it is hardly a quartet done. Gloria Cooper of Harvard
has directed the unit, with the aid of David McNeill
of Harvard, Mary Hen le of the New School, John
Mickey of Colorado State, Betsy Dunkman of the
Newton Schools, and Florence Jackson of the New
York City Schools.
One starts with several truths about Is liffilren and
"tools." They have usually not used mail); 'of them;
and in general, tools will not be of much intertst. This
may derive from the deeper truth that, in genesal, chil-
dren (like their urban parents) think of tools as set
pieces that are Pi be bought in hardware stores. And
finally, childreA in our technol4cally mature society
usually have little notion of the relation between tools
and our way of life. Production takes place in fac-
tories where they have never been, its products arc
packaged to
disguise the production process that
brought them into being,
The tool unit is still under discussion. What follows
are some of the leading ideas that animate the design
of the unit.
We begin with a philosophical approach to the nature
of tool-usine What is most characterir .ic of any kind of
tool-using is not the tools themselves, but rather the
program that guides their use. It is in this broader sense
that tools take on their proper meaning as amplifiers of
human capacities and implementers of human activity.
Seen as amplifiers, tools can fall into three gen-
eral
classes
amplifiers
of
sensory
capacities,
of
motor capacities, and of radocinative capacities. 'Within
each type there are many subspecies.
There axe
sensory amplifiers like microscopes and ear horns
that are "magnifiers," others, De spirit levels and bobs,
that are "reference Markets," etc.
Some implement
systelns "stretch out" time (slow motion qinematog.
raphy) and others condense it (time-lapse registration).
In the realm of motor amplifiers, some tools provide a
basis for binding, some for penetrating, some even for
10
Al
MAN: A COURSE OF STUDY
steadyingas when one of our pupils dacriDed a
draughtsman's compass as a "steadying tool." And, of
course, there are the "soft tools" of ratiocination such as
mathematics and logic and the "hard tools" they make
possible, ranging from the abacus to the high speed
digital computer and the automaton.
Once we think of tools as imbedded in a program of
useas implementers of humaa activitythen it be-
comes possible to.deal with the basic idea of substi-
tutability, an idea as crucial to language as it is to tools.
If one cannot find a certain word or phrase, a near-
equivalent can be substituted in its place. So too with
tools: if a skilled carpenter happens not to have
brought his chisel to the job, he can usually substi-
tute something else in its placethe edge of a plane
blade, a pocket knife, etc. In short, tools are not fixed,
and the "functional fixedness" found by so many psychol-
ogists studying problem-solving comes finally because
so mucb thinking about tools fixes them to convention
a hammer is for nails and nothing but nails.
Our ultimate object in teaching about tools is, as
noted before, not so much to explicate tools and their
significance, but to explore how tools affected man's
evolution. The eviden& points very strongly to the
central part in evolution played by natural selection
favoring the user of spontaneous pebble tools over those
proto-hominids who depended upon their formidable
jaws and dentition. In time, survival depended increas-
ingly on the capacities of the tool-user and tool-maker
not only his opposable forefinger and thumb, but the
nervous system to go with them. Within a few hundred
thousand years after the first primitive tool-using appears,
man's brain size more than doubles. Etiolation (or more
simply, survival) favored the larger brained creatures
capable of adapting by the use of tools, and brain size
seems to have been roughly correlated with that capacity.
There are many fascinating concomitants to this story.
Better weapons meant a shift to carnivorousness. This
in turn led to leisureor at least less food-gathering
which in turn makes possible permanent or semi-
permanent settlement. Throughout, the changes pro-
duced lead to changes in way of life, changes in
culture and social organizaticn, changes in what it is
possible to do.
4. 2
OCCASIONAL PAPER NO, 3-
All of these [hatters are now superbly documented
in, Leaky's excavations in Olduvai Gorge in East Africa.
We have coasulted with him and he- has expressed
eagerness to edit four films for us on tool-making and its
subsequent effects on the emergence of a new way of
life. These are sheduled for the fall of 1965. If we
are Successful in getting our pupils to speculate about
the changes in a society that accompany changes in
technology, we will at least have fulfilled one of the
original aims of the Social Studies Program: to get across
the idea that a technology requires a counterpart in social
organization before it can be used effectively by a society.
There happen also to be new materials available on
the burgeoning technology of the Magdalenian period
when more decbrative features appear and tool-makers
begin it) specialize. We are exploring this work to see
whether it too can be used in the same spirit.
A few of the exercises being planned to the "tool
section" give some flavor of the pe&gogy. One unit
calls for the taking of a "census of skills"the tasks that
children know how to perform, along with some effcnt
to examine how they were learned (including tool
skills). Another unit consists of trying to design an "au-
purpose" tool so that the children can have some
nodon of the programmatic questions one asks
in
V
designing a tool and why specialized use has a role.
There will also be an opportunity (of which more in
a later section) for the children to compare "tool play"
of an Eskimo boy and Danai boy of New Guinea with
the play of immature free-ranging baboons, macaqu'es,
and chimpanzees. We are also in process of obtaining
films on the technique of manufacture of flint imple-
ments and hope also to obtain inexpensive enough ma-
terials to have our pupils try their hand at flint knapping
and other modes qf instrument making, guided possibly
by films on the subject by the distinguished French
archeologist, Dr. 'Bordes.
There will be some treatment of teols to make tools
as well as of tools that control various forms of
natural power. A. possible route into this discussion
is an overview of the evolution of tool-making gen-
erallyfrom the first "spontaneous" or picked-up' tools,
to the shaped ories, to those shaped to a pattern,
12
3
MAN : A COURSE OF STUDY
to modern conceptiOns pf man-machine relations as in
. contemporary systems research. Indeed, if we do-follow
this approach we shall also explore the design of, a-
. game of tool design involving variables such as cost,
.
Oine, gain, specificity of function, and skill required,
with the object .of making clear the programmatic nature
of tooll- gird the manner in which , tools represent a
seltctive extension of human powers.
i..
)
The' section on social organization is still in preliminary
planning, save in one respect Otero work is quite well
advanced. The unit leas-as-its objective to make children
aware that there cis. a ttruetur
in a society and that
this structUre is not fixed once for all...4 ,is an inte-
grated pattern and you cannot change one part of the
pattern without other parts of the society changing
, witlk.it. The way a society, arranges itself for carrying
out its affairs depend.s.upon a varietz, of factors ranging
fromits ecology at one, end to the irreversible course of
its history and w6rld-view at the. otter.
A first taA is to lead children to recognize explicitly
certain basic patterns' in the society around them, pat-
terns they know well in an implicit, intuitive way=the
distinction betweeix- kin.rand others, .between 'face-to-face
groups and secondary group% between reference groups
And ones that have corpcirate, being. Thtse, we believe,
are distinctions that children easily discover. We should
also liZe the ctiildren to grasp the rather abstract fact
that within modhuman groups beyond the 'immediate
family, continuity depends not so -much upon specific
people, hut upon "roles" filled by peopleagain, as
with language and tool-use, there are structures with
substitutability.
.
,
.
:
. Such social organization is marked bk-recifrocity ftd
exehange--e, ()operation is compensated by protection,
itrvice by tee, and so on. .There is alwayst giving and
ening. There arc, moreover, fornis of legitimacy -and
sanction that define the limits of possible behavior in
any iven role. They are the_bounds set by a socieq
and"do.not depend upon the individual's choice. Law is
the classic case, %-but N:it the -only one.. One cannot
commit theft legally, but then too one cannot ignbre
1 3
Social
Organization
.1"
OCCASIONAL PAPER SO. 3
friends with impunity and law has nothing to do with it.
A society, moreover, has a certain world view, a
iway of defining what is "real," what is "good," what is
"possible." To this mattfr we turn in a later section,
mentioning it here only to complete our caialogue of
aspirations of ideas we hope to introduce in this part
of the course.
We believe that these matters can be presented to
children in a fashion that is gripping, close to life, and
intellectually honest The pedagogy is scarcely clear,
but we are on the track of some interesting ways of
operating. One difficulty with social organization is its
ubiquity. Contrast may be our best way of saving
social organization from obviousness=by comparing
our own forms of social organization rip those of
baboon troops, of Eskimo, of Bushmen, of prehistoric
man as inferred (rom excavated living_floors in Europe
and East Africa. But beyond this we are now develop-
ing a "family" of games designed to bring social organ-
ization into the personal consciousness of the children.
The first of these games, "Hunting," is designed to
simulate conditions in an' early human group engaged
in hunting and is patterned on the life and ecology of
the Bushmen of the Kalahari desert. The elements of the
-game are Hunters, Prey, Weapons, Habitats, Messages,
Predators, and Food. Without going into detail, the
game simulates (in the manner of so-called Pentagon
games used for increasing the sensitivities of generals)
the problem of planning how far one wishes tp go in
search of various kinds of game, how resourcW need
to be shared by a group to go beyond "varmint" hunt-
ing to larger game, how differentiation of labor can
come about in weapon-making and weapon-using, how
one must decide among different odils in hunting in one
terrain or another. Given the form of the game (for
which we are principally grateful to Dk CI
Abt), its
content can be readily varied to fit the conditions of
life of other hunting groups, such as the Eskimo, again
with the object of contrast.
What has proved particularly interesting in our early
work 'with the game is that it permits the grouping of a
considerable amount of "real" material around it
accounts cif the life of--the Kalahari Bushmen (of which
14
4
MAN : A COURSE OF STUDY
there is an extraordinarily rich record on film and in
both literary and monographic form), their myths and
ut, the "forbiddingly" desert ecology that is their en-
vironment. And so too with the Eskimo; should we go
ahead to construct an anal9gue game for them, we
are in possession of an equally rich documentation on
the- Netsilii Eskimo of Pelly Bay. Indeed, one of the
documentary films made by the ESI Studio in collabora-
tion with the Canadian Film Board and Dr. Men
Balikci of the University of Montreal (one of seven half-
hour films to be "cut" from our 100,000 feet of film)
has already received international acclaim.
Finally, and again by contrast, there now exists a vast
store of material on the social organization of higher
primatesa considerable portion of which is also in
film shot by a crew under-Dr. Irven DeVore of Harvard
for ESIthat serves extremely well to provoke discus-
sion on what is uniquely human about human social
organization.
The group now at work on Social Organization con-
sists of Edwin Detblefsen of farvard, Richard Mc-
Cimn, on leave from the Newlon Schools, and Mrs.
Linda Braun of the ESI staff.
This unit has just begun, to take shape at the time of
Child Rearing
writing: It is proceeding on three general themes in the
hope of clarifying them by reference to particular
materials in the areas of language, of social organiza-
tion, of tool-making, and of childhood generally. The
fim general theme is the fttent to which and the
manner in which the long human childhood (assisted as
it is by language) leads to the dominance of sentiment
in human lite, in contrast to instinctual patterns of
gratification and response found to predominate at
levels' below man. That is to say, affect can now be
aroused and controlled by symbolshuman beings
have an attitude about anger rather than just anger or
not anger. The long process of sentiment formation
requires both an extended childhood and access to a
symbolized culture through language.. Withipt senti-
ment (or values or the "second signal system° or what-
ever term one prefers) it is highly unlikely that human
society or anything like .it would be possible.
15
OCCASIONAL PAPER NO. 3
A second theme is organized around the human
(perhaps primate) tendency toward mastely of skill for
its own sakethe tendency of the human being, in his
learning of the environment, to go beyond immediate
adaptive necessity toward innovation. Recent work on
human development has underlined this "push toward
effectance," as it has been called. It is present in
human play, in the increased variability of human
behavior when things get under control. Just as William
James commented three-quarters of a century ago that
habit was the fiy-wheel of society, we can now say that
the innovative urge is the accelerator.
The third theme concerns the shaping of the man by
the petterning of childhoodthat while all humans are
intrinskally human, the expression of their humanity is
affected by what manner of childhood they have ex-
perienced.
The working out of these themes has only begun.
One exercise now being tried out is to get children to
describe differences between infancy, childhood, and
adulthood for different' speciesusing live specimens
brought to class (in the case of non-human species) or
siblings for humans. For later distribution, of course,
the live specimens (and siblings) will be rendered on
film. Yet the success of a session, say, with a ten-day-
old, stud-tailed macaque suggests that the real thing
should be used whenever possible.
Dr. Ba1ikci will be cutting a film on Eskimo child-
hood from the Netsilik footage, and comparable films
on baboon and Japanese macaque childhood will also
be in preparation. 'Beyond this there is still little to
report. Dr. Richard Jones of Brandeis is in charge of
the unit, assisted by Miss Catherine Matz, on leave
from Germantown Friends School, and Mrs. Kathy
Sylva and Mrs. Phyllis Stein of ESI.
World View
The fifth_unit in preparation concerns itself with man's
drive to explicate and represent his world. While it
concerns itself with myth, with art, with primitive
legend, it is only incidentally designed to provide the
stories, the images, the religious impulses, and the
mythic romance of man's being. It would be more
accurate to describe the unit as "beginning philosophy"
16
1. 7
MAN : A CouRsE OF STUDY
in both senses of
at expressionphilosophy at the
beginning and, perhaps, philosophy for young beginners.
Central to the unit is the idea that men everywhere are
humans, however advanced or "primitive" their civil-
ization. The difference is not one of more or less than
human, but of how particular human societies express
their human capacities. A remark by the French
anthropologist, 1.6vi-Strauss, puts it well.
Prevalent attempts to explain alleged differences be-
tween the so-called primitive mind and scientific
thought have resorted to qualitative differences be-
tween the working processes of the mind in both
cases, while assuming that the entities which they
were studying remained very nusch the same. If our
interpretation is correct, )ve are led toward a com-
pletely different viewnamely, that the kind of logic
in mythical thought is as rigorous as that of modern
science, and that the difference lies, not in the quality
of the intellectual process, but in the nature of things
to which it is applied. This is well in agreement with
the situation known to prevail in. the field of tech-
nology: What makes a steel ax superior to a stone
ax is not that the first one is better made than the
second. They are equally well made, but steel is
quite different from stone. In the same way we may
be able to show that the same logical processes oper-
ate in myth as in science, and that man has always
been thinking equally well; the improvement lies,
not in the alleged progress of man's mind, but in the
discovery of new areas to which it may apply its
unchanged 'and unchanging powers.
All cultures are created equal. One societysay, that
of Eskimosmay have only a few tools, but they are
used in a versatile way. The woman's knife does what
our scissors do, but it also serves to scrape hides, and to
clean and thin them. The man's knife is used for killing
and skinning animals, carving wood and bone, cutting
snow for building blocks for the igloo, chopping meat
into bites.
Such simple weapons are "the mother of
tools," and by specialization a number of tools derive
from them. What is "lost" in variety of tools is won
8
17
do
OCCASIONAL PAPER NO. 3
in the versatility of uses; in brief, an Eskimo man and
wife have tools for all their tasks and can carry most
of these tools about with them at all times.
So too with symbolic systems. The very essence -of
being human is in the use of symbols. We do not know
what the hierarchy of primacy is between speech, song,
dance, and drawing; but, whichever came first, as soon
as it stood for something else other than the act itself,
man was born; as soon as it caught on with another man,
culture was born, and as soon as there were two sym-
bols, a system was born. A dance, a song, a painting,
and a narrative can all symbolize the same thing. They
do so differently. One way of searching for the some-
ture of a world view is to take animportant narrative
and to see what it ultimateiy tells. A narrative, or at
least a corpus of narratives, may be what philosophy
used to be. It may reflect what is believed about the
celestial bodies and their relation to man, it may tell
how man came into being, how social life was founded,
what is believed about death and about life after death,
it may codify law and morals. In short, it may give
expression to the group's basic tenets on astronomy,
theology, sociology, law, education, even esthetics.
In studying symbolic systems, we want the students
to understand myths rather than to learn them.
We
will give them examples from simple cultures for the
same reason for which the anthropologist travels into
an isolated society. Our hope is tb lead the children to
understand how man goes about explaining his world,
making sense of it and that one kind of explanation is
no more human than another.
We have selected for our starting point some hunting
societies. An Eskimo society, a Bushman society, an
Australian aboriginal society will certainly suffice to
show what the life experience of hunting peoples is.
Frain the scrutiny of the myths of these groups, it is
immediately clear that you can tell a society by the
narratives it keeps. The ecology, the economy, the
social structure, the tasks of men and women, and the
fears and anxieties are reflected in the stories, and in a
way in which the children can handle them. One good
example of Eskimo narrative or Eskimo poetry, if skill-
fully handled in class, can show the child that the prob-
18
MAN : A COURSE OP STUDY
lems of an Eskimo are like our problems: to cope with
his environment, to cope with his fellow men, and to
cope with himself. We hope to show that wherever
man lives, he manages not only to survive and to breed,
but also to think and to express his thoughts. But we
can also let the children enjoy the particulars of a
given culturethe sense of an alien ecology, the bush,
or ice and snow, and a participant understanding for
alien styles.
We introduce an origin myth, things taking their
present order, the sun shining over the paths of the
Bushmen, and the Bushmen starting to hunt. But we
should equip thechildren with some possible theories to
make the discussiim profitable, theories not in wards,
but in ways of reading and understandinz a myth. If
the narrative is to be called a myth, it should portray
conditions radically different from the way things are
now.
It is possible to devise ways for children to
analyze a plot. If done with one story variant only,
such an analysis may yield something akin to a phrase-
structure grammar; if done vrith a group of myths,
something comparable to a transformational grammar
may result It is intriguing to see how stories change.
Children know such things intuitively and can be helped
to appreciate them more powerfully.
One last thing: why should such thhigs be taught so
early? Why not postpone them until the student can
handle the "theory" itself, not only the examples? There
is a reason: if such things are new to a twenty-year-old,
there is not only a new view to lean, but an old
established view to unlearn. We want the children to
recognize that man is constantly seeking to bring reason
into his world, that he does so with a variety of symbolic
tools, and that he does so with a striking and fully
rational humanity. The unit on world view is under the
direction of Dr. Elli Maranda, aided by Mr. Pierre Mar-
ands of Harvard and assisted by Miss Bonnie McLane.
The most persistent problem in social studies is to
Pedagogy
rescue the phenomena of social life from familiarity
without, at the same time, making it all seem ."primi-
tive" and bizarre. Three techniques are particularly
useful to us in achieving ibis end. The fast is contrast,
o
19
/ tifOr
OCCASIONAL PAPER NO. 3
of which much has already been said. The second is
through the use of 'lames" that incorporate the' formal
properties of the phenomena for which the game is an
analogue. In th5s sense, a game is like a mathematical
modelan artificialized but often powerful represent&
don of reality. Finally, we use the ancient approach of
stimulating
self-consciousness
about assumptions
going beyond mere admonition to think. We believe
there is a learnable strategy for discovering one's
unspoken assumptions.
Before considering each of these, a word is in order
about a point of vie,y, quite different from ours. It
holds that one should begin teaching social studies by
presenting the familiar world of home, the street, and
the neighborhood. It is a thoroughly commendable
ideal; its only fault is its failure to recognize how
difficult it is for human beings to see generality in
what has become familiar. The "friendly postman" is
indeed the vicar of federal powers, but to lead the
child to the recognition of such powers requires many
detours into the realm of what constitutes power, federal
or otherwise, and how, for example, constituted power
and willfully exercised force differ. We would rather
find a way of stirring the curiosity of our children with
particulars whose intrinsic drama and human signifi-
cance are planwhether close at hand or at a far
remove. If we can evoke a feeling for bringing order
into what has been studied, the task is well started.
A word first about contrast. We hope to use four
principal sources of contrast: man versus
higher
primates, man versus prehistoric man, contemporary
technological man versus "primitive" man, and man
versus child. We have been gathering materials relevant
to each of the contrastsfilms, stories, artifacts, read-
ings, pictures, and above all, ideas for pointing up
contrasts in the interest of achieving clarity.
Indeed, we often &pa to achieve for our puplls a
sense of continuity by presenting them first with what
seems Re contrast and letting them live with it long
enough to sense that what before seemed different
is, in fact, closely akin to things they understand
from their own lives. So it is particularly with our
most extensive collection of material, a film record
20
MAN : A COURSE OF STUDY
taken through the full cycle of the year of a family of
Netsilik Eskimo, The ecology and the externals are
full of contrast to daily life in an American or Euro-
pean setting. But there is enough material available to
go into depth, to work into the year's cycle of a single
family so that our pupils can get a sense of the in-
tegrity not only of a family, but of a culture. It is
characteristic of Netsilik Eskimo, for example, that
they make a few beautifully specialized tools and
weapons, such as their fishing lester or spear. But it is
also apparent that each man can make do with the
stones he finds around him, that the Eskimo is a
superbly gifted bricoleur. Whenever he needs to do
something, improvised tools come from nowhere. A
fiat stone, a little fish oil, a touch of arctic cotton and
he has a lamp.
So while the Eskimo film puts
modern technological man in sharp contrast, it also
serves perhaps even better, to present the inherent,
internal logic of any society.
Each society has its
own approach to technology, to the use of intelligence.
Games go a long way toward getting children in-
volved in understanding language and social organ-
ization; they also introduce, as we have alrezdy noted,
the idea of a theory of these phenomena. We do not
know to what extent these games will be successful,
but we shall give them a careful tryout. The alleged
success of these rather sophisticated games in business
management and military affairs is worth extrapolating!
As for stimulating self-consciousness about thinking,
we feel that the best approach is through stimulating
the art of getting and using informationwhat is
involved in going beyond the, information given and
what makes it possible to take such leaps. Crutchfield
has produced results in this sphere by using nothing
more complicated than a series of comic books in
which the adventures of a detective, aided by his
nephew and niece, are recounted. The theme is using
clues cleverly. As Children explore the implications
of clues encountered, their general reasoning ability
increases, and they formulate more and better hypo-
theses. We plan to design materials in which chil-
dren have an opportunity to do this sort of thinking
with questions related to the coursepossibly in con-
1 2
21
OCCASIONAL PAPER NO. 3
rection with prehistoric materials where it will be
most relevant If it turns out to be the case that the
clothing that people wore was made from the skins of
the ibex, what can they "postdict" about the size of a
hunting party and how would they look for data? Pro-
fessor Leaky informs us that he has some useful
material on this subject.
Children should be at least as self-conscious about
their strategies of thought as they are about their
attempts to commit things to memory. So too the
"tools" of thoughtwhat is explanation and "cause."
One of those tools is languageperhaps the principal
one. We shall try to encourage children to have a look
at language in this light.
The most urgent need of all is to give our pupils the
experience of what it is to use a theoretical model, with
some sense of what is involved in being aware that one
is trying out a theory. We shall be using a fair number
of rather sophisticated theoretical notions, in intuitively
rather than formally stated form, to be sure, but we
should like to give children the experience of using
alternative models. This is perhaps easiest to do in the
study of language, but it can also be done elsewhere.
We shall, of course, try to encourage students to dis-
cover on their own. Children surely need to discover
generalizations on their own. Yet we want to give
them enough opportunity to do so to r develop a
decent competence at it and a proper confidence in their
ability to operate on their own. There is also some
need for the children to pause and review in order to
recognize the connections within the structure they
have learnedthe kind of internal discovery that is
probably of highest value. The cultivation of such a
sense of connectedness is surely the hub of our cur-
riculum effort.
-
If we are successful, we would hope to achieve five
ideals:
1. To give our pupils respect for and confidence in
the powers of their own mind.
2. To give them respect, moreover, for the powers of
thought concerning the human condition, man's plight
and his social life.
9
22
3
MAN: A COURSE OF STUDY
3. To provide them with c se. of workable models
that make it simples to analyze the nature of the social
world in which they live and the condition in which
man finds himself.
4. To impart a sense of respect for the capacities
and plight of man as a species, for his origins, for his
potential, for his humanity.
5. To leave the student with a sense of the un-
finished business a man's evolution.
It is one thing to describe the nature of a course in
terms of its underlying discipline and its pedagogical
aims, and quite another to render these hopes into a
workable form for real teachers in real classes. Teach-
ers are sufficiently constrained by their work loads so
that it would be vain to hope they might read generally
and widely enough in the field to be able to give form
to the course in their own terms. The materials to be
covered in this particular course, moreover, are so
vast in scope as to be forbidding. The materials, in
short, have got to be made usable and attractive not
only to the highly gifted teacher, but to teachers in
general, and to teachers who live with the ordinary
fatigue of coping with younger pupils day by day. They
cannot be overburdened with reading, nor can the
reading be of such an order as to leave them with a
feeling of impotence. At the same time, the material
presented should be loosely enough woven to permit
the teacher to satisfy his interests in forming a final
product to be presented to children.
That much said, we can state what we mean by a
unit, the elements of which the course is made. A
unit is a body of materials and exercises that may oc-
cupy as much as several days of class time or as little
as half a class period. In short, it can be played to the
full and consume a considerable amount of the course
content, or be taken en puissant. Indeed, some units
will surely be skipped and are intended only for those
teachers who have a particular interest in a topic or a
particular kind of exercise. There will be more units
thin can possibly be fitted into a year's course and
teachers will be encouraged to put them together in a
form that is commodious to their own intent.
4
23
The Form
of the Course
OCCASIONAL PAPER NO. 3
In a manner of speaking, a collettion of such units
constitutes a course of study. But the image is unfor-
tunate, connoting as it does so many beads strung
together by some principle of succession. It is our hope
that after a certain number of units have been got
through, a unit can then be introduced to "recode"
what has gone before, to exploit connection. Some
units only review and present no new material.
A unit also sits on the teacher's ready shelf, and
consists of six constituent elements.
I.
Talks to teachers. These consist of lively ac-
counts of the nature of the unitparticulady the nature
of its mystery, what about it impels curiosity and
wonder. Our experience in preparing these indicates the
importance of staying close to the great men in the
field, if possible to find a great article that can be
presented in somewhat abridged form. The design of
a language (taken from Hockett) or the nature of
kinship (taken from Radcliffe-Brown) or how a thing
should be caged (Roger Brown)these are examples.
The genre needs further study and we are explor-
ing the kind of writing requiredsomething that is at
once science and poetry. If it should turn out that a
student finds "talks to teachers" worth reading, so
much the better.
2. Queries and contrasts. In trying out materials to
be taught, we have learned certain ways of getting ideas
across or getting the students to think out matters on
their own. Often these can be embodied in devices
pictures, reading, and diagrams. But sometimes they are
best stated as hints to teachers about questions to use
and contrasts to invoke.
"How could you improve the human hand?" turns
out to be a useful question.
So, does the question,
"What are the different ways something can 'stand for'
something else, like a red light 'standing for' stop?"
We have already spoken of our tactical fondness for
contrasts, and we are coming up with useful ones in
our designing. One such is to have students contrast
a cry of pain with the words, "It hurts." Another is
to compare the usu$ words from which phonemes may
be inferredhit, hat, hate, hut, hot, etc. Or the differ-
ence to be found in the two allophones of the phoneme
24
a
MAN: A CODkSE OF STUDY
/p/ in the words spit and pitthe latter of which will
blow out a match held to the lips, the former will not.
Yet the two are regarded as the "same letter" or the
"same sound" whereas hoi and hut are "different."
3.
Devices.
This part of the unit contains the
"stuff"the material for students. Principal among the
devices is, of course, reading material and we are, like
others, struggling to get such material prepared.
In
good season we hope to understand this obscure matter
better. Currently, we are operating, much as others
,
have, to find, or cause to be written, material that is in-
teresting, informative, and in a decent style.
But there are many devices beyond reading that are
in need of developing for different units. One is the
film loop for use with the Technicolor cartridge pro-
jectors that we use increasingly. We are putting to-
gether four-minute loops constructed from Eskimo and
balron footage, with the intention of asking questions or
posing riddles. Too often, films have a way of pro-
ducing passivity. Can we devise ones to do the oppo-
site? Why does Last Year at Marienbad abrade the
curiosity so well?
Wc are also exploring what can be done with games,
as already noted, and with animation and graphics and
maps. We shall get help where we can find it within
ES1 and outside.
4. Model exercises. From time to time in devising
a unit it becomes plain that the problem we face is less
in the subject matter and more in tilt; intellectual habits
of children in ordinary schools. We have commented
on some of these problems alreadythe difficulty many
children and not a few adults have in distinguishing nec-
essary from necessary and sufficient conditions, the
tendency of children to be lazy in using information,
not exploiting its inferential power to nearly the degree
warranted.
Model exercises are designed to overcome such in-
tellectual difficulties.
We think they are best kept
imbedded in the very materials one is teaching. But it
is often helpful to provide the teacher with additional
special devices. We intend to use puzzles, conundrums,
gamesa kind of pedagogical first-aid kit.
5.
Documentaries. These are accounts, or even tape
25
OCCASIONAL PAPER NO. 3
recordings, of ordinary children at work with the ma-
terials in the unit. We would like the documentary to be
both exemplary and at the same time typical enough to
be within reach of a teicher in his own work.
Along with the documentary goes a more analytic
description. The analytic documentary is designed to
serve dual purposes. The first is to make it plainer
both to ourselves and to teachers what in fact are the
psychological problems involved in particular kinds of
intellectual mastery that we hcipe to stimulate in chil-
dren.
In this sense, the analytic documentary is a
further clarification of oqr pedagOgical objectives. But
in another sense, they represent an attempt on our part
to accustom teachers to thinking in more general terms
about the intellectual life of children. The second objec-
tivecall it educationalis to provide teachers with
what might be a more useful educational psychology
than the kind that is found conventionally in textbooks
dedicated to that obscure subject.
It is our hope Cuat as We proceed in our work there
will be spin-offs in the form of 'general research prob-
lems that can be worked on by research centers not
directly geared to the daily routines of curriculum
building and curriculum testing. The work of such
centers, as well as research in the regular literature on
intellectual development, will constitute a continuing
font from which we can draw material for the analytic
documentaries.
6. Supplementary materials. The final section of the
unit "kit" consists of such supplenlentary materials as
paperbacks (and lists of related paperbacks), additional
film and game materials, and such other devices as
might attract the attention of either a diligent student
or an aspiring teacher. Without question, it will become
clearer what is needed by way of supplement once we
hvve gone further into providing what will be our
standard fare.
A final word about the unit materials. We hope to
issue them in such a form that each year's experience
can be addedlo the pievious year's kit. That is to say,
we believe that as new experience is gained in teaching
the course, new editions of the kits should be made
available to all our teachers. We intend to gather the
7
MAN: A COURSE Olr'STUDY
wisdom of tdachers who try out the course so that it
may be Made available later to others, to gather in
new materials for teaching, new documentaries, new
analyses of the scholarly literature, ana fresh attempts
through our talks to teachers to lend a still more com-
pelling mystery to those topics that deserve to be taught.
Indeed, it is probably obvious by now that the six-
sectioned unit kit, stretched tram one end of the teach-
er's shelf to the other, is our proixised substitute for
that normally most unhelpful genre, the teacher's
manual.
No plans for teacher training have yet been established,
save that we hope within the next two years to bring
together for a summer session a group of master
teachers to help advise us about proper steps. Our
staff now includes several highly gifted and experienced
teachers, all now brooding over this very issue.
The "course," such as it is, will bo "taught" to three
classes this coming summer (1965 ) at the Underwood
School in Newton. The classes will be fourth, filth, and
sixth grades, with the object of discovering at what level
to pitch the material, how to take account of the slow
and fast learners, and so on. But teaching is in this case
part of a summer workshop effort to get material written,
drawn, readied. It will also pitivide an opportunity to
do the kind of intensive interviewing of children to de-
termine what they are making of the material and how
their grip may be strengthened.
In short, the summer ahead is a first effort to do an
intensive summer workshop on the course.
Z8
27
Teacher Training.-
Ai
Tryout and
Shaping
