! 
I 
I 
VI 
I 
I, 
\ ...... ! " 
The Process of Education 
JEROME S. BRUNER 
j 
I' 
1111 0 
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS • CAMBRIDGE • MASSACHUSETTS • 
LONDON • ENGLAND • 
r 
PREFACE, 1977 
Having said this much, I am bound to answer the query 
why I did not, in good time, write a second edition of 
this book, having brooded as much as I confess to having 
done. I do not think it was possible to do so. The book 
was a creature of its time, place, and circumstances, for 
better or worse. The changes that it produced in my 
mind, just by virtue of its having been written and put 
into the public domain, are recorded in my later work 
(a sample of which can be found in Jeremy Anglin's 
collection Beyond the Information Given, which includes 
his shrewd commentary on the course of that work 
since 1960). 
I want, finally, to express my gratitude to the Harvard 
University Press for having kept this little book flourishing 
all these years, and for giving me this chance to say a 
few words about what has happened in the meanwhile. 
Oxford 
January 1977 
xvi 
Jerome S. Bruner 
. 
, 
\" -~ t 
PREFACE 
IN September 1959 there gathered at Woods 
Hole on Cape Cod some thirty-five scientists, scholars, 
and educators to discuss how education in science might 
be improved in our primary and secondary schools. The 
ten-day meeting had been called by the National Acad-
emy of Sciences, which, through its Education Commit-
tee, had been examining for several years the long-range 
problem of improving the dissemination of scientific 
knowledge in America. The intention was not to institute 
a crash program, but rather to examine the fundamental 
processes involved in imparting to young students a sense 
of the substance and method of science. Nor was the 
objective to recruit able young Americans to scientific 
careers, desirable though such an outcome might be. 
Rather, what had prompted the meeting was a conviction 
that we were at the beginning of a period of new progress 
in, and concern for, creating curricula and ways of teach-
ing science, and that a general appraisal of this progress 
and concern was in order, so as to better guide develop-
ments in the future. 
Major efforts in curriculum design had been launched 
by leading physicists, mathematicians, biologists, and 
chemists, and similar projects were in prospect in other 
fields of scientific endeavor. Something new was stirring 
in the land. A tour of the United States in the summer 
xvii 
PREFACE 
of '959 would have revealed a concentration of distin-
guished mathematicians in Boulder, Colorado, engaged in 
writing new textbooks for primary, junior high, and high 
school grades. In Kansas City, there could be found a 
group of first-class biologists busily producing films on 
subjects such as the structure of the cell and photo-
synthesis for use in tenth-grade biology courses. In 
Urbana, lliinois, there was a flurry of work on the teach-
ing of fundamental mathematical concepts to grade-
school children, and in Palo Alto one might have found 
a mathematical logician at work trying out materials for 
teaching geometry to children in the beginning grades of 
school. In Cambridge, Massachusetts, work was progress-
ing on an "ideal" physics course for high school students, 
engaging the efforts not only of text writers and film 
producers but also of men who had earned world renown 
in theoretical and experimental physics. At various centers 
throughout the country, teachers were being trained to 
teach this new physics course by others who had already 
tried it. Preliminary work was under way in Boulder on 
a junior high school course in biology, and a group of 
chemists were similarly engaged in their field in Portland, 
Oregon. Various learned societies were searching for and 
finding ways of establishing contact between their leading 
scholars and educators in the schools. For their part, 
educators and psychologists were examining anew the 
nature of teaching methods and curricula and were be-
coming increasingly ready to examine fresh approaches. 
The time was indeed ripe for an over-all appraisal of the 
situation. 
Various organizations charged with one or another 
responsibility in the field of scientific education and re-
xviii 
\,-, (~. 
/. 
PREFACE 
search had also reached a point at which a general 
examination of progress and prospects was in order. The 
National Academy of Sciences had engaged in consider-
able discussion about the manner in which it might facili-
tate a closer relation between scientists in universities 
and those charged with teaching in schools, as had the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science 
and the Carnegie Corporation of New York. These or-
ganizations were generous in their counsel during the 
planning of the Conference. The National Science Foun-
dation had, so to speak, already gone into business: it was 
principally through its financial aid and moral support 
that various of the curriculum proj ects mentioned above 
had got under way. It also provided financial support for 
the Woods Hole Conference, as did the United States 
Office of Education, the Air Force, and the RAND Cor-
poration. 
.:The Conference, whose members are listed at the head 
of the book, was unique in composition. Virtually all of 
the curriculum projects mentioned earlier were repre-
sented by scientists who had been engaged in the process 
of writing texts, teaching the new courses, or preparing 
films or other materials. In addition, there were psycholo-
gists who had devoted a major part of their research lives 
to the examination of intelligence, learning, remembering, 
thinking, and motivation. Strange as it may seem, this was 
the first time psychologists had been brought together 
with leading scientists to discuss the problems involved in 
teaching their various disciplines. The psychologists 
themselves represented a wide spectrnm of points of 
view-behavioristic, Gestalt, psychometric, the develop-
mental viewpoint of the Geneva school, and the rest. 
xix 
PREFACE 
The differences, however, paled before the issues that 
were to be faced. The group was leavened by a represen-
tation of professional educators-teachers, deans, experts 
in audio-visual methods. Two of the Conference mem-
bers, finally, were historians. It had been our conviction 
in planning the Conference that it would be unwise to 
limit ourselves exclusively to the teaching of science, 
that the eventual problem would be more general than 
that, and that it would be in the interest of perspective 
to compare the issues involved in teaching science with 
those in a more humanistic field, such as history. The 
conviction turned out to be a sound one, and our his-
torians contributed mightily to the proceedings. 
The conduct of the Conference at Woods Hole will 
help explain the existence of this book. The opening days 
were given over to a round-the-clock series of progress 
reports and appraisals of the work of various curriculum 
projects-the School Mathematics Study Group, the Uni-
versity of Illinois Committee on School Mathematics, the 
University of Illinois Arithmetic Project, the Minnesota 
School Mathematics Center, the Biological Sciences Cur-
riculum Study, and the Physical Science Study Com-
mittee. In addition, there were searching reports on 
requirements for a curriculum in American history. We 
also took time to examine some recent research related 
to the educational effort. Demonstration films were 
shown by Dr. Richard Suchman on the lllinois StUdies 
in Inquiry Training, dealing with how children may be 
educated to the formulation of searching questions, and 
also by Dr. Barbel Inhelder on the recent work of the 
Geneva group on the thought processes of young chil-
dren. Indeed, lest the Conference get too remote from 
xx 
I 
L 
< \;, 
f'" 
\ •. ~'. : 
PREFACE 
the direct problems of teaching, an afternoon was given 
over to a class demonstration of the techniques used by 
the Illinois Arithmetic Project, with Dr. David Page, its 
director, serving as teacher. Teaching machines were 
demonstrated by Professor B. F. Skinner of Harvard, 
and the demonstration led to a lively, at times stonny, 
discussion. Late in those opening evenings, one could 
relax to instructional films in biology and physics. Time 
was well filled. 
A few days after the Conference opened, its members 
were divided into five work groups-one concerned with 
the "Sequence of a Curriculum," a second with "The 
Apparatus of Teaching," a third with "The Motivation 
of Learning," a fourth with "The Role of Intuition in 
Learning and Thinking," and a fifth with "Cognitive 
Processes in Learning." • The second half of the Con-
ference was devoted almost wholly to the activities of 
these work groups. Each prepared a lengthy report, and 
as these were being readied, they were presented to the 
Conference for debate. While there was considerable 
• The members of the various work groups were as follows: 
"Sequence of a Curriculum," John Blum, Gilbert Finlay, Arnold 
Grohman, Robert S. Morison, William C. H. Prentice, Herbert E. 
Vaughan; "The Apparatus of Teaching," C. Ray Carpenter. John B. 
Carroll, John H. Fischer, John Flory, H. Bentley Glass, Donald 
Taylor, Don Williams; "The Motivation of Learning," Richard Alpert, 
Lee J. Cronbach, John F. Latimer, Richard Pieters, Paul C. Rosen-
bloom. Kenneth W. Spence; "The Role of Intuition in Learning and 
Thinking," Henry Chauncey, Robert M. Gagne, Ralph Gerard. 
George A. Miller, Jerrold Zacharias; "Cognitive Processes in Leam~ 
in~," Edward G. Begle. Jerome S. Bruner, Donald Cole, Francis L. 
Fnedman, Barbel Inhelder, David L. Page, H. Burr Steinbach. An 
Executive Committee served to coordinate the work of the Confer-
ence. It consisted of Edward G. Begle. John Blum, Henry Chauncey. 
Lee J. Craubach, Francis L. Friedman, Arnold Grohman, Randall M. 
Whaley, and Jerome S. Bruner, Cbmrman. 
xxi 
PREFACE 
agreement in the various work groups on major emphases, 
plenary sessions of the Conference were more concerned 
with debating the issues, and no effort was made to reach 
a consensus of the Conference as a whole. And herein 
lies the origin of the present book. 
The reports of the various work groups, copies of 
which can be obtained through the National Academy 
of Sciences in Washington, were obviously prepared 
under pressure and with a view to debate. They were not 
designed to be definitive statements or manifestoes. Yet 
there were certain recurrent themes that emerged in these 
reports and at the Conference generally, and it would 
have been unfortunate indeed to lose these in the maze of 
compromise wherein thirty-five spirited men reach agree-
ment on what should constitute a final report. 
It fell to the Chairman, then, to prepare a Chairman's 
Report-perforce a selective account of what in his view 
were the major themes, the ptincipal conjectures, and 
the most striking tentative conclusions reached. In a 
proper sense it is the Chairman who is principally re-
sponsible for the pages that follow, however much he 
made every effort to reflect the thought of his colleagues. 
In drafting the present document, consequendy, I have 
made liberal use of the papers prepared by the work 
groups and of notes taken at the plenary sessions. In 
preparing a first draft of the Report for circulation, I 
leaned particularly upon two members of the Conference, 
Professor Francis Friedman of M.I.T. and Dr. Richard 
Alpert of Harvard, who helped not only in the prepara-
tion of outlines but also in drafting some of the ideas 
contained in the outlines. When a first draft of the Chair-
man's Report was completed, copies of it were sent to 
xxII 
\" 
.. <"' 
'"~', 
I 
PREFACE 
all of the members of the Conference for commeut and 
criticism. Several colleagues wrote long commentaries; 
virtually all had their say in the margins. There were 
amplifications, dissents here and there, expressions of 
affirmation, urgings to more extreme statements or cau-
tions against them, a few complaints about ideas omitted 
and some about ones that had been included or added in 
the spirit of retrospect. One extended comment pressed 
the point that the views of Piaget concerning the transi-
tion from preoperational to operational thought had been 
given too prominent a place in the Report. Another com-
plained that the first draft had given short shrift to the 
problem of teaching aids and had neglected the views 
of our audio-visual professionals who had urged a "bal-
anced system of teaching aids" consisting of well-tested 
devices. In the end, the section on aids was expanded, 
although the doctrine of the "balanced system" was 
subordinated to what appeared to me to be the prevailing 
view of the discussions: that aids are instruments to help 
attain an educational objective, and that it is these objec-
tives and not the existence of apparatuS that determine 
balance. 
In short, the preparation of a final draft was greatly 
aided by the comments of participants-though again it 
was not undertaken in the spirit of tryin g to find a 
consensus. Rather, the pages that follow constitute my 
conception of the "sense of the meeting" and inevitably 
will reflect the biases and predilections I bring to the 
task. At the same time, this book represents a set of views 
that grew out of the Conference and intense correspond-
ence that followed it. 
In preparing the final draft, in the winter following 
xxiii 
c 
PREFACE 
the Conference, I benefited particularly from several 
helpful discussions with Woods Hole colleagues. Perhaps 
the most thorough going-over of the final draft took 
place in Urbana, Illinois, where Lee Cronbach, Gilbert 
Finlay, and David Page joined me in what amounted to 
an intensive seminar on points that had remained moot 
after the months of correspondence and exchanging of 
drafts. In Cambridge, I also had the benefit of continuing 
discussion with my colleagues Richard Alpert and George 
Miller of Harvard, and Francis Friedman and Jerrold 
Zacharias of M.L T. Two men closely associated with 
primary and secondary education who were not at 
Woods Hole, Mr. Paul Brandwein and Mr. Edward 
Yeomans, have also read and commented on the manu-
script. 
In a cooperative enterprise such as this, there are many 
people who come to deserve special gratitude. Foremost 
among these is the man who not only had the idea of 
calling the Conference, but who implemented it in all 
possible ways by his intelligent and devoted labors. Dr. 
Randall Whaley, Director of the Education Office in 
the National Academy of Sciences, had the idea, arranged 
for the financing of the Conference and for its housing, 
helped recruit its members, and generally served to keep 
the proceedings moving effectively. Dr. Whaley was on 
leave to the National Academy from Purdue University, 
where he has now returned as Associate Dean of Sciences. 
The work of the Conference itself was enormously facili-
tated by the hard and subtle labors of a staff consisting 
of Mrs. Eleanor Horan of Harvard University, Mrs. 
Elizabeth Ramsey of the National Academy of Sciences, 
xxiv 
\ 
C 
'. -~ : 
PREFACE 
Miss Mildred Runciman of the Rockefeller Foundation, 
and Miss Margaret Gazan of M.LT. Mr. Robert Green 
of the National Academy expedited countless details 
ranging from having cars meet men who arrived on air-
planes in the weather-bedeviled schedules of Cape Cod 
to obtaining the cooperation of children for demonstra-
tions of the teaching of arithmetic. Finally, it would be 
difficult to express sufficient thanks to the many kind 
offices done us by Rear Admiral B. van Mater, U.S.N. 
(ret.), and his staff at Woods Hole. We were housed in 
the summer headquarters of the National Academy there, 
with Admiral van Mater as a most effective chief adminis-
trative officer. 
I should like also to express my thanks to Harvard 
University for handling many financial details of the 
Conference on behalf of the National Academy and 
particularly to the Director of the Harvard Office for 
Research Contracts, Mr. Richard Pratt, who combines 
administrative acumen and a sense of humor to an extra-
ordinary degree. 
Many of the ideas that emerged at the Conference and 
after have long and honorable lineages in the history of 
educational thought. I, as Chairman of the Conference 
and author of this Report, apologize for the virtual ab-
sence of bibliographical citation in the pages that follow. 
Our thinking has been shaped and aided, obviously, 
by the literature related to this subject-and it is a 
vast literature. In writing this book, I have not sought 
to do justice to the parentage of ideas, a task more 
properly undertaken by a more scholarly volume. One 
such volume, containing a wisely assembled collection of 
xxv 
~ 
PREFACE 
readings, is Professor Roben Ulich's Three Thousand 
Years of Educational Wisdom (Cambridge, Massachu-
setts, 1959). 
Thanks are due, finally, to Harvard University Press 
for thoughtful and swift publishing. 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 
May 1960 
xxvi 
Jerome S. Bruner 
\. 
< 
I 
MEMBERS OF THE WOODS HOLE CONFERENCE 
Dr. Carl Allandoerh, 
University of Washington 
Mathematics 
Dr. Richard A.lpert 
Harvard University 
Psychology 
Dr. Edward Begle 
Yole University 
Mathematics 
Dr. John Blum 
Yole University 
History 
Dr. Jerome S. Bruner, 
Harvard University 
Psychology 
Director 
Dr. C. Roy Corpenter 
Pennsylvonlo State University 
Psychology 
Dr. John B. Carroll 
Harvard University 
Education 
Dr. Henry Chounc"," 
Educationol Testing Service 
Education 
Mr. Donald Cole 
Phillips Exeter Academy 
History 
Dr ..... Cronboch 
University of illinois 
Psychology 
Mr. Gilbert Finlay 
University of illinois 
Physics 
Dr. John H. Fllcher 
Teacher's Colleae, 
Education 
Columbia 
nlverslty 
Mr. John Flory 
Eastman Kodak Company 
Cinematography 
Dr. Francl. L Friedman Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology 
Physics 
Dr. Robert M. Gogn. 
princeton University 
Psychology 
Dr. Rolph Gerard 
University of Michigan 
Biology 
Dr. H. Bptley Glon 
Johns Hopkins University 
Biology 
Dr. "'rnold Grobmon 
American Institute of Biological 
Sciences 
Biology 
Dr. Thoma. S. Hall 
Washington University 
Biology 
Dr. Barblll Inhelder 
Instltut Rousseau, Geneva 
Psychology 
Dr. John F. Latimer 
George Washington University 
Classics 
Dr. Geo,. ..... Miller 
Harvard University 
Psychology 
Dr. Robert S. Morl.on 
Rockefeller Foundation 
Medicine 
Dr. David L Page 
University of '!linols 
Mathematics 
Mr. Richard Pleten 
Phillips Academy, Andover 
Mathematics 
Dr. Wm. C. H. Prentlc. Swarthmore College 
Psychology 
Dr. Paul C. Ro.enbloom University of Minnesota 
Mathematics 
Dr. Kenn.th W. Spenee State University of Iowa 
Psychology 
Dr. H. Burr Steinbach 
University of Chicago 
Biology 
Dr. Donald Taylor 
Yale University 
Psychology 
Dr. Herbert E. Vaughan University of Illinois 
Mathematics 
Dr. Randall M. Whal., Purdue University 
Physics 
Dr. Don William. 
University of Kansas City 
Cinematography 
Dr. Jerrold Zacharla. 
Massachusetts Institute of 
Physics 
Technology 
r 
\" .-, 
""-, 
CONTENTS 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
1 
2 
THE IMPORTANCE OF STRUCTURE 
17 
3 
READINESS FOR LEARN ING 
33 
4 
INTUITIVE AND ANALYTIC THINKING 
55 
5 
MOTIVES FOR LEARNING 
69 
6 
AIDS TO TEACHING 
81 
INDIX 
93 
\, 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
EACH generation gives new form to the aspira-
tions that shape education in its time. What may be 
emerging as a mark of our own generation is a widespread 
renewal of concern for the quality and intellectual aims 
of education-but without abandonment of the ideal that 
education should serve as a means of training well-
balanced citizens for a democracy. Rather, we have 
reached a level of public education in America where a 
considerable portion of our population has become in-
terested in a question that until recently was the concern 
of specialists: "What shall we teach and to what end?" 
The new spirit perhaps reflects the profound scientific 
revolution of our times as well. The trend is accentuated 
by what is almost certain to be a long-range crisis in 
national security, a crisis whose resolution will depend 
upon a well-educated citizenry. 
One of the places in which this renewal of concern 
has expressed itself is in curriculum planning for the 
elementary and secondary schools. Several striking de-
velopments have taken place. There has been an un-
precedented participation in curriculum development by 
universiry scholars and scientists, men distinguished for 
their work at the frontiers of their respective disciplines. 
They have been preparing courses of Study for elemen-
tary and secondary schools not only reflecting recent 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
advances in science and scholarship but also embodying 
bold ideas about the nature of school experience. Perhaps 
the most highly developed curriculum of this kind is the 
physics course for high schools prepared by the Physical 
Science Study Committee, a course for which textbooks, 
laboratory exercises, films. and special teaching manuals 
have been prepared, as well as training courses for teach-
ers. Some twenry-five thousand high school students are 
taking this course, and its impact is now being studied. 
There are similar projects in the field of mathematics 
under the supervision of the School Mathematics Study 
Group, the Commission on Mathematics, the University 
of Illinois Committee on School Mathematics, and other 
groups. The Biological Sciences Curriculum Study is 
constructing a high school biology course, and work of 
a comparable nature is under way in chemistry and other 
fields. 
The main objective of this work has been to present 
subject matter effectively-that is, with due regard not 
only for coverage but also for structure. The daring and 
imagination that have gone into this work and the re-
markable early successes it has achieved have stimulated 
psychologists who are concerned with the nature of 
learning and the transmission of knowledge. The Woods 
Hole Conference, the background and conduct of which 
are described in the Preface, was one response to this 
stimulation of interest. Physicists, biologists, mathemati-
cians, historians, educators, and psychologistS came to-
gether to consider anew the nature of the learning process, 
its relevance to education, and points at which current 
curricular efforts have raised new questions about our 
conceptions of learning and teaching. What shall be 
2 
'\ 
INTRODUCTION 
taught, when, and how? What kinds of research and 
inquiry might further the growing effott in the design 
of curricula? What are the implications of emphasizing 
the structure of a subject, be it mathematics or history-
emphasizing it in a way that seeks to give a student as 
quickly as possible a sense of the fundamental ideas of 
a discipline? 
An additional word of background is needed to appr~ 
ciate the significance of present curricular effotts in the ">'-;~ ~~ 
changing educational scene. The past half century has ~",< ..... \"~ 
witnessed the rise of the American university graduate 
.,...\: .... 
school with its strong emphasis upon advanced study and'" 
..I. ~ 
research. One consequence of this development has been .... ~~ l~ 
the growing separation of first-rank scholars and scientistsl.,-",n co) 
from the task of presenting their own subjects in primary v.;r 
and secondary schools-indeed even in elementary courses 
../"---
for undergraduates. The chief contact between those on 
the frontiers of scholarship and students in schools was 
through the occasional textbooks for· high schools pre-
pared by such distingnished scienrists as Millikan or by 
historians of the stature of Beard or Commager. For the 
most part, however, the scholars at the forefront of their 
disciplines, those .who might be able to make the greatest 
contribution to the substantive reorganization of their 
fields. were not involved in the development of curricula 
for the elementary and secondary schools. In conse-
quence, school programs have often dealt inadequately 
or incorrectly with contemporary knowledge, and we 
have not reaped the benefits that might have come from 
a joining of the efforts of eminent scholars, wise and skill-
ful teachers. and those trained in the fields related to 
teaching and learning. Now there appears to be a reversal 
3 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATIOH 
of this trend. It consists in the renewed involvement of 
many of America's most distinguished scientists in the 
planning of school study programs in their field, in the 
preparation of textbooks and laboratory demonstrations, 
in the construction of films and television programs. 
This same half century saw American psychology move 
away from its earlier concern with the nature of learning 
as it occurs in school. The psychology of learning tended 
to become involved with the precise details of learning 
in highly simplified short-term situations and thereby lost 
much of its contact with the long-term educational effects 
of learning. For their part, educational psychologists 
turned their attention with great effect to the study of 
aptitude and achievement and to social and motivational 
aspects of education, but did not concern themselves 
directly with the intellectual structure of class activities. 
Other considerations led to a neglect of curriculum 
problems by psychologists. The ever-changing pattern 
of American educational philosophy played a part in 
the matter as well. There has always been a dualism in 
our educational ideal, a striving for a balance between 
what Benjamin Franklin referred to as the "useful" and 
the "ornamental." As he put it, in the mid-eighteenth 
century: "It would be well if they could be taught 
everything that is useful and everything that is orna-
mental: but art is long and their time is short. It is there-
fore proposed that they learn those things that are likely 
to be most useful and most ornamental." The concept of 
the useful in Franklin and in the American educational 
ideal afterwards was twofold: it involved, on the one 
hand, skills of a specific kind and, on the other, general 
understanding, to enable one better to deal with the affairs 
4 
,,'. " '~. 
INTRODUCTION 
of life. Skills were matters of direct concern to one's 
profession. As early as the 1750'S we find Ben Franklin 
urging that future merchants be taught French, German, 
and Spanish, and that pupils be taught agriculture, supple-
mented by farm visits and the like. General understand-
ing was to be achieved through a knowledge of history 
plus the discipline produced by the diligent study of 
mathematics and logic, and by training in careful obser-
vation of the natural world around one; it required a 
well-disciplined, well-stocked mind. 
The American secondary school has tried to strike a 
balance between the two concepts of usefulness-and 
most often with some regard for the ornamental as weI!. 
But as the proportion of the population registered in 
secondary schools increased, and as the proportion of new 
Americans in the school population went up, the balance 
between instruction in the useful skills and in disciplined 
understanding was harder to maintain. Dr. Conant's 
recent plea for the comprehensive high school is ad-
dressed to the problem of that balance. 
It is interesting that around the tum of the last century 
the conception of the learning process as depicted by 
psychology gradually shifted away from an emphasis upon 
the production of general understanding to an emphasis 
on the acqnisition of specific skills. The study of "trans-
fer" provides the type case-the problem of the gain in 
mastery of other activities that one achieves from having 
mastered a particular learning task. Whereas the earlier 
emphasis had led to research studies on the transfer of 
formal discipline-the value obtained from the training 
of such "faculties" as analysis, judgment, memory, and 
so forth-later work tended to explore the transfer of 
5 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
identical elements or specific skills. In consequence, there 
was relatively little work by American psychologists 
during the first four decades of this century on the 
manner in which the smdent could be trained to grasp 
the underlying structure or significance of complex 
knowledge. Virmally all of the evidence of the last two 
decades on the nature of learning and transfer has indi-
cated that, while the original theory of formal discipline 
was poorly stated in terms of the training of faculties, it 
is indeed a fact that massive general transfer can be 
achieved by appropriate learning, even to the degree that 
learning properly under optimum conditions leads one 
to "learn how to learn." These smdies have stimulated 
a renewed interest in complex learning of a kind that one 
finds in schools, learning designed to produce general 
understanding of the structure of a subject matter. In-
terest in curricular problems at large has, in consequence, 
been rekindled among psychologists concerned with the 
learning process. 
A word is needed at this point to explain in fuller 
detail what is meant by the structure of a subject, for we 
shall have occasion to return to this idea often in later 
pages. Three simple examples-from biology, from mathe-
matics, and from the learning of language-help to make 
the idea clearer. Take first a set of observations on an 
inchworm crossing a sheet of graph paper mounted on 
a board. The board is horizontal; the animal moves in a 
straight line. We tilt the board so that the inclined plane 
or upward grade is 300. The animal does not go straight 
up the line of maximum climb, but travels at an angle of 
45 0 from it. We tilt the board to 60
0
• At what angle 
does the animal travel with respect to the line of maxi-
6 
INTRODUCTION 
mum climb? His path now makes a 67 y, 0 angle with it, 
that is, he travels along a line 75
0 off the vertical. We 
may thus infer that inchworms "prefer" to travel up-
hill, if uphill they must go, along an incline of ISo. We 
have discovered a tropism, as it is called, indeed a geo-
tropism. It is not an isolated fact. We can go on to show 
that among simple organisms, such phenomena-regula-
tion of locomotion according to a fixed or built-in stand-
ard-are the rule. There is a preferred level of illumination 
toward which lower organisms orient, a preferred level 
of salinity, of temperature, and so on. Once a smdent 
grasps this basic relation between external stimulation and 
locomotor action, he is well on his way toward being able 
to handle a good deal of seemingly new but, in fact, 
highly related information. The swarming of locusts 
where temperature determines the swarm density in 
which locusts are forced to travel, the species maintenance 
of insects at different altitudes on the side of a mountain 
where crossbreeding is prevented by the tendency of 
each species to travel in its preferred oxygen zone, and 
many other phenomena in biology can be understood in 
the light of tropisms. Grasping the structure of a subject 
is understanding it in a way that permits many other 
things to be related to it meaningfully. To learn structure, 
in short, is to learn how things are related. 
Much more briefly, to take an example from mathe-
matics, algebra is a way of arranging knowns and un-
knowns in equations so that the unknowns are made 
knowable. The three fundamentals involved in working 
with these equations are commutation, distribution, and 
association. Once a student grasps the ideas embodied by 
these three fundamentals, he is in a position to recognize 
7 
~\.I'O 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
wherein "new" equations to be solved are not new at 
all, but variants on a familiar theme. Whether the student 
knows the formal names of these operations is less impor-
tant for transfer than whether he is able to use them. 
The often unconscious nature of learning structures is 
perhaps best illustrated in learning one's native language. 
Having grasped the subtle structure of a sentence, the 
child very rapidly learns to generate many other sentences 
based on this model though different in content from the 
original sentence learned. And having mastered the rules 
for transforming sentences without altering their mean-
ing-"The dog bit the man" and "The man was bitten by 
the dog" -the child is able to vary his sentences much 
more widely. Yet, while young children are able to use 
the structural rules of English, they are cenainly not 
able to say what the rules are. 
The scientists constructing curricula in physics and 
mathematics have been highly mindful of the problem of 
teaching the structure of their subjects, and it may be 
that their early successes have been due to this emphasis. 
Their emphasis upon structure has stimulated students of 
the learning process. The reader will find the emphasis 
reflected many times in the pages that follow. 
Clearly there are general questions to be faced before 
one can look at specific problems of courses, sequences, 
and the like. The moment one begins to ask questions 
about the value of specific courses, one is asking about 
the objectives of education. The construction of curricula 
proceeds in a world where changing social, cultural, and 
political conditions continually alter the surroundings and 
the goals of schools and their students. We are concerned 
with curricula desigued for Americans, for their ways 
8 
INTRODUCTION 
and their needs in a complex world. Americans are a 
changing people; their geographical mobility makes im-
perative some degree of uniformity among high schools 
and primary schools. Yet the diversity of American 
communities .and of American life in general makes 
equally imperative some degree of variety in curricula. 
And whatever the limits placed on education by the 
demands of diversity and uniformity, there are also re-
quirements for productivity to be met: are we producing 
enough scholars, scientists, poets, lawmakers, to meet the 
demands of our times? Moreover, schools must also con-
tribute to the social and emotional development of the 
child if they are to fulfill their function of education for 
life in a democratic community and for fruitful family 
life. If the emphasis in what follows is principally on the 
intellectual side of education, it is not that the other 
objectives of education are less imponant. 
We may take as perhaps the most general objective of 
education that it cultivate excellence; but it should be 
clear in what sense this phrase is used. It here refers not 
ouly to schooling the better student but also to helping 
each student achieve his optimum intellectual develop-
ment. Good teaching that emphasizes the structure of a 
subject is probably even more valuable for the less able 
student than for the gifted one, for it is the former rather 
than the latter who is most easily thrown off the track 
by poor teaching. This is not to say that the pace or the 
content of courses need be identical for all studenrs-
though, as one member of the Conference put it, "When 
you teach well, it always seems as if seventy-five per cent 
of the students are above the median." Careful investiga-
tion and research can tell us wherein differences must be 
9 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
introduced. One thing seems clear: if all students are 
helped to the full utilization of their intellectual powers, 
we will have a better chance of surviving as a democracy 
in an age of enonnous technological and social com-
plexity. 
The chapters that follow will be found to be some-
what specialized in the direction of the sciences and 
mathematics and how they might best be taught. This 
should not be taken as a declaration in favor of emphasiz-
ing the sciences and scientific training. It is an accident, 
rather, of historical developments over the last ten years. 
There has simply been more opportunity to examine 
progress in these fields, since it is in these fields that most 
of the experimental curricula have been constructed. 
Redoubled efforts are essential in the social studies, in 
the humanities, and in language instruction. A sense of 
tragedy and triumph achieved through the study of his-
tory and literature is surely as important to modern man 
as a sense of the structure of matter achieved through 
the study of physics. It should be utterly clear that the 
humanities, the social studies, and the sciences are all 
equally in need of imaginative effort if they are to make 
their proper contribution to the education of coming 
generations; 
The top quarter of public school students, from which 
we must draw intellectual leadership in the next genera-
tion, is perhaps the group most neglected by our schools 
in the recent past. Improvements in the teaching of 
science and mathematics may very well accentuate the 
gaps already observable between talented, average, and 
slow students in these subjects. Even as they now exist, 
these gaps raise difficult problems. It is plain that, in 
10 
INTRODUCTION 
general, scientific and mathematical aptitudes can be dis-
covered earlier than other intellectual talents. Ideally, 
schools should allow students to go ahead in different 
subjects as rapidly as they can. But the administrative 
problems that are raised when one makes such an arrange-
ment possible are almost inevitably beyond the resources 
that schools have available for dealing with them. The 
answer will probably lie in some modification or abolition 
of the system of grade levels in some subjects, notably 
mathematics, along with a program of course enrichment 
in other subjects. Questions about the enrichment and 
the special handling of gifted students will doubtless 
persuade the more eulightened and wealthier schools to 
modify current practices. But we can certainly ill afford 
as a nation to allow local inadequacies to inhibit the de-
velopment of children born into relatively poor towns 
or reglOns. 
Four themes are developed in the chapters that follow. 
The first of these has already been introduced: the role 
of structure in learning and how it may be made central 
in teaching. The approach taken is a practical one. Stu-
dents, perforce, have a limited exposure to the materials 
they are to learn. How can this exposure be made to 
count in their thinking for the rest of their lives? The 
dominant view among men who have been engaged in 
preparing and teaching new curricula is that the answer 
to this question lies in giving students an understanding 
of the fundamental structure of whatever subjects we 
choose to teach. This is a minimum requirement for 
using knowledge, for bringing it to bear on problems 
and events one encounters outside a classroom-or in 
11 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
classrooms one enters later in one's training. The teach-
ing and learning of structure, rather than simply the 
mastery of facts and techniques, is at the center of the 
classic problem of transfer. There are many things that 
go into learning of this kind, not the least of which are 
supporting habits and skills that make possible the active 
use of the materials one has come to understand. If earlier 
learning is to render later learning easier, it must do so 
by providing a general picture in terms of which the 
relations between things encountered earlier and later 
are made as clear as possible. 
Given the importance of this theme, much too little 
is known about how to teach fundamental structure 
effectively or how to provide learning conditions that 
foster it. Much of the discussion in the chapter devoted 
to this topic has to do with ways and means of achieving 
such teaching and learning and with the kinds of research 
needed to help in preparing curricula with emphasis on 
Structure. 
The second theme has to do with readiness for learn-
ing. Experience over the past decade points to the fact 
that our schools may be wasting precious years by pOSt-
poning the teaching of many important subjects on the 
ground that they are too difficult. The reader will find 
the chapter devoted to this theme introduced by the 
proposition that the foundations of any subject may be 
taught to anybody at any age in some form. Though the 
proposition may seem startling at first, its intent is to 
underscore an essential point often overlooked in the 
planning of curricula. It is that the basic ideas that lie 
at the heart of all science and mathematics and the basic 
themes that give form to life and literature are as simple 
12 
INTRODUCTION 
as they are powerful. To be in command of these basic 
ideas, to use them effectively, requires a continual deep-
ening of one's understanding of them that comes from 
learning to use them in progressively more complex 
forms. It is only when such basic ideas are put in formal-
ized terms as equations or elaborated verbal concepts 
that they are out of reach of the young child, if he has 
not first understood them inrnitively and had a chance 
to try them out on his own. The early teaching of sci-
ence, mathematics, social studies, and literature should 
be designed to teach these subjects with scrupulous in-
tellectual honesty, but with an emphasis upon the intui-
tive grasp of ideas and upon the use of these basic ideas. 
A curriculum as it develops should revisit these basic 
ideas repeatedly, building upon them until the Student 
has grasped the full formal apparatus that goes with 
them. Fourth-grade children can play absorbing games 
governed by the principles of topology and set theory, 
even discovering new "moves" or theorems. They can 
grasp the idea of tragedy and the basic human plights 
represented in myth. But they cannot put these ideas . 
into formal language or manipulate them as grownups 
can. There is much still to be learned about the "spiral 
curriculum" that turns back on itself at higher levels, 
and many questions still to be answered are discussed in 
Chapter 3. 
The third theme involves the nature of intuition-the 
intellectual technique of arriving at plausible but tenta-
tive formulations without going through the analytic 
steps by which such formulations would be found to be 
valid or invalid conclusions. Intuitive thinking, the train-
ing of hunches, is a much~neglected and essential feature 
13 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATIOH 
of productive thinking not only in formal academic 
disciplines but also in everyday life. The shrewd guess, 
the fertile hypothesis, the courageous leap to a tentative 
conclusion-these are the most valuable coin of the 
thinker at work, whatever his line of work. Can school 
children be led to master this gift? 
The three themes mentioned so far are all premised 
on a central conviction: that intellectual activity any-
where is the same, whether at the frontier of knowledge 
or in a third-grade classroom. What a scientist does at 
his desk or in his laboratory, what a literary critic does 
in reading a poem, are of the same order as what anybody 
else does when he is engaged in like activities-if he is 
to achieve understanding. The difference is in degree, 
not in kind. The schoolboy learning physics is a physi-
cist, and it is easier for him to learn physics behaving like 
a physicist than doing something else. The "something 
else" usually involves the task of mastering what came 
to be called at Woods Hole a "middle language" -class-
room discussions and textbooks that talk about the con-
clusions in a field of intellectual inquiry rather than cen-
tering upon the inquiry itself. Approached in that way, 
high school physics often looks very little like physics, 
social studies are removed from the issues of life and 
society as usually discussed, and school mathematics too 
often has lost contact with what is at the heart of the 
subject, the idea of order. 
The fourth theme relates to the desire to learn and 
how it may be stimulated. Ideally, interest in the material 
to be learned is the best stimulus to learning, rather than 
such external goals as grades or later competitive ad-
vantage. While it is surely unrealistic to assume that the 
14 
INTRODUCTION 
pressures of competition can be effectively eliminated 
or that it is wise to seek their elimination, it is nonethe-
less worth considering how interest in learning per se 
can be stimulated. There was much discussion at Woods 
Hole of how the climate in which school learning occurs 
can be improved, discussion that ranged over such di-
verse topics as teacher training, the nature of school 
examinations, the quality of a curriculum. Chapter 5 is 
devoted to this set of problems. 
While there was considerable discussion at Woods 
Hole of the apparatus of teaching-films, television, and 
audio-visual aids, teaching machines, and other devices 
that a teacher may use in instruction-there was anything 
but consensus on the subject. Virtually all of the parti-
cipants agreed that not teaching devices but teachers 
were the principal agents of instruction, but there was 
a division of opinion on how the teacher was to be aided. 
The disagreement, perhaps, can be summarized (though 
oversimplified in the process) in terms of the relative 
emphasis placed upon the teacher as such and upon the 
aids that the teacher might employ. The two extreme 
positions-stated in exaggerated form-were, first, that 
the teacher must be the sole and final arbiter of how to 
present a given subject and what devices to use, and, 
second, that the teacher should be explicator and com-
mentator for prepared materials made available through 
films, television, teaching machines, and the like. The 
implication of the first extreme position is that every 
effort should be made to educate the teacher to a deep 
knowledge of his or her subject so that he or she may 
do as good a job as possible with it, and at the same time 
the best materials should be made available for the teacher 
15 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
to choose from in constructing a course that meets the 
requirements of the syllabus. The other extreme implies 
a massive effort to prepare films, television programs, 
instructional programs for teaching machines, and so on, 
and to teach the teacher how to use these with wisdom 
and understanding of the subject. The debate is sufficient-
ly intense and its implications for a philosophy of educa-
tion sufficiently great that the concluding chapter is 
devoted to this issue. 
In sum, then, we shall concentrate on four themes and 
one conjecture: the themes of structure, readiness, in-
tuition, and interest, and the conjecture of how best to 
aid the teacher in the task of instruction. 
16 
2 
THE IMPORTANCE OF STRUCTURE 
T HE first object of any act of learning, over and 
beyond the pleasure it may give, is that it should serve 
us in the future. Learning should not only take us some-
where; it should allow us later to go further more easily. 
There are two ways in which learning serves the future. 
One is through its specific applicability to tasks that 
are highly similar to those we originally learned to per-
form. Psychologists refer to this phenomenon as specific 
transfer of training; perhaps it should be called the ex-
tension of habits or associations. Its utility appears to be 
limited in the main to what we usually speak of as skills. 
Having learned how to hammer nails, we are better able 
later to learn how to hammer tacks or chip wood. Learn-
ing in school undoubtedly creates skills of a kind that 
transfers to activities encountered later, either in school 
or after. A second way in which earlier learning renders 
later perfonnance more efficient is through what is con-
veniently called nonspecific transfer or, more accurately, 
the transfer of principles and attitudes. In essence, it 
consists of learning initially not a skill but a general idea, 
which can then be used as a basis for recognizing subse-
quent problems as special cases of the idea originally 
mastered. This type of transfer is at the heart of the 
educational process-the continual broadening and deep-
ening of knowledge in terms of basic and general ideas. 
i I 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
The continuity of learning that is produced by the 
second type of transfer, transfer of principles, is depend-
ent upon mastery of the structure of the subject matter, 
as structure was described in the preceding chapter. That 
is to say, in order for a person to be able to recognize the 
applicability or inapplicability of an idea to a new situ-
ation and to broaden his learning thereby, he must have 
clearly in mind the general nature of the phenomenon 
with which he is dealing. The more fundamental or basic 
is the idea he has learned, almost by defiuition, the greater 
will be its breadth of applicability to new problems. 
Indeed, this is almost a tautology, for what is meant by 
"fundamental" in this sense is precisely that an idea has 
wide as well as powerful applicability. It is simple enough 
to proclaim, of course, that school curricula and methods 
of teaching should be geared to the teaching of funda-
mental ideas in whatever subject is being taught. But as 
soon as one makes such a statement a host of problems 
arise, many of which can be solved ouly with the aid of 
considerably more research. We turn to some of these 
now. 
The first and most obvious problem is how to con-
struct curricula that can be taught by ordinary teachers 
to ordinary students and that at the same time reflect 
clearly the basic or underlying principles of various fields 
of inquiry. The problem is twofold: first, how to have 
the basic subj ects rewritten and their teaching materials 
revamped in such a way that the pervading and powerful 
ideas and attitudes relating to them are given a central 
role; second, how to match the levels of these materials 
to the capacities of students of different abilities at differ-
ent grades in school. 
18 
THE IMPORTANCE OF STRUCTURE 
The experience of the past several years has taught at 
least one important lesson about the design of a curricu-
lum that is true to the underlying structure of its subject 
matter. It is that the best minds in any particular dis-
cipline must be put to work on the task. The decision as 
to what should be taught in American history to ele-
mentary school children or what should be taught in 
arithmetic is a decision that can best be reached with the 
aid of those with a high degree of vision and competence 
in each of these fields. To decide that the elementary 
ideas of algebra depend upon the fundamentals of the 
commutative, distributive, and associative laws, one 
must be a mathematician in a position to appreciate and 
understand the fundamentals of mathematics. Whether 
schoolchildren require an understanding of Frederick 
Jackson Turner's ideas about the role of the frontier in 
American history before they can sort out the facts and 
trends of American history-this again is a decision that 
requires the help of the scholar who has a deep under-
standing of the American past. Only by the use of our 
best minds in devising curricula will we bring the fruits 
of scholarship and wisdom to the student just beginning 
his studies. 
The question will be raised, "How enlist the aid of 
our most able scholars and scientists in designing cur-
ricula for primary and secondary schools?" The answer 
has already been given, at least in part. The School 
Mathematics Study Group, the Uuiversity of Illinois 
mathematics projects, the Physical Science Study Com-
mittee, and the Biological Sciences Curriculum Study 
have indeed been eulisting the aid of eminent men in 
their various fields, doing so by means of summer proj-
19 
('0\ \"b .. .!.. 
i 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
ects, supplemented in pan by year-long leaves of absence 
for certain key people involved. They have been aided 
in these projects by outstanding elementary and second-
ary school teachers and, for special purposes, by pro-
fessional writers, film makers, designers, and others re-
quired in such a complex enterprise. 
There is at least one major matter that is left unsettled 
even by a large-scale revision of curricula in the direction 
indicated. Mastery of the fundamental ideas of a field 
involves not only the grasping of general principles, but 
also the development of an attitude toward learning and 
inquiry, toward guessing and hunches, toward the pos-
sibility of solving problems on one's own. Just as a physi-
cist has certain attitudes about the ultimate orderliness 
of nature and a conviction that order can be discovered, 
so a young physics student needs some working version 
of these attitudes if he is to organize his learning in such 
a way as to make what he learns usable and meaningful 
in his thinking. To instill such attitudes by teaching 
requires something more than the mere presentation of 
fundamental ideas. Just what it takes to bring off such 
teaching is something on which a great deal of research 
is needed, but it wonld seem that an imponant ingredi-
ent is a sense of excitement about discovery-discovery 
of regularities of previously unrecognized relations and 
similarities between ideas, with a resulting sense of self-
confidence in one's abilities. Various people who have 
worked on curricula in science and mathematics have 
urged that it is possible to present the fundamental struc-
ture of a discipline in such a way as to preserve some 
of the exciting sequences that .lead a student to discover 
for himself. 
20 
THE IMPORTANCE OF STRUCTURE 
It is panicuJarly the Committee on School Mathe-
matics and the Arithmetic Project of the University of 
Illinois that have emphasized the importance of discovery 
as an aid to teaching. They have been active in devising 
methods that permit a student to discover for himself 
the generalization that lies behind a particular mathe-
matical operation, and they contrast this approach with 
the "method of assertion and proof" in which the gen-
eralization is first stated by the teacher and the class 
asked to proceed through the proof. It has also been 
pointed out by the Illinois group that the method of 
discovery would be too time-consuming for presenting 
all of what a student must cover in mathematics. The 
proper balance between the two is anything but plain, 
and research is in progress to elucidate the matter, though 
more is needed. Is the inductive approach a better tech-
nique for teaching principles? Does it have a desirable 
effect on attitudes? 
That the method of discovery need not be limited to 
such highly formalized subjects as mathematics and 
physics is illustrated by some experimentation on social 
studies carried out by the Harvard Cognition Project. 
A sixth-grade class, having been through a conventional 
unit on the social and economic geography of the South-
eastern states, was introduced to the North Centra.! 
region by being asked to locate the major cities of the 
area on a map containing physical features and natural 
resources, but no place names. The resulting class dis-
cussion very rapidly produced a variety of plausible 
theories concerning the requirements of a city-a water 
transportation theory that placed Chicago at the junction 
of the three lakes, a mineral resources theory that placed 
21 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
it near the Mesabi range, a food-supply theory that put 
a great city on the rich soil of Iowa, and SO on. The level 
of interest as well as the level of conceptual sophistica-
tion was far above that of control classes. Most srriking, 
however, was the attitude of children to whom, for the 
first time, the location of a city appeared as a problem, 
and one to which an answer could be discovered by 
taking thought. Not only was there pleasure and excite-
ment in the pursuit of a question, but in the end the 
discovery was worth making, at least for urban children 
for whom the phenomenon of the city was something 
that had before been taken for granted. 
How do we tailor fundamental knowledge to the 
interests and capacities of children? This is a theme we 
shall rerum to later, and only a word need be said about 
it here. It requires a combination of deep undersranding 
and patient honesty to present physical or any other 
phenomena in a way that is simultaneously exciting, 
correct, and rewardingly comprehensible. In examining 
certain teaching materials in physics, for example, we 
have found much patient honesty in presentation that 
has come to naught because the authors did not have 
a deep enough understanding of the subject they were 
presenting. 
A good case in point is to be found in the usual attempt 
to explain the narure of tides. Ask the majority of high 
school srudents to explain tides and they will speak of 
the gravitational pull of the moon on the surface of the 
earth and how it pulls the water on the moon's side into 
a bulge. Ask them now why there is also a bulge of less 
magnirude on the side of the eanh opposite to the moon, 
and they will almost always be without a satisfactory 
22 
THE IMPORTANCE OF STRUCTURE 
answer. Or ask them where the maximum bulge of the 
incoming tide is with respect to the relative position of 
the earth and moon, and the answer will usually be that 
it is at the point on the earth's surface nearest to the 
moon. If the srudent knows there is a lag in the tidal 
crest, he will usually not know why. The failure in both 
cases comes from an inadequate picrure of how gravity 
acts upon a free-moving elastic body, and a failure to 
connect the idea of inertia with the idea of gravitational 
action. In short, the tides are explained without a share 
of the excitement that can come from understanding 
Newton's great discovery of universal gravitation and 
its mode of action. Correct and illuminating explanations 
are no more difficult and often easier to grasp than ones 
that are partly correct and therefore too complicated 
and too restricted. It is the consensus of virtually all the 
men and women who have been working on curriculum 
projects that making material interesting is in no way 
incompatible with presenting it soundly; indeed, a cor-
rect general explanation is often the most interesting of 
all. Inherent in the preceding discussions are at least four 
general claims that can be made for teaching the funda-
mental structure of a subject, claims in need of detailed 
srudy. 
The firsr is that understanding fundamentals makes a 
subject more comprehensible. This is true not only in 
physics and mathematics, where we have principally 
illustrated the point, but equally in the social srudies and 
literarure. Once one has grasped the fundamental idea 
that a nation must trade in order to live, then such a 
presumably special phenomenon as the Triangular Trade 
of the American colonies becomes altogether simpler to 
23 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
understand as something more than commerce in molas-
ses, sugar cane, rum, and slaves in an atmosphere of vio-
lation of British trade regulations. The high school stu-
dent reading Moby Dick can only understand more 
deeply if he can be led to understand that Melville's 
novel is, among other things, a study of the theme of evil 
and the plight of those pursuing this "killing whale." 
And if the student is led funher to understand that there 
are a relatively limited number of human plights about 
which novels are written, he understands literature the 
better for it. 
The second point relates to human memory. Perhaps 
the most basic thing that can be said about human mem-
ory, after a century of intensive research, is that unless 
detail is placed into a structured pattern, it is rapidly 
forgotten. Detailed material is conserved in memory by 
the use of simplified ways of representing it. These sim-
plified representations have what may be called a "re-
generative" character. A good example of this regenera-
tive propeny of long-term memory can be found in 
science. A scientist does not try to remember the dis-
tances traversed by falling bodies in different gravita-
tional fields over different periods of time. What he 
carries in memory instead is a formula that permits him 
with varying degrees of accuracy to regenerate the de-
tails on which the more easily remembered formula is 
based. So he commits to memory the formula s = 12 gt' 
and not a handbook of distances, times, and gravitational 
constants. Similarly, one does not remember exactly 
what Marlowe, the commentator in Lord Jim, said about 
the chief protagonist's plight, but, rather, simply that he 
was the dispassionate onlooker, the man who tried to 
understand without judging what had led Lord Jim into 
24 
THE IMPORTANCE OF STRUCTURE 
the straits in which he found himself. We remember a 
formula, a vivid detail that carries the meaning of an 
event, an average that stands for a range of events, a 
caricature or picture that preserves an essence-all of 
them techniques of condensation and representation. 
What learning general or fundamental principles does 
is to ensure that memory loss will not mean total loss, that 
what remains will permit us to reconstruct the details 
when needed. A good theory is the vehicle not only for 
understanding a phenomenon now but also for remem-
bering it tomorrow. 
Third, an understanding of fundamental principles 
and ideas, as noted earlier, appears to be the main road 
to adequate "transfer of training." To understand some-
thing as a specific instance of a more general case-which 
is what understanding a more fundamental principle or 
structure means-is to have learned not only a specific 
thing but also a model for understanding other things 
like it that one may encounter. If a student could grasp 
in its most human sense the weariness of Europe at the 
close of the Thirty Years' War and how it created the 
conditions for a workable but not ideologically absolute 
Treaty of Westphalia, he might be better able to think 
about the ideological struggle of East and West-though 
the parallel is anything but exacr. A carefnlly wrought 
understanding should also permit him to recognize the 
limits of the generalization as well. The idea of "prin-
ciples" and "concepts" as a basis for transfer is hardly 
new. It is much in need of more research of a specific 
kind that would provide detailed knowledge of how best 
to proceed in the teaching of different subjects in differ-
ent grades. 
The founh claim for emphasis on structure and prin-
25 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
ciples in teaching is that by constantly reexamining 
material taught in elementary and secondary schools for 
its fundamental character, one is able to narrow the 
gap between "advanced" knowledge and "elementary" 
knowledge. Part of the difficulty now found in the pro-
gression from primary school through high school to 
college is that material learned earlier is either out of 
date or misleading by virtue of its lagging too far behind 
developments in a field. This gap can be reduced by the 
kind of emphasis set forth in the preceding discussion. 
Consider now some specific problems that received 
considerable discussion at Woods Hole. One of them has 
to do with the troubled topic of "general science." There 
are certain recurrent ideas that appear in virtually all 
branches of science. If in one subject one has learned 
them well and generally, that achievement should make 
the task of learning them again in different fortn else-
where in science much easier. Various teachers and sci-
entists have raised the question whether these basic ideas 
should not be "isolated," so to speak, and taught more 
explicitly in a manner that frees them from specific areas 
of science. The type of idea can be easily illustrated: 
categorization and its uses, the unit of measure and its 
development, the indirectness of infortnation in science 
and the need for operational definition of ideas, and so 
forth. With respect to the last, for example, we do not 
see pressure or the chemical bond directly but infer it 
indirectly from a set of measures. So too body tempera-
ture. So too sadness in another person. Can these and 
similar ideas be presented effectively and with a variety 
of concrete illustrations in the early grades in order to 
give the child a better basis for understanding their 
26 
THE IMPORTANCE OF STRUCTURE 
specific representation in various special disciplines later? 
Is it wise to teach such "general science" as an introduc-
tion to disciplinary sciences in the later grades? How 
should they be taught and what could we reasonably 
expect by way of easier learning later? Much research 
is needed on this promising topic-research not only on 
the usefulness of such an approach, but also on the kinds 
of general scientific ideas that might be taught. 
Indeed, it may well be that there are certain general 
attitudes or approaches toward science or literature that 
can be taught in the earlier grades that would have con-
siderable relevance for later learning. The attitude that 
things are connected and not isolated is a case in point. 
One can indeed imagine kindergarten games designed 
to make children more actively alert to how things affect . 
or are connected with each other-a kind of introduction 
to the idea of multiple detertnination of events in the 
physical and the social world. Any working scientist 
is usually able to say something about the ways of think-
ing or attitndes that are a part of his craft. Historians 
have written rather extensively on this subject as far as 
their field is concerned. Literary men have even evolved 
a genre of writing about the fortns of sensibility that 
make for literary taste and vigor. In mathematics, this 
subject has a fortnal name, "heuristic," to describe the 
approach one takes to solving problems. One may well 
argue, as it was argued at Woods Hole by men in widely 
diffeting disciplines, that it might be wise to assess what 
attitudes or heuristic devices are most pervasive and 
useful, and that an effort should be made to teach chil-
dren a rudimentary version of them that might be fur-
ther refined as they progress through school. Again, the 
27 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
reader will sense that the argument for such an approach 
is premised on the assumption that there is a continuity 
berween what a scholar does on the forefront of his 
discipline and what a child does in approaching it for 
the first time. This is not to say that the task is a simple 
one, only that it is worthy of careful consideration and 
research. 
Perhaps the chief arguments put forward in opposi-
tion to the idea of such efforts at teaching general prin-
ciples and general attitudes are, first, that it is better to 
approach the general through the specific and, second, 
that working attitudes should be kept implicit rather 
than being made explicit. For example, one of the prin-
cipal organizing concepts in biology is the persistent 
question, "What function does this thing serve? "-a 
question premised on the assumption that everything 
one finds in an organism serves some function or it 
probably would not have survived. Other general ideas 
are related to this question. The student who makes 
progress in biology learns to ask the question more and 
more subtly, to relate more and more things to it. At the 
next step he asks what function a particular structure or 
process serves in the light of what is required in the 
total functioning of an organism. Measuring and cate-
gorizing are carried out in the service of the general idea 
of function. Then beyond that he may organize his 
knowledge in terms of a still more comprehensive notion 
of function, turning to cellular ~tructure or to phylo-
genetic comparison. It may well be that the style of 
thought of a particular discipline is necessary as a back-
ground for learning the working meaning of general 
concepts, in which case a general introduction to the 
28 
THE IMPORTANCE OF STRUCTURE 
meaning of "function" might be less effective than 
teaching it in the context of biology. 
As for "attitude" teaching or even the teaching of 
heuristic in mathematics, the argument runs that if the 
learner becomes too aware of his own attitudes or ap-
proach, he may become mechanical or trick-oriented in 
his work. No evidence exists on the point, and research 
is needed before any effort is made to teach in this way. 
Work is now going on at Illinois on training children to 
be more effective in asking questions about physical 
phenomena, but much more information is needed before 
the issue is clear. 
One hears often the distinction between "doing" and 
"understanding." It is a distinction applied to the case, 
for example, of a student who presumably understands 
a mathematical idea but does not know how to use it in 
computation. While the distinction is probably a false 
one-since how can one know what a student under-
stands save by seeing what he does-it points to an inter-
esting difference in emphasis in teaching and in learning. 
Thus one finds in some of the classic books on the psy-
chology of problem solving (such as Max Wertheimer's 
Productive Thinking) a sharp line drawn berween "rote 
drill" and "understanding." In point of fact, drill need 
not be rote and, alas, emphasis on understanding may 
lead the student to a certain verbal glibness. It has been 
the experience of members of the School Mathematics 
Study Group that computatioQal practice may be a 
necessary step toward understa~ding conceptual ideas 
in mathematics. Similarly one m:\y try to give the high 
school student a sense of styles by having him read 
contrasting authors, yet final insight into style may come 
29 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
only when the student himself tries his hand at writing 
in different styles. Indeed, it is the underlying premise 
of laboratory exercises that doing something helps one 
understand it. There is a certain wisdom in the quip 
made by a psychologist at Woods Hole: "How do I 
know what I think until I feel what I do?" In any case, 
the distinction is not a very helpful one. Wbat is more 
to the point is to ask what methods of exercise in any 
given field are most likely to give the student a sense of 
intelligent mastery over the material. What are the most 
fruitful computational exercises that one can use in vari-
ous branches of mathematics? Does the effort to write 
in the style of Henry James give one an especially good 
insight into that author's sryle? Perhaps a good stan 
toward understanding such matters would be to study 
the methods used by successful teachers. It would be 
surprising if the information compiled failed to suggest 
a host of worthwhile laboratory studies on techniques 
of teaching-or, indeed, on techniques of imparting 
complex information generally. 
A word is needed, finally, on examinations. It is ob-
vious that an examination can be bad in the sense of 
emphasizing trivial aspects of a subject. Such examina-
tions can encourage teaching in a disconnected fashion 
and learning by rote. Wbat is often overlooked, how-
ever, is that examinations can also be allies in the battle 
to improve curricula and teaching. Whether an examina-
tion is of the "objective" type involving multiple choices 
or of the essay type, it can be devised so as to emphasize 
an understanding of the broad principles of a subject. 
Indeed, even when one examines on detailed knowledge, 
it can be done in such a way as to require an understand-
30 
THE IMPORTANCE OF STRUCTURE 
ing by the student of the connectedness between specific 
facts. There is a concerted effort now under way among 
national testing organizations like the Educational Test-
ing Service to construct examinations that will empha-
size an understanding of fundamental principles. Such 
efforts can be of great help. Additional help might be 
given to local school systems by making available to 
them manuals that describe the variety of ways in which 
examinations can be constructed. The searching exami-
nation is not easy to make, and a thoughtful manual on 
the subject would be welcome. 
To recapitulate, the main theme of this chapter has 
been that the curriculum of a subject should be deter-
mined by the most fundamental understanding that can 
be achieved of the underlying principles that give struc-
ture to that subject. Teaching specific topics or skills 
without making clear their context in the broader funda-
mental structure of a field of knowledge is uneconomical 
in several deep senses. In the first place, such teaching 
makes it exceedingly difficult for the student to general-
ize from what he has learned to what he will encounter 
later. In the second place, learning that has fallen shon 
of a grasp of general principles has little reward in terms 
of intellectual excitement. The best way to create inter-
est in a subject is to render it worth knowing, which 
means to make the knowledge gained usable in one's 
thinking beyond the situation in which the learning has 
occurred. Third, knowledge one has acquired without 
sufficient structure to tie it together is knowledge that 
is likely to be forgotten. An unconnected set of facts has 
a pitiably short half-life in memory. Organizing facts in 
terms of principles and ideas from which they may be 
31 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
inferred is the only known way of reducing the quick 
rate of loss of human memory. 
Designing curricula in a way that reflects the basic 
structure of a field of knowledge requires the most 
fundamental understanding of that field. It is a task that 
cannot be carried out without the active participation 
of the ablest scholars and scientists. The experience of 
the past several years has shown that such scholars and 
scientists, working in conjunction with experienced 
teachers and students of child development, can prepare 
curricula of the sort we have been considering. Much 
more effort in the actual preparation of curriculum 
materials, in teacher training, and in supporting research 
will be necessary if improvements in our educational 
practices are to be of an order that will meet the chal-
lenges of the scientific and social revolution through 
which we are now living. 
There are many problems of how to teach general 
principles in a way that will be both effective and inter-
esting, and several of the key issues have been passed 
in review. What is abundantly clear is that much work 
remains to be done by way of examining currently effec-
tive practices, fashioning curricula that may be tried out 
on an experimental basis, and carrying out the kinds of 
research that can give support and guidance to the gen-
eral effort at improving teaching. 
How may the kind of curriculum we have been dis-
cussing be brought within the intellectual reach of 
children of different ages? To this problem we turn next. 
32 
3 
READINESS FOR LEARNING 
W E begin with the hypothesis that any subj ect 
can be taught effectively in some intellectually honest 
form to any child at any stage of development. It is a 
bold hypothesis and an essential one in thinking about 
the nature of a curriculum. No evidence exists to con-
tradict it; considerable evidence is being amassed that 
supports it. 
To make clear what is implied, let us examine three 
general ideas. The first has to do with the process of 
intellectual development in children, the second with 
the aCt of learning, and the third with the notion of the 
"spiral curriculum" introduced earlier. 
Intellectual development. Research on the intellectual 
development of the child highlights the fact that at each 
stage of development the child has a characteristic way 
of viewing the world and explaining it to himself. The 
task of teaching a subject to a child at any particular 
age is one of representing the structure of that subject in 
terms of the child's way of viewing things. The task can 
be thought of as one of translation. The general hypothe-
sis that has just been stated is premised on the considered 
judgment that any idea can be represented honestly and 
usefully in the thought forms of children of school age, 
and that these first representations can later be made 
more powerful and precise the more easily by virtue of 
this early learning. To illustrate and support this view, 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
we present here a somewhat detailed picmre of the 
course of intellectual development, along with some sug-
gestions about teaching at different stages of it. 
The work of Piaget and others suggests that, roughly 
speaking, one may distinguish three stages in the intel-
lecmal development of the child. The first stage need 
not concern us in detail, for it is characteristic principally 
of the pre-school child. In this stage, which ends (at 
least for Swiss school children) around the fifth or sixth 
year, the child's mental work consists principally in 
establishing relationships between experience and action; 
his concern is with manipulating the world through 
action. This stage corresponds roughly to the period 
from the first development of language to the point at 
which the child learns to manipulate symbols. In this 
so-called preoperational stage, the principal symbolic 
achievement is that the child learns how to represent the 
external world through symbols established by simple 
generalization; things are represented as equivalent in 
terms of sharing some common property. But the child's 
symbolic world does not make a clear separation between 
internal motives and feelings on the one hand and exter-
nal reality on the other. The sun moves because God 
pushes it, and the stars, like himself, have to go to bed. 
The child is little able to separate his own goals from the 
means for achieving them, and when he has to make 
corrections in his activity after unsuccessful attempts at 
manipulating reality, he does so by what are called in-
tuitive regulations rather than by symbolic operations, 
the former being of a crude trial-and-error nature rather 
than the result of taking thought. 
What is principally lacking at this stage of develop-
34 
READINESS FOR LEARNING 
ment is what the Geneva school has called the concept 
of reversibility. When the shape of an object is changed, 
as when one changes the shape of a ball of plasticene, 
the preoperational child cannot grasp the idea that it 
can be brought back readily to its original state. Because 
of this fundamental lack the child cannot understand 
cenain fundamental ideas that lie at the basis of mathe-
matics and physics-the mathematical idea that one con-
serves quantity even when one partitions a set of things 
into subgroups, or the physical idea that one conserves 
mass and weight even though one transforms the shape 
of an object. It goes without saying that teachers are 
severely limited in transmitting concepts to a child at 
this stage, even in a highly intuitive manner. 
The second stage of development-and now the child 
is in school-is called the stage of concrete operations. 
This stage is operational in contrast to the preceding 
stage, which is merely active. An operation is a type of 
action: it can be carried out rather directly by the 
manipulation of objects, or internally, as when one 
manipulates the symbols that represent things and rela-
tions in one's mind. Roughly, an operation is a means 
of getting data about the real world into the mind and 
there transforming them so that they can be organized 
and used selectively in the solution of problems. Assume 
a child is presented with a pinball machine which 
bounces a ball off a wall at an angle. Let us find out what 
he appreciates about the relation between the angle of 
incidence and the angle of reflection. The young child 
sees no problem: for him, the ball travels in an are, 
touching the wall on the way. The somewhat older 
child, say age ten, sees the two angles as roughly related 
35 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
-as one changes so does the other. The still older child 
begins to grasp that there is a fixed relation between the 
two, and usually says it is a right angle. Finally, the 
thirteen- or fourteen-year-old, often by pointing the 
ejector directly at the wall and seeing the ball come back 
at the ejector, gets the idea that the two angles are equal. 
Each way of looking at the phenomenon represents the 
result of an operation in this sense, and the child's think-
ing is constrained by his way of pulling his observations 
together. 
An operation differs from simple action or goal-
directed behavior in that it is internalized and reversible. 
"Internalized" means that the child does not have to go 
about his problem-solving any longer by overt trial and 
error, but can actually carry out trial and error in his 
head. Reversibiliry is present because operations are seen 
as characterized where appropriate by what is called 
"complete compensation"; that is to say, an operation 
can be compensated for by an inverse operation. If 
marbles, for example, are divided into subgroups, the 
child can grasp intuitively that the original collection of 
marbles can be restored by being added back together 
again. The child tips a balance scale too far with a 
weight and then searches systematically for a lighter 
weight or for something with which to get the scale 
rebalanced. He may carry reversibiliry too far by assum-
ing that a piece of paper, once burned, can also be re-
stored. 
With the advent of concrete operations, the child 
develops an internalized structure with which to oper-
ate. In the example of the balance scale, the structure is 
a serial order of weights that the child has in his mind. 
36 
READINESS FOR LEARNING 
Such internal structures are of the essence. They are the 
internalized symbolic systems by which the child repre-
sents the world, as in the example of the pinball machine 
and the angles of incidence and reflection. It is into the 
language of these internal structures that one must trans-
late ideas if the child is to grasp them. 
But concrete operations, though they are guided by 
the logic of classes and the logic of relations, are means 
for structuring only immediately present reality. The 
child is able to give structure to the things he encounters, 
but he is not yet readily able to deal with possibilities 
not directly before him or not already experienced. 
This is not to say that children operating concretely 
are not able to anticipate things that are not present. 
Rather, it is that they do not command the operations 
for conjuring up systematically the full range of alterna-
tive possibilities that could exist at any given time. They 
cannot go systematically beyond the infortnation given 
them to a description of what else might occur. Some-
where between ten and fourteen years of age the child 
passes into a third stage, which is called the stage of 
"formal operations" by the Geneva school. 
Now the child's intellectual activity seems to be 
based upon an ability to operate on hypothetical propo-
sitions rather than being constrained to what he has 
experienced or what is before him. The child can now 
think of possible variables and even deduce potential 
relationships that can later be verified by experiment or 
observation. Intellectual operations now appear to be 
predicated upon the same kinds of logical operations 
that are the stock in trade of the logician, the scientist, 
or the abstract thinker. It is at this point that the child 
37 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
is able to give formal or axiomatic expression to the con-
crete ideas that before guided his problem-solving but 
could not be described or formally understood. 
Earlier, while the child is in the stage of concrete 
operations, he is capable of grasping intuitively and 
concretely a great many of the basic ideas of mathematics, 
the sciences, the humanities, and the social sciences. 
But he can do so only in terms of concrete operations. 
It can be demonstrated that fifth-grade children can 
play mathematical games with rnIes modeled on highly 
advanced mathematics; indeed, they can arrive at these 
rules inductively and learn how to work with them. 
They will flounder, however, if one attempts to force 
upon them a formal mathematical description of what 
they have been doing, though they are perfectly capable 
of guiding their behavior by these rnIes. At the Woods 
Hole Conference we were privileged to see a demonstra-
tion of teaching in which fifth-grade children very 
rapidly grasped central ideas from the theory of func-
tions, although had the teacher attempted to explain to 
them what the theory of functions was, he would have 
drawn a blank. Later, at the appropriate stage of devel-
opment and given a certain amount of practice in con-
crete operations, the time would be ripe for introducing 
them to the necessary formalism. 
What is most important for teaching basic concepts 
is that the child be helped to pass progressively from 
concrete thinking to the utilization of more conceptually 
adequate modes of thought. But it is futile to attem?t 
this by resentin formal explanations based on a 10 IC 
tfiat IS !Stant from t e c 
s manner of t" 
n 
e in its implicanons for hlffi. Much teaching ~ 
38 
READINESS FOR LEARNING 
mathematics is 0 this sort. The child learns not to under-
~tand mathematical order but rat er to apply certain 
devices or reci es without understanding their signifi-
cance and connecte ness. 
ey are 
0 trans ate mto 
IUs way of thinking. Given this inappropriate start, he 
is easily led to believe that the important thing is for him 
to be "accurate"-though accuracy has less to do with 
mathematics than with computation. Perhaps the most 
striking example of this type of thing is to be found in 
the manner in which the high school student meets 
Euclidian geometry for the first time, as a set of axioms 
and theorems, without having had some experience with 
simple geometric configuratiQllS- and the intuitive means 
whereby one deals with them. If the child were earlier 
given the concepts and strategies in the form of intuitive 
geometry at a level that he could easily follow, he might 
be far better able to grasp deeply the meaning of the 
theorems and axioms to which he is exposed later. 
But the intellectual development of the child is no 
clockwork sequence of events; it also responds to influ-
ences from the environment, notably the school environ-
ment. Thus instruction in scientific ideas, even at the 
elementary level, need not follow slavishly the natural 
course of cognitive development in the child. It can also 
lead intellectual development by providing challenging 
but usable opportunities for the child to forge ahead in 
his development. Experience has shown that it is worth 
the effort to provide the growing child with problems 
that tempt him into next stages of development. As 
David Page, one of the most experienced teachers of 
elementary mathematics, has commented: "In teaching 
from kindergarten to graduate schoo~ I have been 
39 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
amazed at the intellectual similarity of human beings at 
all ages, although children are perhaps more spontaneous, 
creative, and energetic than adults. As far as I am con-
cerned young children learn almost anything faster than 
adults do if it can be given to them in terms they under-
stand. Giving the material to them in terms they under-
stand, interestingly enough, turns out to involve know-
ing the mathematics oneself, and the better one knows 
it, the better it can be taught. It is appropriate that we 
warn ourselves to be careful ·of assigning an absolute 
level of difficulty to any particular topic. When I tell 
mathematicians that fourth-grade students can go a 
long way into 'set theory' a few of them reply: 'Of 
course.' Most of them are startled. The latter ones are 
completely wrong in assuming that 'set theory' is in-
trinsically difficult. Of course it may be that nothing is 
intrinsically difficult. We JUSt have to Watt until the 
proper point of view and corresponding TanguageTor 
.. 
, 'n (;jven particular subject matter 
or a pamcular concept, It IS easy to ask trivial questions 
or to lead the child to ask trivial questions. It is also easy 
to ask impossibly difficult questions. The trick is to find 
the medium questions that can be answered and that 
rake you somewhere. This is the big job of teachers and 
textbooks." One leads the child by the well-wrought 
"medium questions" to move more rapidly through the 
stages of intellectual development, to a deeper under-
standing of mathematical, physical, and historical prin-
ciples. We must know far more about the ways in which 
this can be done. 
Professor Inhelder of Geneva was asked to suggest 
ways in which the child could be moved along faster 
40 
READINESS FOR LEARNING 
through the various stages of intellectual development 
in mathematics and physics. What follows is part of a 
memorandum she prepared for the Conference. 
"The most elementary forms of reasoning-whether 
logical, arithmetical, geometrical, or physical-rest on 
the principle of the invariance of quantities: that the 
whole remains, whatever may be the arrangement of its 
parts, the change of its form, or its displacement in space 
or time. The principle of invariance is no a priori datum 
of the mind, nor is it the product of purely empirical 
observation. The child discovers invariance in a manner 
comparable to scientific discoveries generally. Grasping 
the idea of invariance is beset with difficulties for the 
child, often unsuspected by teachers. To the young 
child, numerical wholes, spatial dimensions, and physical 
quantities do not seem to remain constant but to dilate 
or contraCt as they are operated upon. The total number 
of beads in a box remains the same whether subdivided 
into two, three, or ten piles. It is this that is so hard for 
the child to understand. The young child perceives 
changes as operating in one direction without being able 
to grasp the idea that certain fundamental features of 
things remain constant over change, or that if they 
change the change is reversible. 
"A few examples among many used in studying the 
child's concept of invariance will illustrate the kinds of 
materials one could use to help him to learn the concept 
more easily. The child transfers beads of a known quan-
tity or liquids of a known volume from one receptacle 
to another, one receptacle being tall and narrow, the 
other flat and wide. The young child believes there is 
more in the tall receptacle than the flat one. Now the 
41 
nt-"''> 
r~ 
." -If... 
(>G" 
\\t-G.) 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
child can be confronted concretely with the nature of 
one-to-one correspondence between two versions of the 
same quantity. For there is an easy technique of check-
ing: the beads can be counted or the liquid measured in 
some standard way. The same operations work for the 
conservation of spatial quantity if one uses a set of sticks 
for length or a set of tiles for surface, or by having the 
child transform the shape of volumes made up of the 
same number of blocks. In physics dissolving sugar or 
transforming the shapes of balls of plasticene while con-
serving volume provides comparable instruction. If teach-
ing fails to bring the child properly from his perceptual, 
primitive notions to a proper intuition of the idea of 
invariance, the result is that he will count without having 
acquired the idea of the invariance of numerical quanti-
ties. Or he will use geometrical measures while remaining 
ignorant of the operation of transitivity-that if A in-
cludes B, and B includes C, then A also includes C. In 
physics he will apply calculations to imperfectly under-
stood physical notions such as weight, volume, speed, 
and time. A teaching method that takes into account the 
natural thought processes will allow the child to discover 
such principles of invariance by giving him an oppor-
tunity to progress beyond his own primitive mode of 
thinking through confrontation by concrete data-as 
when he notes that liquid that looks greater in volume 
in a tall, thin receptacle is in fact the same as that quantity 
in a flat, low vessel. Concrete activity that becomes 
increasingly formal is what leads the child to the kind 
of mental mobility that approaches the naturally revers-
ible operations of mathematics and logic. The child 
gradually comes to sense that any change may be men-
42 
READINESS FOR LEARNING 
tally cancelled out by the reverse operation-addition by 
subtraction-or that a change may be counterbalanced 
by a reciprocal change. 
"A child often focuses on only one aspect of a phe-
nomenon at a time, and this interferes with his under-
standing. We can set up little teaching experiments in 
such a way that he is forced to pay attention to other 
aspects. Thus, children up to about age seven estimate 
the speed of two automobiles by assuming that the one 
that gets there first is the faster, or that if one passes the 
other it is faster. To overcome such errors, one can, by 
using toy automobiles, show that two objects starting at 
different distances from a finish line cannot be judged 
by which one arrives first, or show that one car can pass 
another by circling it and still not finish first. These are 
simple exercises, but they speed the child toward attend-
ing to several features of a situation at once. 
"In view of all this it seems highly arbitrary and very 
likely incorrect to delay the teaching, for example, of 
Euclidian or metric geometry until the end of the primary\ 
\ 
grades, particularly when projective geometry has not (."'~ '1 
been given earlier. So too with the teaching of physics, ; ~\~..,t..\i .... 
which has much in it that can be profitably taught at an 
inductive or intuitive level much earlier. Basic notions in 
these fields are perfectly accessible to children of seven 
to ten years of age, provided that they are divorced from 
their mathematical expression and studied through ma-
terials that the child can handle himself. 
"Another matter relates particularly to the ordering 
of a mathematics curriculum. Often the sequence of 
psychological development follows more closely the 
axiomatic order of a subject matter than it does the his-
43 
\...J7 
S-\V->L T..>V. 
~.lk. <.v.v;~ 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
torical order of development of concepts within the field. 
One observes, for instance, that certain topological no-
tions, such as connection, separation, being interior to, 
and so forth, precede the formation of Euclidian and 
projective notions in geometry, though the former ideas 
are newer in their formalism in the history of mathe-
matics than the latter. If any special justification were 
needed for teaching the structure of a subject in its 
proper logical or axiomatic order rather than its order 
of historical development, this should provide it. This 
is not to say that there may not be situations where the 
historical order is important from the point of view of 
its cultural or pedagogical relevance. 
"As for teaching geometrical notions of perspective 
and projection, again there is much that can be done by 
the use of experiments and demonstrations that rest on 
the child's operational capaciry to analyze concrete ex-
perience. We have watched children work with an appa-
ratus in which rings of different diameter are placed at 
different positions between a candle and a screen with 
a fixed distance between them so that the rings cast shad-
ows of varying sizes on the screen. The child learns how 
the cast shadow changes size as a function of the distance 
of the ring from the light source. By bringing to the 
child such concrete experience of light in revealing situ-
ations, we teach him maneuvers that in the end permit 
him to understand the general ideas underlying projec-
tive geometry. 
"These examples lead us to think that it is possible to 
draw up methods of teaching the basic ideas in science 
and mathematics to children considerably younger than 
the traditional age. It is at this earlier age that systematic 
44 
READINESS FOR LEARNING 
instruction can lay a groundwork in the fundamentals 
that can be used later and with great profit at the second-
ary level. 
"The teaching of probabilistic reasoning, so very com-
mon and important a feature of modem science, is hardly 
developed in our educational system before college. The 
omission is probably due to the fact that school syllabi 
in nearly all countries follow scientific progress with a 
near-disastrous time lag. But it may also be due to the 
widespread belief that the understanding of random 
phenomena depends on the leamer's grasp of the mean-
ing of the rarity or commonness of events. And admitted-
ly, such ideas are hard to get across to the young. Our 
research indicates that the understanding of random 
phenomena requires, rather, the use of cenain concrete 
logical operations well within the grasp of the young 
child-provided these operations are free of awkward 
mathematical expression. Principal among these logical 
operations are disjunction ('either A or B is true') and 
combination. Games in which lots are drawn, games of 
roulette, and games involving a gaussian distribution of 
outcomes are all ideal for giving the child a basic grasp 
of the logical operation needed for thinking about proba-
bility. In such games, children first discover an entirely 
qualitative notion of chance defined as an uncertain 
event, contrasted with deductive certainty. The notion 
of probability as a fraction of cenainty is discovered 
only later. Each of these discoveries can be made before 
the child ever learns the techniques of the calculus of 
probabilities or the formal expressions that normally go 
with probability theory. Interest in problems of a 
probabilistic nature could easily be awakened and de-
45 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
veloped before the introduction of any statistical 
processes or computation. Statistical manipulation and 
computation are only tools to be used after intnitive 
understanding has been established. If the array of com-
putational paraphernalia is introduced first, then more 
likely than not it will inhibit or kill the development of 
probabilistic reasoning. 
"One wonders in the light of all this whether it might 
not be interesting to devote the first two years of school 
to a series of exercises in manipulating, classifying, and 
ordering objects in ways that highlight basic operations 
of logical addition, multiplication, inclusion, serial order-
ing, and the like. For surely these logical operations are 
the basis of more specific operations and concepts of all 
mathematics and science. It may indeed be the case that 
such an early science and mathematics 'pre-curriculum' 
might go a long way toward building up in the child 
the kind of intnitive and more inductive understanding 
that could be given embodiment later in formal courses 
in mathematics and science. The effect of such an ap-
proach would be, we think, to put more continuity into 
science and mathematics and also to give the child a 
much better and firmer comprehension of the concepts 
which, unless he has this early foundation, he will mouth 
later without being able to use them in any effective 
way." 
A comparable approach can surely be taken to the 
teaching of social studies and literature. There has been 
little research done on the kinds of concepts that a child 
brings to these subjects, although there is a wealth of 
observation and anecdote. Can one teach the struCture 
of literary forms by presenting the child with the first 
46 
READINESS FOR LEARNING 
part of a Story and then having him complete it in the 
form of a comedy, a tragedy, or a farce-without ever 
using such words? When, for example, does the idea of 
"historical trend" develop, and what are its precursors 
in the child? How does one make a child aware of liter-
ary style? Perhaps the child can discover the idea of style 
through the presentation of the same content written in 
drastically different styles, in the manner of Beerbohm's 
Christmas Garland. Again, there is no reason to believe 
that any subject cannot be taught to any child at virtual-
ly any age in some form. 
Here one is immediately faced with the question of 
the economy of teaching. One can argue that it might 
be better to wait until the child is thirteen or fourteen 
before beginning geometry so that the projective and 
intnitive first steps can immediately be followed up by 
a full formal presentation of the subject. Is it worth 
while to train the young inductively so that they may 
discover the basic order of knowledge before they can 
appreciate its formalism? In Professor Inhelder's memo-
randum, it was suggested that the first two grades might 
be given over to training the child in the basic logical 
operations that underlie instruction in mathematics and 
science. There is evidence to indicate that such rigorous 
and relevant early training has the effect of making later 
learning easier. Indeed the experiments on "learning set" 
seem to indicate JUSt that-that one not only learns spe-
cifics but in so doing learns how to learn. So important 
is training per se that monkeys who have been given 
extensive training in problem solving suffer considerably 
less loss and recover more qnickly after induced brain 
damage than animals who had not been previously thus 
47 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
educated. But the danger of such early training may be 
that it has the effect of training out original but deviant 
ideas. There is no evidence available on the subject, and 
much is needed. 
The act of learning. Learning a subject seems to in-
volve three almost simultaneous processes. First there is 
acquisition of new information-often information that 
runs counter to or is a replacement for what the person 
has previously known implicitly or explicitly. At the 
very least it is a refinement of previous knowledge. Thus 
one teaches a student Newton's laws of motion, which 
violate the testimony of the senses. Or in teaching a 
student about wave mechanics, one violates the student's 
belief in mechanical impact as the sole source of real 
energy transfer. Or one bucks the language and its built-
in way of thinking in terms of "wasting energy" by in-
trodncing the student to the conservation theorem in 
physics which asserts that no energy is lost. More often 
the situation is less drastic, as when one teaches the de-
tails of the circulatory system to a student who already 
knows vaguely or intuitively that blood circulates. 
A second aspect of learning may be called transforma-
tion-the process of manipulating knowledge to make it 
fit new tasks. We learn to "unmask" or analyze informa-
tion, to order it in a way that permits extrapolation or 
interpolation or conversion into another form. Trans-
formation comprises the ways we deal with information 
in order to go beyond it. 
A third aspect of learning is evaluation: checking 
whether the way we have manipulated information is 
adequate to the task. Is the generalization fitting, have 
we extrapolated appropriately, are we operating proper-
48 
READINESS FOR LEARNING 
ly? Often a teacher is crucial in helping with evaluation, 
but much of it takes place by judgments of plausibility 
without our actually being able to check rigorously 
whether we are correct in our efforts. 
In the learning of any subject matter, there is usually 
a series of episodes, each episode involving the three 
processes. Photosynthesis might reasonably comprise 
material for a learning episode in biology, fitted into a 
more comprehensive learning experience such as learning 
about the conversion of energy generally. At its best a 
learning episode reflects what has gone before it and 
permits one to generalize beyond it. 
A learning episode can be brief or long, contain many 
ideas or a few. How sustained an episode a learner is 
willing to undergo depends upon what the person ex-
pects to get from his efforts, in the sense of such external 
things as grades but also in the sense of a gain in under-
standing. 
We usually tailor material to the capacities and needs 
of students by manipulating learning episodes in several 
ways: by shortening or lengthening the episode, by 
piling on extrinsic rewards in the form of praise and 
gold stars, or by dramatizing the shock of recognition 
of what the material means when fully understood. The 
unit in a curriculum is meant to be a recognition of the 
importance of learning episodes, though many units drag 
on with no climax in understanding. There is a surpris-
ing lack of research on how one most wisely devises 
adequate learning episodes for children at different ages 
and in different subject matters. There are many ques-
tions that need answers based on careful research, and 
to some of these we turn now. 
49 
'v-
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
There is, to begin with, the question of the balance 
between extrinsic rewards and intrinsic ones. There has 
been much written on the role of reward and punish-
ment in learning, but very little indeed on the role of 
interest and curiosity and the lure of discovery. If it is 
our intention as teachers to inure the child to longer and 
longer episodes of learning, it may well be that intrinsic 
rewards in the form of quickened awareness and under-
standing will have to be emphasized far more in the 
detailed design of curricula. One of the least discussed 
ways of carrying a student through a hard unit of 
material is to challenge him with a chance to exercise 
his full powers, so that he may discover the pleasure of 
full and effective functioning. Good teachers know the 
power of this lure. Students should know what it feels 
like to be completely absorbed in a problem. They 
seldom experience this feeling in school. Given enough 
absorption in class, some students may be able to carry 
over the feeling to work done on their own. 
There is a range of problems that have to do with 
how much emphasis should be placed on acquisition, 
transformation, and evaluation in a learning episode-
getting facts, manipulating them, and checking one's 
ideas. Is it the case, for example, that it is best to give 
the young child a minimum set of facts first and then 
encourage him to draw the fullest set of implications 
possible from this knowledge? In short, should an epi-
sode for a young child contain little new information 
but emphasize what can be done to go beyond that bit 
on one's own? One teacher of social studies has had 
great success with fourth-graders through this approach: 
he begins, for example, with the fact that civilizations 
SO 
READINESS FOR LEARt-lING 
have most often begnn in fertile river valleys-the only 
"fact." The students are encouraged in class discussion 
to fignre out why this is the case and why it wonld be 
less likely for civilizations to start in mountainous coun-
try. The effect of this approach, essentially the tech-
nique of discovery, is that the child generates informa-
tion on his own, which he can then check or evaluate 
against the sources, getting more new information in 
the process. This obviously is one kind of learning epi-
sode, and doubtless it has limited applicability. What 
other kinds are there, and are some more appropriate 
to certain topics and ages than others? It is not the case 
that "to learn is to learn is to learn," yet in the research 
literature there appears to be little recognition of differ-
ences in learning episodes. 
With respect to the optimum length of a learning 
episode, there are a few commonsense things one can 
say about it, and these are perhaps interesting enough 
to suggest frnieful research possibilities. It seems fairly 
obvious, for example, that the longer and more packed 
the episode, the greater the pay-off must be in terms of 
increased power and understanding if the person is to 
be encouraged to move to a next episode with zest. 
Where grades are used as a substitute for the reward 
of understanding, it may well be that learning will cease 
as soon as grades are no longer given-at graduation. 
It also seems reasonable that the more one has a sense 
of the structure of a subject, the more densely packed 
and longer a learning episode one can get through with-
out fatigne. Indeed, the amount of new' information in 
any learning episode is really the amount that we cannot 
qnite fit into place at once. And there is a severe limit, 
51 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
as we have already noted, on how much of such un-
assimilated information we can keep in mind. The esti-
mate is that adults can handle about seven independent 
items of information at a time. No norms are available 
for children-a deplorable lack. 
There are many details one can discuss concerning 
the shaping of learning episodes for children, but the 
problems that have been mentioned will suffice to give 
their flavor. Inasmuch as the topic is central to an under-
standing of how one arranges a curriculum, it seems 
obvious that here is an area of research that is of the 
first importance. 
The "spiral curriculum." If one respects the ways of 
thought of the growing child, if one is courteous 
enough to translate material into his logical forms and 
challenging enough to tempt him to advance, then it 
is possible to introduce him at an early age to the ideas 
and styles that in later life make an educated man. We 
might ask, as a criterion for any subject taught in pri-
mary school, whether, when fully developed, it is worth 
an adult's knowing, and whether having known it as a 
child makes a person a better adult. If the answer to 
both questions is negative or ambiguous, then the ma-
terial is cluttering the curriculum. 
If the hypothesis with which this section was intro-
ducedis true-that any subject can be taught to any 
child in some honest form-then it should follow that 
a curriculum ought to be built around the great issues, 
principles, and values that a society deems worthy of 
the continual concern of its members. Consider two 
examples-the teaching of literarure and of science. If 
it is granted, for example, that it is desirable to give 
S2 
READINESS FOR LEARNING 
children an awareness of the meaning of human tragedy 
and a sense of compassion for it, is it not possible at the 
earliest appropriate age to teach the literarure of tragedy 
in a manner that illuminates but does not threaten? 
There are many possible ways to begin: through a re-
telling of the great myths, through the use of children's 
classics, through presentation of and commentary on 
selected films that have proved themselves. Precisely 
what kinds of materials should be used at what age with 
what effect is a subject for research-research of several 
kinds. We may ask first about the child's conception of 41.,. " •• .1 
th~ tragic. and here one might proceed in mucn tne same 1;', .... Or 
""ay that Piaget and his colleagues have proceeded In ~ ~. 
srudying the child's conception of physical causality, 
. tcH''1 
of morality, of number, and the rest. It is only when 
'of\ 
we are e ui 
ed with such knowledge that we wdl be eJ.Jc.. 
inaositio 
wtec' 
ever we present to him into his own su Jectlve terms. 
Nor need we wait for all the research findings to be in 
before proceeding, for a skillful teacher can also experi-
ment by attempting to teach what seems to be inruitively 
right for children of different ages, correcting as he 
goes. In time, one goes beyond to more complex versions 
of the same kind of literarure or simply revisits some of 
the same books used earlier. What matters is that later 
teaching build upon earlier reactions to literarure, that 
it seek to create an ever more explicit and marure under-
standing of the literarure of tragedy. Any of the great 
literary forms can be handled in the same way, or any 
of the great themes-be it the form of comedy or the 
theme of identity, personal loyalty, or what not. 
So too in science. If the understanding of number, 
53 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
measure, and probability is judged crucial in the pursuit 
of science, then instruction in these subjects should begin 
as intellectually honestly and as early as possible in a 
manner consistent with the child's forms of thought. Let 
the topics be developed and redeveloped in later grades. 
Thus, if most children are to take a tenth-grade unit in 
biology, need they approach the subject cold? Is it not 
possible, with a minimum of formal laboratory work if 
necessary, to introduce them to some of the major bio-
logical ideas earlier, in a spirit perhaps less exact and more 
intuitive? 
Many curricula are originally planned with a guiding 
idea much like the one set forth here. But as curricula 
are actually executed, as they grow and change, they 
often lose their original form and suffer a relapse into 
a certain shapelessness. It is not amiss to urge that acmal 
curricula be reexamined with an eye to the issues of 
continuity and development referred to in the preceding 
pages. One cannot predict the exact forms that revision 
might take; indeed, it is plain that there is now available 
too little research to provide adequate answers. One can 
only propose that appropriate research be undertaken 
with the greatest vigor and as soon as possible. 
54 
4 
INTUITIVE AND ANALYTIC THINKING 
MUCH has been said in the preceding chapters 
about the importance of a student's intuitive, in contrast 
to his formal, understanding of the subjects he encoun-
ters. The emphasis in much of school learning and stu-
dent examining is upon explicit formulations, upon the 
ability of the student to reproduce verbal or numerical 
formulae. It is not clear, in the absence of research, 
whether this emphasis is inimical to the later develop-
ment of good intuitive understanding-indeed, it is even 
unclear what constitutes intuitive understanding. Yet we 
can distinguish between inarticulate genius and articulate 
idiocy-the first represented by the student who, by his 
operations and conclusions, reveals a deep grasp of a sub-
ject but not much ability to "say how it goes," in contrast 
to the student who is full of seemingly appropriate words 
but has no matching ability to use the ideas for which 
the words presumably stand. A careful examination of 
the nature of intuitive thinking might be of great aid to 
~hose charged with curriculum construction and teach-
mg. 
Mathematicians, physicists, biologists, and others stress 
the value of intuitive thinking in their respective areas. 
In mathematics, for example, intuition is used with two 
rather different meanings. On the one hand, an individ-
ual is said to think intuitively when, having worked for 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
a long time on a problem, he rather suddenly achieves 
the solution, one for which he has yet to provide a 
formal proof. On the other hand, an individual is said 
to be a good intuitive mathematician if, when others 
come to him with questions, he can make quickly very 
good guesses whether something is so, or which of sev-
eral approaches to a problem will prove fruitful. 
The development of effectiveness in intuitive think-
ing is an objective of many of the most highly regarded 
teachers in mathematics and science. The point has been 
repeatedly made that in the high school plane geometry 
is typically taught with excessive emphasis upon tech-
niques, formal proofs, and the like, that much more at-
tention needs to be given to the development of students 
who have a good intuitive feel for geometry, students 
who are skillful in discovering proofs, not just in check-
ing the validity of or remembering proofs with which 
they have been presented. There has been very little 
done, for example, on the use of diagrams as geometrical 
experiments as in Hilbert and Cohn's Geometry and 
the Imagination, in which visual proof substitutes for 
formal proof where possible. Similarly, in physics, 
Newtonian mechanics is typically taught deductively 
and analytically. In the judgment of many physicists, 
at least, there is too little attention to the development 
of intuitive understanding. Indeed, some have suggested 
that improving the use of intuitive thinking by teachers 
is as much a problem as improving its use by students. 
Yet, as one member of the Conference put it, it is 
wrong to look at intuition as ''all 11 la mode and no pie." 
The good intuiter may have been born with something 
special, but his effectiveness rests upon a solid knowl-
56 
INTUITIVE AND ANALYTIC THINKING 
edge of the subject, a familiarity that gives intuition 
something to work with. Certainly there are some ex-
periments on learning that indicate the importance of 
a high degree of mastery of materials in order to operate 
effectively with them intuitively. 
Those concerned with the improvement of curricula 
in physics and mathematics particularly have often cited 
as one of their important aims the use of procedures that 
will contribute to the improvement of intuitive thinking. t'\(e.J 
In their attempts to design such procedures, there has ~ 
been a question of the kind of systematic psychological 
knowledge that would be of help. Unfortunately, little l~~ t., 
systematic knowledge is available about the nature of 
intuitive thinking or the variables that influence it. What 
seems most appropriate at this point, therefore, is an 
attempt to outline the kinds of research which, if even 
only partially carried out, would begin to provide in-
formation useful to those concerned with the improve-
ment of particular courses or, more generally, of the 
curriculum as a whole. What kinds of questions do we 
need the answers to? 
Questions about the nature of intuitive thinking seem 
to center upon two large issues: what intuitive thinking 
is, and what affects it. 
One can say many more concrete things about ana-
lytic thinking than about intnitive thinking. Analytic 
thinking characteristically proceeds a step at a time. 
Steps are explicit and usually can be adequately reported 
by the thinker to another individual. Such thinking pro-
ceeds with relatively full awareness of the information 
and operations involved. It may involve careful and 
deductive reasoning, often using mathematics or logic 
57 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
and an explicit plan of attack. Or it may involve a step-
by-step process of induction and experiment, utilizing 
principles of research design and statistical analysis. 
In contrast to analytic thinking, inruitive thinking 
characteristically does not advance in careful, well-
defined steps. Indeed, it tends to involve maneuvers 
based seemingly on an implicit perception of the total 
problem. The thinker arrives at an answer, which may 
be right or wrong, with little if any awareness of the 
process by which he reached it. He rarely can provide 
an adequate account of how he obtained his answer, and 
he may be unaware of just what aspects of the problem 
situation he was responding to. Usually inruitive think-
ing rests on familiarity with the domain of knowledge 
involved and with its structure, which makes it possible 
for the thinker to leap about, skipping steps and employ-
ing short cuts in a manner that requires a later recheck-
ing of conclusions by more analytic means, whether 
deductive or inductive. 
The complementary narure of inruitive and analytic 
thinking should, we think, be recognized. Through in-
tuitive thinking the individual may often arrive at solu-
tions to problems which he would not achieve at all, 
or at best more slowly, through analytic thinking. Once 
achieved by inruitive methods, they should if possible be 
checked by analytic methods, while at the same time 
being respected as worthy hypotheses for such check-
ing. Indeed, the inruitive thinker may even invent or 
discover problems that the analyst would not. But it may 
be the analyst who gives these problems the proper 
formalism. Unforrunately, the formalism of school learn-
ing has somehow devalued intuition. It is the very strong 
58 
INTUITIVE AND ANALYTIC THINKING 
conviction of men who have been designing curricula, 
in mathematics and the sciences particularly, over the 
last several years that much more work is needed to 
discover how we may develop the intuitive gifts of our 
srudents from the earliest grades onwards. For, as we 
have seen, it may be of the first importance to establish 
an inruitive understanding of materials before we expose 
our srudents to more traditional and formal methods of 
deduction and proof. 
As to the narure of intuitive thinking, what is it? It is 
quite clear that it is not easy either to recognize a particu-
lar problem-solving episode as inruitive or, indeed, to 
identify inruitive ability as such. Precise definition in terms 
of observable behavior is not readily within our reach 
at the present time. Obviously, research on the topic 
cannot be delayed until such a time as a pure and un-
ambiguous definition of intuitive thinking is possible, 
along with precise techuiques for identifying inruition 
when it occurs. Such refinement is the goal of research, 
not its starting place. It suffices as a start to ask whether 
we are able to identify certain problem-solving episodes 
as more inruitive than others. Or, alternatively, we may 
ask if we can learn to agree in classifying a person's 
style or preferred mode of working as characteristically 
more analytic or inductive, on the one hand, or more 
inruitive, and, indeed, if we can find some way to classify 
tasks as ones that require each of those styles of attack. 
It is certainly clear that it is important not to confuse 
intnitive and other kinds of thinking with such evaluative 
notions as effectiveness and ineffectiveness: the analytic, 
the inductive, and the inruitive can be either. Nor should 
we distinguish them in terms of whether they produce 
59 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
novel or familiar outcomes, for again this is not the 
important distinction. 
For a working definition of intuition, we do well to 
begin with Webster: "immediate apprehension or cogni-
tion." "Immediate" in this context is contrasted with 
"mediated"-apprehension or cognition that depends on 
the intervention of formal methods of analysis and proof. 
Intnition implies the act of grasping the meaning, signifi-
cance, or structure of a problem or situation without 
explicit reliance on the analytic apparatus of one's craft. 
The rightness or wrongness of an intnition is finally 
decided not by intuition itself but by the usual methods 
of proof. It is the intuitive mode, however, that yields 
hypotheses quickly, that hits on combinations of ideas 
before their worth is known. In the end, intnition by 
itself yields a tentative ordering of a body of knowledge 
that, while it may generate a feeling that the ordering of 
facts is self-evident, aids principally by giving us a basis 
for moving ahead in our testing of reality. 
Obviously, some intuitive leaps are "good" and some 
are "bad" in terms of how they turn out. Some men are 
good intuiters, others should be warned off. What the 
underlying heuristic of the good intniter is, is not known 
but is eminendy worthy of study. And what is involved 
in transforming explicit techniques into implicit ones 
that can be used almost automatically is a subject that 
is also full of conjecture. Unquestionably, experience 
and familiarity with a subject help-but the help is only 
for some. Those of us who teach graduate students mak-
ing their first assault on a frontier of knowledge are often 
struck by our immediate reactions to their ideas, sensing 
that they are good or impossible or trivial before ever 
60 
INTUITIVE AND ANALYTIC THINKING 
we know why we think so. Often we turn out to be 
right; sometimes we are victims of too much familiarity 
with past efforts. In either case, the intuition may be 
weeks or months ahead of the demonstration of our 
wisdom or foolhardiness. At the University of Buffalo 
there is a collection of successive drafts of poems written 
by leading contemporary poets. One is struck in examin-
ing them by the immediate sense one gets of the rightness 
of a revision a poet has made-but it is often difficult or 
impossible to say why the revision is better than the 
original, difficult for the reader and the poet alike. 
It is certainly clear that procedures or instruments are 
needed to characterize and measure intnitive thinking, 
and that the development of such instruments should 
be pursued vigorously. We cannot foresee at this stage 
what the research tools will be in this field. Can one rely, 
for example, upon the subject'S willingness to talk as he 
works, to reveal the nature of the alternatives he is con-
sidering, whether he is proceeding by intuitive leaps or 
by a step-by-step analysis or by empirical induction? 
Or will smaller-scale experimental approaches be suit-
able? Can group measurement procedures involving pen-
cil and paper tests be used to provide a measure? All of 
these deserve a try. 
What variables seem to affect intnitive thinking? 
There must surely be predisposing factors that are cor-
related with individual differences in the use of intuition, 
factors, even, that will predispose a person to think in-
tnitively in one area and not in another. With respect 
to such factors, we can only raise a series of conjectures. 
Is the development of intuitive thinking in students more 
likely if their teachers think intuitively? Perhaps simple 
61 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
imitation is involved, or perhaps more complex processes 
of identification. It seems unlikely that a student would 
develop or have confidence in his intuitive methods of 
thinking if he never saw them used effectively by his 
elders. The teacher who is willing to guess at answers 
to questions asked by the class and then subj ect his 
guesses to critical analysis may be more apt to build 
those habits into his students than would a teacher who 
analyzes everything for the class in advance. Does the 
providing of varied experience in a particular field in-
crease effectiveness in intuitive thinking in that field? 
Individuals who have extensive familiarity with a subject 
appear more often to leap intuitively into a decision or 
to a solution of a problem-one which later proves to be 
appropriate. The specialist in internal medicine, for 
example, may, upon seeing a patient for the first time, 
ask a few questions, examine the patient briefly, and then 
make an accurate diaguosis. The risk, of course, is that 
his method may lead to some big errors as well-bigger 
than those that result from the more painstaking, step-
by-step analysis used by the young intern diagnosing the 
same case. Perhaps under these circumstances intuition 
consists in using a limited set of cues, because the thinker 
knows what things are structurally related to what other 
things. This is not to say that "cliuical" prediction is 
better or worse than actuarial prediction, only that it 
is different and that both are useful. 
In this connection we may ask whether, in teaching, 
emphasis upon the structure or connectedness of knowl-
edge increases facility in intuitive thinking. Those con-
cerned with the improvement of the teaching of mathe-
matics often emphasize the importance of developing in 
62 
INTUITIVE AND ANALYTIC THINKING 
the student an understanding of the structure or order 
of mathematics. The same is true for physics. Implicit 
in this emphasis, it appears, is the belief that such under-
standing of structure enables the student, among other 
things, to increase his effectiveness in dealing intuitively 
with problems. 
What is the effect on intuitive thinking of teaching 
various so-called heuristic procedures? A heuristic pro-
cedure, as we have noted, is in essence a nonrigorous 
method of achieving solutions of problems. While 
heuristic procedure often leads to solution, it offers no 
guarantee of doing so. An algorithm, on the other hand, 
is a procedure for solving a problem which, if followed 
accurately, guarantees that in a finite number of steps 
you will find a solution to the problem if the problem 
has a solution. Heuristic procedures are often available 
when no algorithmic procedures are known; this is one 
of their advantages. Moreover, even when an algorithm 
is available, heuristic procedures are often much faster. 
Will the teaching of certain heuristic procedures facili-
tate intuitive thinking? For example, should students 
be taught explicitly, "When you cannot see how to 
proceed with the problem, try to think of a simpler 
problem that is similar to it; then use the method for 
solving the simpler problem as a plan for solving the 
more complicated problem?" Or should the student be 
led to learn such a technique without actually verbaliz-
ing it to himself in that way? It is possible, of course, 
that the ancient proverb about the caterpillar who could 
not walk when he tried to say how he did it may apply 
here. The student who becomes obsessively aware of the 
heuristic rules he uses to make his intuitive leaps may 
63 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
reduce the process to an analytic one. On the other 
hand, it is difficult to believe that general heuristic rules 
-the use of analogy, the appeal to symmetry, the ex-
amination of limiting conditions, the visualization of the 
solution-when they have been used frequently will be 
anything but a support to intuitive thinking. 
Should students be encouraged to guess, in the interest 
of learning eventually how to make intelligent conjec-
tures? Possibly there are certain kinds of situations where 
guessing is desirable and where it may facilitate the 
development of intuitive thinking to some reasonable 
degree. There may, indeed, be a kind of guessing that 
requires careful cultivation. Yet, in many classes in 
school, guessing is heavily penalized and is associated 
somehow with laziness. Certainly one would not like to 
educate students to do nothing but guess, for guessing 
should always be followed up by as much verification 
and confirmation as necessary; but too stringent a pen-
alty on guessing may restrain thinking of any sort and 
keep it plodding rather than permitting it to make occa-
sional leaps. May it not be better for students to guess 
than to be struck dumb when they cannot immediately 
give the right answer? It is plain that a student should 
be given some training in recognizing the plausibility of 
guesses. V cry often we are forced, in science and in life 
generally, to act on the basis of incomplete knowledge; 
we are forced to guess. According to statistical decision 
theory, actions based on inadequate data must take ac-
count of both probability and costs. What we should 
teach students to recognize, probably, is when the cost 
of not guessing is too high, as well as when guessing 
itself is too costly. We tend to do the latter much better 
64 
INTUITIVE AND ANALYTIC THINKING 
than the former. Should we give our students practice 
not only in making educated guesses but also in recogniz-
ing the characteristics of plausible guesses provided by 
others-knowing that an answer at least is of the right 
order of magnitude, or that it is possible rather than 
impossible? It is our feeling that perhaps a student would 
be given considerable advantage in his thinking, general-
ly, if he learned that there were alternatives that could 
be chosen that lay somewhere between truth and com-
plete silence. But let us not confuse ourselves by failing 
to recognize that there are two kinds of self-confidence-
one a trait of personality, and another that comes from 
knowledge of a subject. It is no particular credit to the 
educator to help build the first without building the 
second. The objective of education is not the produc-
tion of self-confident fools. 
Yet it seems likely that effective intuitive thinking is 
fostered by the development of self-confidence and 
courage in the student. A person who thinks intuitively 
may often achieve correct solutions, but he may also 
be proved wrong when he checks or when others checl{ 
on him. Such thinking, therefore, requires a willingness 
to make honest mistakes in the effort to solve problems. 
One who is insecure, who lacks confidence in himself, 
may be unwilling to run such risks. 
Observations suggest that in business, as the novelty 
or importance of situations requiring decision increases, 
the tendency to think analytically also increases. Perhaps 
when the student sees the consequences of error as too 
grave and the consequences of success as too chancy, he 
will freeze into analytic procedures even though they 
may not be appropriate. On these grounds, one may 
65 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
wonder whether the present system of rewards and 
punishments as seen by pupils in school acmally tends 
to inhibit the use of inmitive thinking. The assignment of 
grades in school typically emphasizes the acquisition of 
facmal knowledge, primarily because that is what is 
most easily evaluated; moreover, it tends to emphasize 
the correct answer, since it is the correct answer on the 
straightforward examination that can be graded as "cor-
rect." It appears to us important that some research be 
undertaken to \earn what would happen to the develop-
ment of intnitive thinking if different bases for grading 
were employed. 
Finally, what can be said about the conditions in 
which inmitive thinking is likely to be particularly 
effective? In which subjects will mastery be most aided 
by inmitive procedures followed by checking? Many 
kinds of problems will be best approached by some 
combination of inmitive and other procedures, so it is 
also important to know whether or not both can be 
developed within the same course by the same teaching 
methods. This suggests that we examine the mode of 
effective operation of intuition in different kinds of 
fields. One hears the. most explicit talk about inmition 
in those fields where the formal apparams of deduction 
and induction is most highly developed-in mathematics 
and physics. The use of the word "intuition" by mathe-
maticians and physicists may reflect their sense of con-
fidence in the power and rigor of their disciplines. 
Others, however, may use inmition as much or more. 
Surely the historian, to take but one example, leans 
heavily upon inmitive procedures in pursuing his sub-
ject, for he must select what is relevant. He does not 
66 
INTUITIVE AND ANALYTIC THINKING 
attempt to learn or record everything about a period; he 
limits himself to finding or learning predictively fruitful 
facts which, when combined, permit him to make in-
telligent guesses about what else went on. A comparison 
of inmitive thinking in different fields of knowledge 
would, we feel, be highly useful. 
We have already noted in passing the intuitive con-
fidence required of the poet and the literary critic in 
practicing their crafts: the need to proceed in the ab-
sence of specific and agreed-upon criteria for the choice 
of an image of the formulation of a critique. It is difficult 
for a teacher, a textbook, a demonstration film, to make 
explicit provision for the cultivation of courage in taste. 
As likely as not, courageous taste rests upon confidence 
in one's intnitions about what is moving, what is beauti-
ful, what is tawdry. In a culture such as ours, where 
there is so much pressure toward uniformity of taste in 
our mass media of communication, so much fear of idio-
syncratic style, indeed a certain suspicion of the idea 
of style altogether, it becomes the more important to 
nurture confident intuition in the realm of literature and 
the arts. Yet one finds a virtual vacuum of research on 
this topic in educational literature. 
The warm praise that scientists lavish on those of 
their colleagues who earn the label "intuitive" is major 
evidence that intuition is a valuable commodity in sci-
ence and one we should endeavor to foster in our sm-
dents. The case for intuition in the arts and social studies 
is just as strong. But the pedagogic problems in fostering 
such a gift are severe and should not be overlooked in 
our eagerness to take the problem into the laboratory. 
For one thing, the intnitive method, as we have noted, 
67 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
often produces the wrong answer. It requires a sensitive 
teacher to distinguish an intuitive mistake-an interest-
ingly wrong leap-from a stupid or ignorant mistake, 
and it requires a teacher who can give approval and 
correction simultaneously to the intuitive student. To 
know a subject so thoroughly that he can go easily be-
yond the textbook is a great deal to ask of a high school 
teacher. Indeed, it must happen occasionally that a stu-
dent is not only more intelligent than his teacher but 
better informed, and develops intuitive ways of ap-
proaching problems that he cannot explain and that the 
teacher is simply unable to follow or re-create for him-
self. It is impossible for the teacher properly to reward 
or correct such students, and it may very well be that 
it is precisely our more gifted students who suffer such 
unrewarded effon. So along with any program for de-
veloping methods of cultivating and measuring the oc-
currence of intuitive thinking, there must go some prac_ 
tical consideration of the classroom problems and the 
limitations on our capacity for encouraging such skills 
in our students. This, too, is research that should be given 
all possible support. 
These practical difficulties should not discourage 
psychologists and teachers from making an attack on 
the problem. Once we have obtained answers to various 
of the questions raised in this chapter, we shall be in a 
much better position to recommend procedures for 
overcoming some of the difficulties. 
68 
5 
MOTIVES FOR LEARNING 
I N ASSESSING what might be done to improve the 
state of the curricular art, we are inevitably drawn into 
discussion of the nature of motives for learning and the 
obj ectives one might expect to attain in educating youth. 
Obviously, matters of such enormous scope can be con-
sidered only briefly here. Yet certain issues seem to be 
particularly in need of closer scrutiny in relation to the 
desiguing of curricula. 
In planning a curriculum, one properly distinguishes 
between the long-run objective one hopes to achieve 
and certain short-run steps that get one toward that 
objective. Those of a practical turn of mind are likely 
to say that little is served by stating long-term objectives 
unless one can propose shan-run methods for their 
achievement. More idealistic critits may too readily dis-
miss short-run educational goals' on the grounds that 
they cannot see where they lead. We are inclined to 
take a middle ground. While one benefits from clarity 
about the ends of education, it is often true that we may 
discover or rediscover new ultimate objectives in the 
process of trying to reach more mbdest goals. Something 
of this order seems to have occurred in recent efforts 
to improve school curricula. 
The efforts of the past decade began with the modest 
intention of doing a better job of teaching physics or 
'-
THE PROCESS OF EOUCATION 
mathematics or some other subject. The impulse that 
led a group of highly competent physicists, for example, 
to join together in this effort was the sense of how 
great a gap had developed between physics as known 
by the physicist and physics as taught in school, a gap 
of particular importance because of revolutionary ad-
vances in science and the crisis in national security. But 
as the effort broadened, as scholars and scientists from 
o~her disciplines entered the field, a broader objective 
began to emerge. It is clear that there is in American 
Clducation today a new emphasis upon the pursuit of 
¢xcellence. There appear to be several things implied 
by the pursuit of excellence that have relevance not only 
to what we teach, but to how we teach and how we 
arouse the interest of our students. 
The view has already been expressed that the pursuit 
of excellence must not be limited to the gifted student. 
But the idea that teaching should be aimed at the average 
student in order to provide something for everybody 
is an equally inadequate formula. The quest, it seems to 
many of us, is to devise materials that will challenge 
the superior student while not destroying the confidence 
and will-to-Iearn of those who are less fortunate. We 
have no illusions about the difficulty of such a course, 
yet it is the only one open to us if we are to pursue 
excellence and at the same time honor the diversiry of 
talents we must educate. Much has already been said 
about the importance of preparing curricula adequate 
to this end, of educating teachers, of using all available 
teaching aids. These are steps toward the achievement 
of excellence. Another essential step has to do with 
motivation. 
70 
MOTIVES FOR LEARNING 
Arnold Bennett remarked that the Fr~nch sacrifice 
the girl to the woman; the English, the woman to the 
girl. How do we fare? It has been said of the American 
high school that its emphasis on the "peer" culture 
negates some of the adult aims of education. The claim 
is debatable, but the issue is a real one, as such com-
mentators on the social setting of American secondary 
education as James Coleman and David Riesman have 
pointed out. One need only examine the advertisements 
directed to the teen-age set to sense the central role of 
social life and "the sociables." Studies of American high-
school culture point particularly to the higher value 
placed on social populariry than upon academic achieve-
ment. Yet the 1960 Report on Admissions Policy pre-
pared by a Committee of the Harvard Faculty under 
the chairmanship of Professor Franklin Ford indicates 
that Harvard students enrolled from public high schools 
carry away more honors than students of like aptitude 
enrolled from the great independent preparatory schools 
of the Eastern seaboard. It may well be that the high 
school students in the Harvard group are the outstand-
ing ones in their schools, but, even at that, it would 
certainly indicate that at the very least American high 
schools are not ruining these students for later outstand-
ing work. 
Granting, then, that the situation is not as black as 
some would have us believe nor yet as good as some 
would like to hope, what can be said about motives for 
learning in our schools? What results from emphasis 
upon units of curriculum, upon grades and promotion, 
upon rate examinations, and the rest, with respect to 
the continniry and deepening of school learning? 
71 
f--
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
Somewhere between apathy and wild excitement, 
there is an optimum level of aroused attention that is 
ideal for classroom activity. What is that level? Frenzied 
activity fostered by the competitive project may leave 
no pause for reflection, for evaluation, for generalization, 
while excessive orderliness, with each student waiting 
passively for his turn, produces boredom and ultimate 
apathy. There is a day-to-day problem here of great 
significance. Short-run arousal of interest is not the same 
as the long-term establishment of interest in the broader 
sense. Films, audio-visual aids, and other such devices 
may have the short-run effect of catching attention. In 
the long run, they may produce a passive person waiting 
for some son of curtain to go up to arouse him. We do 
not know. Perhaps anything that holds the child's atten-
tion is justified on the ground that eventually the child 
will develop a taste for more self-controlled attention-
a point on which there is no evidence. The issue is par-
ticularly relevant in an entertainment-oriented, mass-
communication culture where passivity and "spectator-
ship" are dangers. Perhaps it is in the technique of 
arousing attention in school that first steps can be taken 
to establish that active autonomy of attention that is the 
antithesis of the spectator's passivity. 
There will always be, perhaps, mixed motives for 
learning among schoolchildren. There are parents and 
teachers to be pleased, one's contemporaries to be dealt 
with, one's sense of mastery to be developed. At the 
same time, interests are developing, the world opens up. 
Schoolwork is only a pan of the quickened life of the 
growing child. To different children it means different 
things. To some it is the road to parental approbation; 
72 
MOTIVES FOR LEARNING 
to others it is an intrusion on the social world of con-
temporaries, and is to be handled by the minimum effort 
that will "get by." The culture of the school may be 
anti-intellectual or quite the opposite. And within this 
complex picture there is the subtle attraction of the 
subj ects in school that a child finds interesting. One can 
spell out the details of the picture, but in the main they 
are familiar enough. How, within this context, do we 
arouse the child's interest in the world of ideas? 
Several tentative recommendations have already been 
made in the spirit of suggesting needed research. Prin-
cipal among these were increasing the inherent interest 
of materials taught, giving the student a sense of discov-
ery, translating what we have to say into the thought 
forms appropriate to the child, and so on. What this 
amounts to is developing in the child an interest in what 
he is learning, and with it an appropriate set of attitudes 
and valnes about intellectual activity generally. Surely 
we shall not by presently conceivable reforms create 
a nation of devoted intellectuals, nor is it apparent that 
this should be the major gniding aim of our schools. 
Rather, if teaching is done well and what we teach is 
worth learning, there are forces at work in our con-
temporary society that will provide the external prod 
that will get children more involved in the process of 
learning than they have been in the past. 
Our cultural climate has not been marked traditional-
ly by a deep appreciation of intellectual values. We have 
as a people always expressed a great faith in education. 
There are many reasons for this-the absence of an 
aristocracy, the pragmatic demands inherent in a frontier 
society, and so on-but these need not concern us here. 
73 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
Education has been conceived as a means to better the 
lot of our children rather than our own lot; it is almost 
a universal belief that children should have a better edu-
cational opportunity than their parents. Yet for all our 
reverence for education, we have paid little enough 
attention to its content: a vague reference to the "three 
R's" has seemed sufficient. We have been a country in 
which doing has been taken as the mark of effectiveness 
in thinking, and, perhaps more than any other major 
Western power, we have conceived of the gap between 
theory and practice as a yawning one. Insofar as we 
have idealized the thinker, it has been in the form of 
celebrating arcane wizardry as in the case of Einstein, 
who was presumably incomprehensible but brilliant, or 
of rewarding the practical accomplishments that have 
followed from thought. Thomas Edison was our con-
ception of the American scientist as engineer. The 
writer, the poet, the theorist, and the savant have not 
been folk figures in America, have not stimulated 
legends. 
Today, many Americans have become conscious, not 
just of the practical virtues of education, but of its 
content and quality-what it is and what it might be. 
Several factors are contributing to this trend. We are 
moving into a new era of scientific technology, a second 
industrial revolution, perhaps more drastic than the 
first one of over a century ago. Control systems, auto-
mation, new sources of power, new space to explore-
all of these have livened interest in the nature of our 
schools and what our young people are learning in them. 
Unquestionably, there has also been a surge of aware-
ness born of our sense of imperiled national security. 
74 
MOTIVES FOR LEARNING 
The Soviet Union's conquests in space, its capability of 
producing not only powerful weapons but also an 
. effective industrial society, have shaken American com-
placency to a degree that, looking back, would have 
seemed inconceivable a decade ago. And, finally, part 
of the growing interest in education comes from the 
fact that the American population now contains a very 
high proportion of college graduates. We also have the 
good fortune to be wealthy. The proportion of young 
people graduating from college today is higher than the 
proportion graduating from high school forty years ago. 
Al! of these factors have stimulated a renewal of interest 
in education that is making itself felt among students 
and parents alike. 
There is much discussion about how to give our schools 
a more serious intellectual tone, about the relative em-
phasis on athletics, popularity, and social life on the one 
hand and on scholarly application on the other. There is 
an effort afoot throughout the nation to redress what has 
clearly been an imbalance. Admiration for and interest in 
scholarship is likely to increase faster than expected. 
There are even some amusing sidelights in which the old 
symbols are being poured into new bottles-as in certain 
high schools where the coveted athlete's "letter" is being 
given as well to students who make distinguished grade 
averages. But there is another problem, more remote in 
time, that may eventually prove more serious and for 
which planning can now be effectively undertaken. 
It is highly probable that certain changes in our edu-
cational system will occur in the years ahead, given the 
demands placed upon it by the community. The first is 
that there will be an increasing demand for the teaching 
75 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
of science, technology, and supporting subjects. Jobs will 
be abundant in the newer technical industries. The de-
centralized American school system has always responded 
to the opportunities available in American industry and 
will respond again. It is very difficult to tell on the basis 
of population statistics and of extrapolations of economic 
developments when the supply and demand for such 
technical specialists will meet. At the present time we are 
far from it. Some estimates suggest that within twenty 
years, as a combined result of the increased training of 
engineers and the postwar baby crop now reaching col-
lege age, the first part of this demand will be taken up. 
What will occur after that will depend upon a host of 
factors, not the least of which will be the speed and 
thoroughness with which American industry absorbs the 
new scientific technology available to it. 
A second almost inevitable consequence of the national 
security crisis is that there will be a quickened flow of 
federal funds in support of education at the state and local 
levels. The present National Defense Education Act is 
only a beginning. A likely, though scarcely inevitable, 
consequence of federal aid is that there may be a reduc-
tion in the disparity in quality that now exists among 
local school systems. The lower limit of teachers' salaries 
is likely to increase faster than the upper limit, and better 
school facilities everywhere will be available as a result 
of present and proposed legislation on school construc-
tion. 
Both of these trends-increasing emphasis on techno-
logical progress and federal aid in the interest of coping 
with the competitive crisis that America must face as a 
world power-are likely to lead to one result that has 
76 
MOTIVES FOR LEARNING 
questionable consequences for American education and 
American life unless change is planned well in advance. 
Let us not be so involved in present efforts to improve 
the intellecrual level of American schools that we over-
look preparations for dealing with our success in doing 
so. The peril of success under the conditions sketched is 
the growth of what has been called "meritocracy." Part-
ly out of the inertia of present practice and partly in 
response to the challenge of the new developments de-
scribed earlier, there will be a strong tendency to move 
the able srudent ahead faster and particularly to move him 
ahead if he shows early promise in technical or scientific 
fields. Planned carefully, such acceleration can be good 
for the student and for the nation. A meritocracy, how-
ev~r, implies a system of competition in which srudents 
are moved ahead and given further opporrunities on the 
basis of their achievement, with position in later life 
increasingly and irreversibly determined by earlier school 
records. Not only later educational opporrunities but 
subsequent job opportunities become increasingly fixed 
by earlier school performance. The late bloomer, the 
early rebel, the child from an educationally indifferent 
home-all of them, in a full-scale meritocracy, become 
victims of an often senseless irreversibility of decision. 
A meritocracy is likely to have several undesirable 
effects on the climate in which edncation occurs, though 
with advance planning we may be able to control them. 
One consequence may be an overemphasis upon examina-
tion performance. C. P. Snow's Rede Lecrure of 1959 
(The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolutions, Cam-
bridge, 1959) contains these comments (pp. 19-20) on 
the Cambridge Mathematical Tripos. They might well 
77 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
give us pause: "For over a hundred years, the nature of 
the T ripos had been crystallizing. The Competition for 
the top places had got fiercer, and careers hung on them. 
In most colleges, certainly in my own, if one managed 
to come out as a Senior or Second Wrangler, one was 
elected a Fellow out of hand. A whole apparatus of 
coaching had grown up. Men of the quality of Hardy, 
Littlewood, Russell, Eddington, Jeans, Keynes, went in 
for two or three years' training for an examination that 
was intensely competitive and intensely difficult. Most 
people in Cambridge were very proud of it, with a 
similar pride to that which almost anyone in England 
always has for our existing educational institutions, what-
ever they happen to be .... In every respect but one, the 
old Mathematical Tripos seemed perfect. The one ex-
ception,however, appeared to some to be rather impor-
tant. It was simply-so the young creative mathematicians, 
such as Hardy and Litrlewood, kept saying-that the 
training had no intellectual merit at all. They went a little 
further, and said that the T ripos had killed serious mathe-
matics in England stone dead for a hundred years." It is, 
to be sure, highly unlikely that anything approaching the 
fierceness of the Mathematical Tripos would develop in 
the United States, and certainly not at the level of our 
high schools and primary schools. But caricatured ex-
tremes help quicken understanding. If it should become 
the case that certain highly desirable jobs are assured to 
winners of National Merit Scholarships, then we may be 
quite sure that it will not be long before teaching and 
learning reflect the importance of such scholarships. If, 
further, the principal scholarships and prizes come in-
creasingly to be awarded for merit in the sciences and 
78 
MOTIVES FOR LEARNING 
mathematics, then we may also expect, and this is another 
danger we face, that there will be a devaluation of other 
forms of scholarly enterprise. Literature, history, and the 
arts will, under such circumstances, likely become the 
prerogative of a group whose family values rather than 
school values provide the principal support for the pursuit 
of these topics. Good teachers in the nonscientific sub-
jects will be harder to recruit, harder to attract into ieach-
ing. Motives for learning in these fields will become 
feebler. One exaggerates, to be sure, but these are all 
possible contingencies that should be guarded against. 
Perhaps it would not be amiss at this point in our 
educational history to consider the forms of countervail-
ing activity that might prevent such an eventual outcome. 
We can ill afford an alienated group of literary intellec-
tuals who feel that advances in science, which they may 
fail to understand out of a sense of being shunned by the 
system of rewards for technical and scientific achieve-
ment, betoken the destruction of traditional culture. It is 
certaiuly plain that at the very least there will have to 
be energy devoted to improving curricula and teaching 
in the humanities and social sciences comparable to what 
is now being devoted to science and mathematics. Future 
legislative provisions for federal and state aid to education 
might well include specific titles concerned with such 
problems, and it is none too early to consider, before 
appropriate legislative committees, the nature and extent 
of such support. 
Emphasis on competitive performance in the scientific 
subjects can, of course, be converted to useful ends 
through imaginativeness and flexibility in the construction 
of examinations. An examination can also foster thought-
79 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
fulness. Special counseling will be necessary in what is 
almost certain to be a more competitive school system 
than we ever have known before in America. It will be 
needed not only for the student who is moving ahead 
rapidly but more especially for the student-and he rep-
resents an important segment of our younger population-
who is not the fast, early, and steady producer. 
But remedies such as better examinations and counsel-
ing do not provide the major answer. If the dangers of 
meritocracy and competitiveness, the risks of an over-
emphasis on science and technology, and the devaluation 
of humanistic learning are to be dealt with, we shall have 
to maintain and nurture a vigorous pluralism in America. 
The theatre, the arts, music, and the humanities as pre-
sented in our schools and colleges will need the fullest 
support. 
To sum up the matter, motives for learning must be 
kept from going passive in an age of specratorship, they 
must be based as much as possible upon the arousal of 
interest in what there is to be learned, and they must be 
kept broad and diverse in expression. The danger signs 
of meritocracy and a new form of competitiveness are 
already in evidence. Already it is possible to see where 
advance planning can help. Such planning and the re-
search to suppOrt it should be given high priority. 
80 
6 
AIDS TO TEACHING 
T 
HERE has been a great deal of discussion in 
recent years about the devices that can be employed to 
aid in the teaching process. These devices are of many 
kinds. Some of them are designed to present material to 
the student of a kind that would not be available to him 
in his ordinary school experience. Films, TV, micro-
photographic film, film strips, sound recordings, and the 
like are among the devices ordinarily employed in such 
work. Books also serve in this role. These are the tools 
by which the student is given vicarious though "direct" 
experience of events. It does not serve much to dismiss 
such materials as "merely for enrichment," since it is 
obvious that such enrichment is one of the principal 
obj ectives of education. Let us call these devices fOT 
vicarious experience. 
A second type of teaching aid has the function of 
helping the student to grasp the underlying structure of 
a phenomenon-to sense the genotype behind the pheno-
type, to use terms from genetics. The well wrought 
laboratory experiment or demonstration is the classic aid 
in such activity. A closer look at our efforts to get 
students to grasp structure indicates that there are many 
other devices and exercises that have the same function. 
The effort to give visible embodiment to ideas in mathe-
matics is of the same order as the laboratory work. The 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
Stem blocks, Cuisenaire rods, and Dienes blocks, as well 
as the demonstrations of Piaget and Inhelder mentioned 
earlier, have the same function. So too do certain kinds 
of chans and representations, either in animated or still 
form. Models, such as a model of the molecule or an 
idealized model of the respiratory system, serve a com-
parable function. Needless to say, films and television as 
well as adroitly illustrated books can be adjuncts to the 
effort at producing clarity and concrete embodiment. 
But there are other, more subtle devices that can be 
and are being used to lead the student to a sense of the 
conceptual structure of things he observes. Perhaps the 
best way to characterize them is to call them "sequential 
programs." There are certain orders of presentation of 
materials and ideas in any subject that are more likely 
than others to lead the student to the main idea. The 
courses being devised by the University of Illinois Com-
mittee on School Mathematics, the School Mathematics 
Study Group, the Physical Science Study Committee, 
and others a~e excellent instances of the well condeived 
sequence designed to lead the student to an understanding 
of basic ideas and structures. 
The whole range of aids from the laboratory exercise 
through the mathematical blocks to the programmed se-
quence we shall, for convenience, speak of as model 
devices. 
Closely related to these are what might be called 
drll11latizing devices. The historical novel that is true in 
spirit to its subject, the nature film that dramatizes the 
struggle of a species in its habitat, the exemplification of 
an experiment executed by a dramatic personality, ex-
posure to greatness in government by a documentary on 
82 
AIDS TO TEACHING 
the life and service of a Winston Churchill-all these can 
have the dramatic effect of leading the student to identify 
more closely with a phenomenon or an idea. Undoubt-
edly, this "aid" in teaching can best be exemplified by 
the drama-creating personality of a teacher. But there are 
many additional dramatic aids upon which teachers can 
and do call-and one wonders whether they are called 
..J \......,.> 
upon often enough. 
_ C C/"' { 
Finally, the past decade has wimessed the emergence 
of various automatizing devices, teaching machines, to 
aid in teaching. While such devices vary quite widely, 
they have certain features in common. The machine pre-
sents a carefully programmed order of problems or 
exercises to the student, one step at a time. The student 
responds selectively in one fonn or another to the alter-
natives presented in a problem or exercise. The machine 
then responds immediately, indicating whether the re-
sponse was or was not correct. If a correct response is 
made, the machine moves to the next problem. The 
progression in difficulty from problem to problem is 
usually quite gradual in order to keep the student from 
the discouragement of excessive failure. 
What one teaches and how one teaches it with the aid 
of such devices depends upon the skill and wisdom that 
goes into the construction of a program of problems. The 
art of programming a machine is, of course, an extension 
of the art of teaching. To date, most of the programming 
has been intuitive and has been entrusted to a teacher of 
known reputation. It has been remarked by teachers who 
have written tapes for teaching machines that the exercise 
has the effect of making one highly conscious of the 
sequence in which one presents problems and of the aims 
83 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
of the sequence-whether, for example, one is trying to 
get children to memorize material or use material cumula-
tively in doing progressively more difficult problems. 
Perhaps the technically most interesting features of 
such automatic devices are that they can take some of 
t~load of te=~':!:r the teacher's .shoulders.~d, 
perha smora t 
hat the machine can prOVIde 
. nmediate ~o~~~~ :; !::dback to the stu ent w . e 
heiSil1 tb;ru;;U;;V;;;ug: It is still far too early to 
evaluate the eventual use of such devices, and it is highly 
unfortunate that there have been such exaggerated claims 
I
made by both proponents and opponents. Clearly, the 
machine is not going to replace the teacher-indeed, it 
may create a demand for more and better teachers if the 
more onerous part of teaching can be relegated to auto-
matic devices. Nor does it seem likely that machines will 
have the effect of dehumanizing learning any more than 
books dehumanize learning. A program for a teaching 
machine is as personal as a book: it can be laced with 
humor or be grimly dull, can either be a playful activity 
or be tediously like a close-order drill. 
In sum, then, there exist devices to aid the teacher in 
extending the Student's range of experience, in helping 
him to understand the underlying structure of the ma-
terial he is learning, and in dramatizing the significance 
of what he is learning. There are also devices now being 
developed that can take some of the load of teaching from 
the teacher's shoulders. -How these aids and devices 
should be used in concert as a system of aids is, of course, 
die interesting problem 
The matter of "integration" is nicely illustrated in a 
report on the teaching films used by the Physical Science 
84 
AIDS TO TEACHING 
Study Committee. "Until quite recently, most educational 
films were enrichment films, designed primarily to intto-
duce phenomena or experiences that would otherwise be 
unavailable inside the classroom. Such films are neces-
sarily self-contained, since the producer is ignorant of 
what his audience has previously learned or what it will 
go on to learn; he can neither build upon the student's 
immediate past nor lay the groundwork for his immediate 
future. In the last few years, another kind of educational 
film, stimulated to a large extent by television, has made 
its appearance. These films present the entire substance 
of a course, and are designed to minimize the need for 
a teacher. Clearly, it is possible to make extremely useful 
films in either of these forms, and such films have indeed 
been made." Stephen White, who has had a major part 
in producing the films used in the high school physics 
course prepared by the PSSC, then goes on to say in his 
report on the film work of that group, "Every film pro-
duced by the PSSC must meet rwo conditions. It must 
( I) further the presentation of the PSSC course as a 
whole, and (2) set the tone and level of the course. For 
the PSSC film is patt of a complex that includes also the 
text, the laboratory, the classroom, the student, and the 
teacher." 
White describes some of the problems of making the 
film fit. "The film must fit into this complex and never 
disrupt it. Obviously, this principle imposes serious re-
strictions on the producer. The most important of these 
for the PSSC films lies in the relation between the film 
and the laboratory. Only at his peril may the producer 
include in a film experiments which the Student should 
and could do in the laboratory. Occasionally such an 
85 
THE PROCESS O' EDUCA110M 
experiment will be included because it is essential to the 
logical development of the film's theme, in which case it 
is done briefly and allusively. More often, it is considered 
desirable to repeat on film, with more sophisticated ap-
paratus, an experiment that is suitable for the school 
laboratory; in such cases the film is made in a manner 
which indicates clearly that it should be shown afteT the 
Student has done the lab work, and the teacher is strongly 
urged to defer it until that rime." 
Other elements in the complex must also be taken into 
account. "Other restrictions on the film require it to 
follow the logical development, the spirit, and the vocab-
ulary (where it exists) of the text. Finally, the film must 
always respect the position of the teacher; it must leave 
for him those activities which are necessary for him if 
he is to retain the respect of his class. All these are nega-
tive, but the film makes positive contributions to the 
complex as well. It serves the classroom by directing 
attention to those aspects of the subject which will best 
stimulate classroom discussion. Thus, the PSSC film on 
'Work and Mechanical Energy' deliberately calls atten-
tion to the temperature rise in a nail on which work is 
being done, and thus opens discussion of thettnal energy, 
which the class will meet next. And the film, wherever 
possible, serves the individual Studentdireccly by suggest-
ing work he himself can carry on outside the school; it 
is for this reason that many PSSC films contain sophisti-
cated experiments perfottned with simple apparatus." 
The writer discusses a second function perfottned by 
the integrated teaching film: "The second condition that 
every film must meet-that of setting level and tone-may 
well be the most important contribution that the film 
86 
AIDS TO TEACHING 
medium can make. By directing attention to the impor-
tant questions and the important problems, the film can 
help assure that all the great mass of fact and concept and 
theory and application that constitute any field of knowl-
edge will fall into a coherent pattern in which the more 
important aspects will be clearly differentiated from the 
trivial. This is most difficult to achieve with the printed 
word; on film it can be accomplished at rimes with a 
gesture. Beyond meeting these two conditions, PSSC 
attempts in each film to make other substantial contribu-
tions to the learning process. Each film shows a real 
scientist in action, presenting him not as a disembodied 
intellect but as a nottnal, active, occasionally fallible 
human being, dealing rigorously and respectfully with 
real problems and deriving not only satisfaction but at 
rimes excitement from the intellectoal pursuit in which 
he is engaged. It is in this implicit fashion that the films 
attempt to elucidate the nature of scientists and of the 
scientific life. . . • The films are scrupulously honest. 
Experiments that are seen on the screen were carefully 
perfottned and are accurately reported. The temptation 
to use the legerdemain inherent in film processes has been 
steadily resisted, and in those rare cases where it is used 
to produce a desirable effect, the Student is told explicitly 
how it is used and why." 
The task of the PSSC-the creation of a single high 
school course in physics-was a specialized one, and the 
particular problems of the course may not relate to all 
forms of curriculum construction. Yet there is always a 
question as to the purpose of any particular device-be 
it a film of paramecia or a slide projection of a graph or 
a television show on the Hoover Dam. The devices them-
87 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
selves call1lot dictate their purpose. Unbridled enthusiasm 
for audio-visual aids or for teaching machines as panaceas 
overlooks the paramount importance of what one is trying 
to accomplish. A perpetual feast of the best teaching 
films in the world, unrelated to other techniques of 
teaching, could produce bench-bound passivity. Limiting 
instruction to a steady diet of classroom recitation sup-
ported only by traditional and middling textbooks can 
make lively subjects dull for the student. The objectives 
of a curriculum and the balanced means for attaining it 
should be the guide. 
A discussion of teaching aids may seem like an unusual 
context in which to consider the teacher's role in teaching. 
Yet, withal, the teacher constitutes the principal aid in 
the teaching process as it is practiced in our schools. What 
can be said of the teacher's role in teaching? 
It takes no elaborate research to know that communi-
cating knowledge depends in enormous measure upon 
one's mastery of the knowledge to be communicated. 
That much is obvious enough-whether the teacher uses 
other aids or not. It is also quite plain from recent surveys 
that many primary and secondary school teachers are not, 
in the view of various official bodies, sufficiently weIl 
trained initially to teach their subject. It is also the case 
that, with the present high turnover in the teaching 
profession, even relatively well prepared teachers do not 
have sufficient opportunity to learn their subjects in that 
special way that comes from teaching it. For teaching is 
a superb way of learning. There is a beautiful story 
about a distinguished coIlege teacher of physics. He 
reports introducing an advanced class to the quantum 
88 
AIDS TO TEACHING 
theory: "I went through it once and looked up only to 
find the class full of blank faces-they had obviously not 
understood. 1 went through it a second time and they still 
did not understand it. And so 1 went through it a third 
time, and that time I understood it." 
There are certain measures that must be taken to im-
prove the quality of teachers, steps that have been pro-
posed many times and that need no elaboration here. 
Better recrnitment and the possibility of better selection, 
better substantive education in teacher training insti-
tutions, on-the-job training of younger teachers by 
more experienced ones, in-service and summer institutes, 
closed-circuit television to continue the education of 
teachers, improvement in teachers' salaries-all of these 
must obviously be pursued as objectives. But equally 
important is the upgrading of the prestige of the teaching 
profession. This upgrading will depend upon the degree 
to which we in America are serious about educational 
reform and t.he degree to which efforts are made to 
improve not only the facilities and salaries available to 
teachers but the support they can count on from the com-
munity and from our universities. 
One special matter concerning the teacher as com-
municator of knowledge must be mentioned: the training 
and qualifications of the elementary-school teachers. 
Several references have already been made to the training 
of children concretely and intuitively in logical opera-
tions that will later be taught more formally in upper 
primary and secondary school. Such teaching requires 
special training, and it is not clear what the most effective 
form of training is. Special emphasis should very likely be 
89 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
given to such work-research on how to train teachers 
for such teaching along with research on the actual 
teaching of younger pupils. 
The teacher is not only a communicator but a model. 
Somebody who does not see anything beautiful or power-
ful about mathematics is not likely to ignite others with 
a sense of the intrinsic excitement of the subject. A teach-
er who will not or cannot give play to his own intuitive-
ness is not likely to be effective in encouraging intuition 
in his students. To be so insecure that he dares not be 
caught in a mistake does not make a teacher a likely model 
of daring. If the teacher will not risk a shaky hypothesis, 
why should the student? 
To communicate knowledge and to provide a model 
of competence, the teacher must be free to teach and to 
learn. We have not been sufficiently mindful of the ways 
in which such freedom can be achieved. Notably, we 
have been neglectfnl of the uses to which educated 
parents can be put. Various schools have experimented 
successfully with plans that use parents for the semi-
professional tasks that keep teachers pinned down. Parents 
can certainly help in supervising study halls, in grading 
routine quizzes, in preparing laboratory materials, and in 
the dozens of routine operations necessary in a school. 
The effect would be to free the teacher for teaching and 
study. If the teacher is also learning, teaching takes on 
a new quality. 
The teacher is also an immediately personal symbol of 
the educational process, a figure with whom students can 
identify and compare themselves. Who is not able to 
recall the impact of some particular teacher-an enthusi-
ast, a devotee of a point of view, a disciplinarian whose 
90 
AIDS TO TEACHING 
ardor came from love of a subject, a playful but serious 
mind? There are many images, and they are precious. 
Alas, there are also destructive images: the teachers who 
sapped confidence, the dream killers, and the rest of the 
cabinet of horrors. 
Whitehead once remarked that education should in-
volve an exposure to greatuess. Many of us have been 
fortunate. But there is no simple plan for attracting great-
ness to the teaching profession. Emphasis on excellence 
is still the slow but likely way. Might it not be the case, 
however, that television and film might expand the range 
of identification figures-models of greatness-within the 
special limits imposed by one-way communication? We 
know relatively little about effective identification figures 
for children at different ages and in different circum-
stances. Are Olympian models the only ones or the best 
ones for engaging a child's sense of competence or great-
ness? Perhaps promising high school students as guest 
teachers from time to time would do better? They might 
also lure more talent into teaching. 
In sum, then, the teacher's task as communicator, 
model, and identification figure can be supported by a 
wise use of a variety of devices that expand experience, 
clarify it, and give it personal siguificance. There need 
be no conflict between the teacher and the aids to teach-
ing. There will be no conflict if the development of aids 
takes into account the aims and the requirements of 
teaching. The film or television show as gimmick, the 
television system without substance or style in its pro-
grams, the pictographically vivid portrayal of the trivial-
these will help neither the teacher nor the student. Prob-
lems of quality in a curriculum cannot he dodged by the 
91 
~ 
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION 
purchase of sixteen-millimeter projection equipment. The 
National Defense Education Act provides considerable 
sums of money for the development of audio-visual aids. 
The intelligent use of that money and of other resources 
now available will depend upon how well we are able to 
integrate the techuique of the film maker or the program 
producer with the technique and wisdom of the skillful 
teacher. 
92 
INDEX 
