Information technology: its newmeaning forart
OVERS IZE
TA.
167
.J47
Contents
Introduction by Karl Katz
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
The open ing was an electric night to remember. . . . . . . . . 6
Notes on art and information processing by Jack Burnham .10
Design for a 'non-museum atmosphere'
15
The crafting of media by Theodor H. Nelson
16
Labyrinth: an inte ractive catalogue
18
Gerbils in a computerized environment: Seek
20
Interactive paper systems
24
Level of heat
25
Triangulate your thoughts
26
Cremation piece: a life's work goes up in flames
28
A 'lost' painti ng for Kubler
32
Visitors' profile: a statistical breakdown of spectators
34
Myths, secrets, reporting and betting systems
35
Ultrasonic waves
36
Compose r: a music synthesizer .... . .•. .. . ... .... . .. . .38
Window panes that give off sound
40
The conversationalist
42
Room situation: this man gets too close for com fort
44
An accumulation of information taken from here to there . .45
Order idea : a systematic description of the universe .. .. .47
Selected mental and phys ical characteristics of an artist .. 48
Floor show: simulated behavior of living beings
49
Radio free poetry: a prototype for guerrilla radio
52
An open letter from a 'cafe revolutionary'
53
Vision Substitution System: visual images make a real
impression
55
The conceptual typewriter
56
Software films
58
Work: an Allan Kaprow Happening
59
Artist-i n-res idence expo ses himself electronically
60
Systems burn-off X residual software
62
The R.E.S.I.S.T.O.R.S.: teenage computer pros
64
Computers are not what you think by Theodor H. Nelson . .66
The 7th investigation : art as idea as idea
68
Biographies
70
Exhibition staff
Jack Burnham: Curator
Joanne Lupton: Exhibition Coordinator
James Mahoney: Exhibition Designer
Theodor H. Nelson: Technical Adviser
Deborah Bretzfelder: Assistant Exhibit Designer
Skip King: Organization Consultant
Peter Finn: Organization Assistant
Robert Jakob: Catalogue Designer
Judith Benjamin Burnham: Catalogue Coordinator
Shunk-Kender: Catalogue Photographers
Special Consultant to American Motors Corporation:
Ruder & Finn Fine Arts
OVERS IZE
TA167
. J 47
Jewish Museum (New York,
N. Y.)
software
:
an exhibition
[held at]
the Jewish Museu
september
16 t hrough
November 8,
1970
[ and]
Smithsoni an I nst i t ut i o
14:
-1-;;
Software is an exhibition which utilizes soph isticated
communications technology, but concentrates on the
interaction between peop le and their electronic and
electromechanical surroundings. This is the same
exploration, in human factors, which we use in the engi-
neering design of our automobiles as a human environment.
This exhibition encourages artists to use the medium of
electronic technology in cha llenging and unconventional
ways. The link between art and science, whi ch the artists in
Software are examining, is the same link we must explore
and strengthen in our automotive styling and engineering.
Because of our continuing interest in people, in
technological achievement, and in the advancement of
modern art forms,our involvement in Software has been
both rewarding and stimulating.
Roy D. Chapin, Jr., Chairman
American Motors Corporation
TA167
.J47
Jewish Theol ogi c a l
Semi n a r
Softwar e:
an
e xh i b i t ion
[held at]
th e J e wish
Museum,
September 16
through Nov emb e r
8 ,
1970
[ and]
t he Smit h s onian
~
I
Artist David Antin (left) converses with American Motors VP. Frank Hedge (center) and Roy Chapin
Artist Joseph Kosuth (right) exchanges in/ormation with Museum 0/
Modern Art curator Kynaston L. McShine
Artist Paul Conly (ri ght), Mr. & Mrs. Roy Chapin (center), their daughter
Alexandra (second from left) and Nina Kaiden Wright 0/ Ruder & Finn
Roy Chapin (lett}, Chairman 0/ American Motors Corp. discusses
exhib ition with Curator Jack Burnham
Direct or Karl Katz (le ft) watches museum visi tors interact with
Interactive Paper Systems
Opening night visitors like to congregate near the stairs
Spectators seek out the popular gerbils
9
Notes on art and information processing
Jack Burnham
Software is not specifically a demonstration of engineering
know-how, nor for that matter an art exhibition. Rather in a
lim ited sense it demonstrates the effects of contemporary
control and communication techniques in the hands of artists.
Most importantly it provides the mean s by which the public
can personally respond to programmatic situations
structured by artists. Software makes no distinctions
between art and non-art; the need to make such decisions is
10
left to each visi tor. Hence the goal of Software is to foc us a
sensibilities on the fastest growing area in this culture:
information processing systems and the ir devices.
In just the past few years, the movement away fro m art
objects has been precipitated by concerns with natural and
man-made systems, processes, ecological relationships, all
the philosophical-linguistic involvement of Conceptual Art.
All of these interests deal with art which is transactional;
they deal with underlying structures of communication or
energy exchange instead of abstract appearances. For this
reason most of Software is aniconic; its images are usually
secondary or instructional whi le its information often takes
the form of printed materials. In such forms information pro-
cessing technology influences our notions about creativity,
perception, and the limits of art. Thus it may not be, and
probably is not, the province of computers and other
telecommunication devices to produce art as we know it;
but they wil l, in fact, be instrumental in redefining the
ent ire area of esthetic awareness.
"The concept of cybernetics
now represents a kind of historical
snapshot, the germ of an
insight expanded and modified
far beyond its origins."
Plann ing for the Software exhibition began early in 1969
when Karl Katz assembled representatives from the art and
the computer fields to review the feasibility of such an under-
taking. The theme at that time was vaguely " cybernetic" or
a sequel to the Museum of Modern Art's "The Machine as
Seen at the End of the Mechanical Age" (1968). More than
anything, those early discussions were memorable for com-
munication obstacles between laymen and experts in their
respective fie lds. Somehow the term cybernetic meant little
or nothing to the art representatives present-except that
it epitomized a very complicated and important field-while
it stood for an idea already a little too general and passe
to computer spec ialists.
A touchstone which we all shared in those first months
was Cybernetic Serendipity: The Computer and the Arts, a
boo k-catalogue compiled and edited by Jasia Reichardt for
her exhibition at the London Institute of Contemporary Art in
1968. In a most complete way, her exhibition attempted to
document how computer and various cybernetic devices
have been used creatively, both within and beyond the arts.
Cybernetic Serendipity contained much basic information on
the historical development of digital computers. It included
scientific experiments and works by artists which utilized
the principle of feedback in machines designed to respond
to external and/ or internal stimuli. Other exhibits featured
printouts (visual diagrams) from computers as used in music
analysis and music synthesis, computer graphics and
movies, computer-designed choreography, and computer
poems and text analysis. Since Cybernetic Serendipity
was in many ways a very comprehensive exhibition in the
form of an historical resume, we felt that Software should not
cover the same ground. Moreover, we wanted to use
computers in a museum environment, a sizable technical
feat which the earlier exhibition did not attempt.
In the spring of last year we set about redefining the
scope of the present exhibition as "The Second Age of
Machines" . In regard to this, one of the landmarks in the
history of science occurred in 1947 when the M.I.T.
mathematician Norbert Wiener along with his colleague
Arture Rosenblueth of Harvard, coined the word Cybernetics.
At a basic level, Cybernetics refers to "the set of problems
centered about communication, control, and statistical
mechanics, whether in the machine or in living tissue. "
Wiener's subsequent research, along with that of many
other scientists, led to a working co ncept that the behavior
of all organisms, machines, and other physical systems is
controlled by their communication structures both within
themselves and with their environments. Research and
development in the last twenty years has led to so many new
ideas that the concept of cybernetics now represents a kind
of historical snapshot, the germ of an insight expanded and
modified far beyond its origins. In a sense, the original
purpose of Cybernetics was to produce a unified theory of
the control levels and types of messages used by men and
machines and processes in normal operation. Thus the
history of computer technology may be interpreted as
progress in making communication between men and
machines more natural and complete. This remains an
ideal definition however, because quite often in industry
human beings have been adapted to inhuman machine
schedules, rather than the other way around. What is less
realized is that most businesses of any size have had to
adapt themselves, more or less traumatically, to radically
different patterns of administration and organization as the
result of information structures made possible by computer
systems. So in part Software addresses itself to the personal
and social sensibilities altered by this revolution. By and
large these-alterations have been internal, in the form of
new procedures and ways of dealing with physical reality,
rather than purely visual responses. With this in mind,
Les Levine suggested the name forthe present exhibition.
Throughout the history of computer technology
'software' has always meant changeable programs and
procedures. Its genesis could be related to an idea held
by the mathematician and computer scientist Marvin Minsky.
He compares our intellectual conception of machines to the
duality of the mind-body question which philosophers have
pondered and debated for hundreds of years. All solutions
to the problem, either idealistic or materialistic, contradict
evidence which the body presents of its own functioning.
But for practical purposes we have contented ourselves
with the dualism that the body functions as one form of
activity and the mind as another. Minsky states that
" One area concerns mechanical, geometrical, and physical
matters; the other deals with things like goals, meanings, and
social interactions. When we see an object we account for
its mechanical support in the first domain-we ask who put
it there and why in the second.:"
"Our bodies are hardware,
our behavior software"
Minsky concludes that we build machines in our own
self-image-although such a separation between body and
mind may be no more than an illusion fostered by our lack
of scientific knowledge about human biology and commu-
nication systems in general. While the integrationist
tendencies of systems design tend to play down such
differences, in a very real way the division between software
and hardware is one that tangibly relates to our own
anthropomorphism. So in a sense this exhibition represents
'the state of art' as it is presently conceived.Yet it must be
remembered that software originally referred to those
aspects of a computer system most easi ly changed. This is
no longer true since hardware sometimes can be replaced
more quickly and cheaply than software. Here again
distinctions begin to blur.
For computers, hardware components include
processors, memories, display devices, communication
equipment and other tangible computer subsystems.
Software, or stored programs, has equal value, and perhaps
with future refinement of computer systems it will be
considered more important than hardware. The concept of
11
I
software includes general and special purpose computer
languages, programs such as instructional procedures,
dictionaries, and so forth. In addition to stored information,
software has come to mean for some engineers the process
of systems-design itself; thus systems procedures, from
flow diagramming to putting computer systems in working
order, all fall under the heading of software. Thinking in
systems terms, hardware and software interact, determining
each other's structure for a given problem. Consequently
the tendency is to think of both in unified terms.
Supplementing the above description, Theodor H.
Nelson, technical adviser for Software, provides these
examples of software:
..Plans and procedures for action, as distinct from the
equipment that carries the action out. Thus in a transpor-
tation system the hardware consists of cars, highways,
traffic lights and pol icemen, while the software consists of
rules, such as drive on the right, stop on a red light, etc.
Another example: subway cars and tracks are hardware,
routes A, E, and BB are software. Finally: our bodies are
hardware, our behavior software.
Software is the part of a system which is more easily
changeable. In computer design we recognize no absolute
distinction between machines and programs; often we have
a choice of wiring a certain mode of behavior into equipment,
which is faster but.more expensive, or leaving the behavior
to be done by a program, which is more flexible and cheaper.
This choice, a matter of economics and eng ineering
preference, is called the " hardware-software tradeoff",
a renowned problem. The situation is now made more
complicated by introduction of the term firmware, add itional
changeable programs which effectively rewire the hardware.
Software has a third mean ing of sorts. In publishing,
the terms " hardware" and "software" have for some reason
been adopted as meaning objects (such as physical books)
and content (what's printed in them). This is unfortunate,
since in computer-based text systems we must distinguish
between the hardware (computer and reading screen),
software (computer and display program) and content
(what is read). "
"Machines carry on
brilliant dialogues with articulate
human beings
and very uninspired conversations
with dull people"
The term software has also been adopted by the
commercial and advertising world to mean any kind of
stimulus or environmental conditioning, possibly including
the shaping of public opinion. This could also be construed
as information taken from the environment by a system,
living or inorganic.We might even expand the notion of
software to include any kind of data, but already this
annihilates the traditional distinction between software
(procedures) and data (information operated upon).
Nevertheless, the exhibition contains all of these overtones
and probably a few not mentioned.
Used in the art format, any notion of software leads one
to reconsider our historical notions of art. Normally the
context of art is a painting, sculpture, or perhaps a gallery
environment. Contexts lend meaning to art works or art
ideas: they " frame" the work, so to speak. All works of art
function as signs; that is they sign ify in some form or other
12
how they are operative within the art context. Moreover,
it is becoming evident that the material presences of frames
or even gallery spaces are no longer necessary for placing
signs in the art context. For sophisticated viewers, contexts
are implicitly carried over from prev ious art experiences.
Thus many of the exhibits in Software deal with conceptual
and process relationships which on the surface seem to be
totally devoid of the usual art trappings.
One of the purposes of Software is to undermine normal
I
perceptual expectations and habits which viewers bring to
an art exhibition. In some cases this is done by deliberately
separating or isolating communication structures from their I
usual surroundings. In daily life we receive thousands of
" messages" , most of them unconscious, upon which we act.
The same is true of behavior in an art gallery. Artists'
I
messages are frequently ignored by a non-participant or
someone without the needed training to respond to certain
cues. In this sense the idea of Software det racts from the
notion of art as a system of tangible expectations and
pred igested signs. Rather Software is about experiencing
without the mental cues of art history. Instead it is saying:
"sense your responses when you perceive in a new way or
interact with something or someone in an unusual situation".
For this reason Software regards the perceived appearance
of the art object as a fraction of the ent ire communication
structure surrounding any art. Introspection rather than
inspection is the point of the show.
The machines in Software should not be regarded as
art objects; instead they are merely transducers, that is,
means of relaying information which mayor may not have
relevance to art. Visitors to Software should have the
opportunity to interact in varying degrees with the systems
at hand. In all cases such " interacti on" falls short of the level
of richness found in ordinary human conversation. Yet
another goal of Software is to make it clear that art itself
is a form of intermittent dialogue. We are trying to make
that sense of dialogue a conscious event.
A few years ago one of the inventors of the first
conversational computer programs, Joseph Weizenbaum
of M.I.T., observed that machines carryon brilliant dialogues
with articulate human beings and very uninspired conver-
sations, using the same prog ram, with dull people. Any
" art" that transpires-if such a term is needed-is the direct
result of interaction between the computer's software and
the "program" (behavioral idiosyncrasies) of a human being.
In a similar sense, the printed materials which convey many
of the conceptual wo rks in the exhibition are not art in
themselves; rather the ir concepts and processes, as
perceived, recapitulate art experiences. Such a view of
reality insists that noth ing has art as an innate quality, but
that the art context of an object or environment is always
provisional and always open to challenge.
Such philosophy of insubstantiality appears to be a
form of scientific Neo-Platonism- that is, knowledge free
of the effects of direct sensory affirmation. The objective
of Software, however, is to stress the fact that information
is simply a meas ure of response between sender and
receiver; the ability to change someone's mind about
something is the meas ure of data's worth as information.
(Note: In the computer fie ld information is a commodity,
something which has monetary value for a client. In the
usual mathematical context of information theory,
information is seen as a process between ent ities, one with
no objective value for anyone.) All information becomes
obsolete unless it rema ins in a meaningful con text to us.
The objective of art history and most retrospective
disciplines is to counteract the natural effects of time on
information by turning the past into a form of information
•
wh ich remains relevent in the future. If this seems exag-
gerated, consider the fate of many objects once removed
from the ir elevated contexts in tourist guides and art
histories. Histo ry is a conservative but necessary force which
prese rves by providing a mythical ambiance for objects
and build ings that formerly wou ld have been discarded.
In a very real sense the structure of a computerized
society comes in direct conflict with the Art Ideal. As
Warren Brody and Nilo Lindgren have written, using
co mputers in a soc iety dominated by traditional knowledge
structures is an invitation to chaos. The writers observe that
information is always defined by a point of view, whether a
favored theory, an available technology, or a social
condition. But in a wo rld rapidly being forced to separate
information fro m habitual procedures, " It is not even possible
to gauge how deeply our classical concepts are rooted,
until after we have adopted the evolutionary viewpoint
that regards inform ation as conti nuously being evolved
fro m the unknown, metaboli zed into meaning, and finally
reconstructed into noise . .. Man survives as a creatu re who
continual ly changes and evolve s, a creature who feeds on
novelty, who reorganizes himself as he reorganizes his
physical world and maintains stability by this process of
chanqe.t'- It might be obs erved that presently in the United
States a group of museums are creating the most elaborate
index of known art works ever assembled-all to be filed
in computer programs for the future use of all museums and
scholars. It almost seems as though we are exchanging
myths wh ile retaining the original mythic structure, i.e.,
art history transformed into a kind of comprehensive
electronic memo ry,one given to the same modes of mythic
organ ization that pervaded tribal life in the past.
"No group of artists
involved with computers and electronics
is going to win compliments
for their humanistic endeavors"
As a popular interpreter of technology Marshall
McLuhan has commented on the same evolutionary values.
In The Gutenberg Galaxy McLuhan defines machines of the
nineteenth century, the effects of mass production, and the
technology of the printed book as "homogeneous segmenta-
tion" , or the proliferation of experience through duplication.
This, according to McL uhan , is " the method of the fixed or
specialist point of view that insists on repetition as the
criterion of truth and practicallty." For example, it is safe
to say that the popularity and efficacy of modern art is to a
large degree the result of good, cheap color reproductions
produced by the millions.The magic of personal creativity
in the Machine Age was, and to some degree still is, the
rec reation of the individual' s gesture through the anonymous,
all-pervasive means of the mass media. So, increasingly the
importance of the work of art is seemingly in direct
proportion to the number of times it is reproduced for
popular consumption. Literacy, in McLuhan's judgment,
produces a closed circuit of values, one that makes the
distinction between art and non-art not only possible
but necessary. In mythic terms, works of art are singular or
unique; but paradoxically we reinforce this uniqueness
through mass production of the art object's image. The
non-literate tradition produced myt hs and tales which could
be told over and over again in an infinite number of ways;
with the coming of the book, the ir counterpart was the idea
of the masterpiece. But aga in our concept of perpetuating
important information may be changing ; in McLuhan's
words: " Today our science and method strive nottowards a
point of view but to discover how not to have a point of view,
the method not of closure and perspective but of an open
'field' and the suspended judgment. Such is now the on ly
viable method under electric conditions of simul taneous
information movement and total human interdepedence.'"
Software is McLuhan's idea of the present environment
which cannot be art because it is not yet behind us and
conceptually codified. For many visitors there wi ll be no
" art" in the motion pictures, conceptual displays, television
monitors, computer-based readers, and time-sharing
terminals of the exhibition-mainly because few art
authorities have ever been convinced that these cou ld
contain an art experience. These activities, however,
possess the sensory consistency of the oral tradition in
pre-l iterate society. Where modifications and differences
lie is still uncertain, but McLuhan has this to say about their
effect upon experienced reality: "Thus the technique of
suspended judgment,the great discovery of the twentieth
century in art and physics ali ke, is a recoil and tra nsformation
of the impersonal assembly-l ine of nineteenth century art
and science. And to speak of the stream of consciousness
as unlike the rational wo rld is merely to insist upon visual
sequence as the rational norm, handing art over to the
unconscious quite gratuitously. For what is meant by the
irrational and the nonlogical in much modern discussion is
merely the rediscovery of the ordinary transactions between
self and the world, or between subject and object. Such
transactions had seemed to end with the effects of phonetic
literacy in the Greek world."?
Yet the ultimate achievement of McLuhan's visions
is sti ll very distant. In many instances so far the information
processing technologies have only aggravated the sup-
pressed anxieties of Machine Age politics and economics.
As demonstrated in Nelson's essay on "cybercrud" , we seem
to be the victims of a perpetual consumer's fraud, no matter
how promising the hardware and software. In terms of the
art wo rld , no group of artists involved with computers and
electronics is going to win compliments for their humanistic
endeavors. Yet at some point an attempt has to be made
to put the issues of all contemporary communication, not
just esthetic communication into a questioning frame of
reference. Already we have witnessed a revol ution in usage.
Twenty years ago computers belonged to a tiny, highly
skilled, mathematical elite-a priesthood; ten years later
laymen who bothered to master cumbersome computer
languages could use them; and today, as evidenced by this
exh ibition, people with no special tra ining have access to
computers. Thus in practice there has been a steady trend
towards democratization.
"It appears we cannot survive
without technologies just as dangerous
as the dilemmas they are designed
to solve"
Yet this is a different age in which we are beginning to
read esthetics into budgets, planning procedures, and
priorities-and not so muc h into finished products. When
means become ends we ask such questions as how do
electronic information processing systems affect the
psychological outlook of the average human being?
Furthermore, the possible goals and uses of super-human
intelligent computer programs-if and when they become a
13
reality-are still very unclear even at the highest levels.
Automation or semi-automation of work tasks does not
insure that they are any less boring than before since
much depends upon the job and planning that goes into
them. Computer.programming can be the most varied and
creative activity that one can do on salary, allowing the
most initiative and variety of personal means of expression.
However, in some business situations a certain kind of
low-level programming (also called " coding") is employed;
much worse, keypunching is certainly intolerable. Thus
personal contact with such machines ranges from the most
rewarding to the most boring and regimented experiences
possible. On another level, computerized data files on
individuals continue to be an extremely serious threat to
human rights, and one against which there are few real
protections. In a survey on the effects of computer data
banks, Jerry Rosenberq' finds it significant that the most
negative attitudes are shared by people whose work exposes
them to computerized data-gathering.
As our information storage problems expand in
magnitude (along with our statistics needs and resource
management problems in ecology) we are forced to confront
the computer as one of the few practical solutions. This
produces a very real paradox: it appears that we cannot
survive without technologies potentially just as dangerous
as the dilemmas they are designed to solve. We might ask
ourselves if future generations of information systems will
be used with any more sensitivity than radio and television
have been up to now. Apparently once esthetics is removed
from the tidy confines of the Art World, it becomes infused
with ethical, political, and biological implications that are
overwhelming but nevertheless critical.
Many of the finest works in the Software exhibition are
in no way connected with machines. In a sense they
represent the " programs" of artists who have chosen not
14
to make paintings or sculptures, but to express ideas or art
propositions. After experiencing examples of Conceptual
Art, it becomes apparent that machines can only handle
the ideas given to them by human beings. What machines
do is to telescope and edit experiences in a way that
printed materials cannot.
Again Software is not technolog ical art ; rather it points
to the information technologies as a pervasive environment
bad ly in need of the sensitivity traditionally assoc iated with
art. Since people will continue to make poems and paintings
without computers, Software focuses on modes of
creativity and creative assistance which are more or less
unique to the electronic age. Remembering the Latin
derivation of art, the term ars in the Middle Ages was less
theoretical than scientia: it dealt with the manual skills
related to a craft or technique. But present distinctions
between the fine, app lied, and scientific arts have grow n
out of all proportion to the original schism precipitated by
the Industrial Revolution. Thus Software makes none of the
usual qualitative distinctions between the artistic and
technical subcultures . At a time when esthetic insight must
become a part of technological decision-making , does such
a division still make sense?
June 1970
1. Wiener, Norbert (1948) Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication
in the Animal and the Machine (The M.I.T. Press: Cambridge,
Massachusetts, 2nd edition, 1961) p. 11
2. Minsky. Marvin (April 1969) " I think, Therefore I am" in Psychology Today p. 31
3. Brod y, Warren and Lindgren, Nile (September 1967) " Human Enhanc ement
Through Evolutionary Technology" in IEEE Spectru m p. 91
4. Mc Luhan , Marshall (1962) The Gutenb erg Galaxy (Signet Books:
New York, 1st edition, 1969) p. 327
S./bid.
6. Mcl.uhan, p. 329
7. Rosenberg, Jerry M. (1969) The Death 01Privacy (Rando m House: New York) p. 139
Curator Jack Burnham co nsults with Exhibition Coordinator Joanne Lupton
An installation design
that minimizes 'museum atmosphere'
James A. Maho ney (ri ght) and Theodor H. Nelson go over exhibition plans.
I did not antici pate the difficulty of the installation when
a group of us atte nded a meeting at which the concept for
the exhibit was established. The first realization of a uniq ue
exhibition design and installation problems came months
later with the realization that the work of many artists pro-
duces no obj ects. Equipment there is- but no "objects
of art".
Inside the museum, the visitor will find lig htness and
darkness, two constant elements of day-to-day existence.
This is both a lighti ng and color consideration. Light and
dark shades of gray (for concrete or metal ) were discarded.
Software is not restricted to the city, norto mac hines. Noise
levels from machinery, it was decided,would be dealt with at
installation-we live with noise and we have learned that we
tol erate it within certain bounds. Visito rs to the exhibition
will have to concentrate because we are not isolating indi- .
vidual works of art to be appreciated. Hopefully noth ing
is hidden and noth ing is obvious.
James A. Mahoney, Exhibition Designer
15
The crafting of media
Theodor H. Nelson
The strange revolut ion of our information environment has
only begu n; yet it has begun in such an obscured and
clouded form that the pub lic sees only vari ous
meaningless disguises.
The all-purpose machine, as von Neumann called it, has
been falsely promulgated to the pub lic as the socalled
computer, numerical, uncompromising, demanding and
intract able. It has pro fited certain computer companies to
make " computers" and their associated techniques incom-
prehensible and awesome; these same companies now seem
unprepared for the wi despread public revulsion to this image
of the computer. It has pro fited some computer companies
to build ungainly and obscure systems for business pur-
poses, bad ly related to what their business customers do;
and to con the customer and his poo r employees into
bel ieving it has to be that way; this keeps the hapl ess
customer on the hook indefinitely. These same companies
now seem unprepared to have the ir all-wisdom questioned.
I would like to employ the word cybercrud to mean, in
gen eral, putting things over on people using computers.
Cybercrud is one of the most important specialties, if not the
economic backbone, of the computer field. The promotion
of false or clumsy approaches to a problem as " scientific,"
the frequent claim that "the computer has to have it that way"
- when a certain thing could be programmed very differently
- are cybercrud.
But the computer is an all-pupose machine, and the
computer display-a screen programmed to present text and
pictures somehow stored in the computer-is a universal
miraculous communication tool , as Ivan Sutherland showed
in the early sixties with his Sketchpad system. And computer
pri ces, unlike other prices, go down relentlessly. Expensive
as these devices may be tod ay, within the decade small good
ones will cost a few hundred,at most a few thousand dollars.
As we learn to free ourselves from cybercrud, the question
becomes not, " how do I relate to thi s sinister, demanding
artifact?" but " what is the grooviest way to use this thi ng?"
The human environment can now be wholly, wo nderfully
redesigned . What do we want? What do we want ??
What do we want???
Unti l now, our media-letters, boo ks, television-have
been based on specific inventions and technical connec-
tions. But no longer are specific inventions of special impor-
tance: information may be commuted to any form,functioning
networks may be built connecting any device to any other
device; total trans-pluggability has come. (Imagine if you will
a device with a red oval2-inch TV screen, a set of chimes in
the natural key of C, a smell generator cap abl e of giving off
most smells, and a foghorn. Should the F.C.C. authorize this
combination as a broadcast med ium?)
The design of med ia is thus in a sense a new art; before,
we could tinker littl e with the package. I suggest the term
"fantics" for the art and technology (in that order) of showing
things; the crafting of media for human communication pur-
poses is therefore its most important franchise, something
like " city planning" in generality. Making things look good,
feel right, and com e across clearly should be
a general objective.
We should distinguish between media and faci lities. A
facility is an available activity, or function , like a movie
splicer or desk calculator. A medium is a set of presentation
elements, and relations among them,that may be used by a
person to create an object, environment or experience
for someone else.
Creating media that are organized, then, clear and easily
related to the human mind, is our task. Creating media that
are focussed, or gently converging , is the delicate part.
Rather than present a user with ideas and activiti es stretch-
ing limitlessly in all directions, a presentat ional system
should help organ ize his work and atte ntion.
This is the age of option. For instance, we may have
anything we want on display screens-text or diagrams or
both, moving or flickering or interacting or whatever.
What do we want?
This is also the age of crunch. Ecstatic possibilities must
survive various forbidding or shaping factors that might cut
them down. In the design of media these incl ude not merely
economics and technicalities (such as tran smission rates on
phone lin es), but social structure and motivation (what will
the teacher put up with in the classroom? Why don't students
use the language laboratory?).
Hypertexts and hypergrams, then , are two new species
of media for the computer age : personal, dynami c, and con-
tradictory of the heavy-handed and stupid " computer" in the
general stereotype. Hype rtext, or writi ng that can branch or
perform, is seen in the Software show's " Labyrinth" piece,
wherein the visitor may browse through a maze of writings on
the screen. " Hypergrams," branching or performing pictures,
will be the pictorial equivalent. Design ing the detailed activ-
ities of the presenting systems is an important task, demand-
ing technical knowledge, love and appreciation for words
and pictures, and a sense of alternatives and inspiration.
The new age will not be "scientific. " The word " scien-
tific" is obsolete (except where specifying the activities and
problems of scientists), like the adjectives " modern" and
" streamlined." The technological imperative is a fake, com-
puterization can take whatever form we wish it to; therefore
we must learn about computers in orderto wish better. As
Burnham says at the end: " ...Software makes none of the
usual qualitative distinctions between the artistic and tech-
nical subcultures. At a time when esthetic insight must
become a part of technological decision-making , wou ld
such division s make sense?"
May 24, 1970
Bush, Vannevar, "As We May Think" in Atlantic Monthly. June 1945.
Sutherland , Ivan, Ske tchpad: A Man·Machine System, l incoln l aboratory,
Lexington, Mass.
Nelson, Theodor H., "Getting It Out of Our System " in Sc hech ter (ed.), Critique of
Inform ation Retrieval, Thompson Books, 1967.
Nelson, Theodar H" "No More Teachers' Dirty looks" in Computer Decisions,
September 1970.
Nelson, Theodor H" "As We Will Think", to be pub lished.
17
Ned Woodman/Theodor H. Nelson
Labyrinth: An Interactive Catalogue 1970
with assistance from Scott Bradner (Art & Technology, lnc., Boston)
Digital Equipment Corporation (time share PDP-8 computer)
Labyrinth is a hypertext, or interactive te xt retrieval system.
To read in this interactive catalogue, the user sits down
at one of many Labyrinth keyscope terminals and begins
to read. To read mo re of any section wh ich is larger th an the
screen, the user types F (forward) . To go back to the
beginning of the catalogue, the user types R (return) .
To obtain a related section as indicated by an asterisk
appearing in the text, the user types the code appearing with
the asterisk.
Before leaving the show, the museum goer may obtain
a printout of what he himself has selected to read in the
interactive catalogue by giving his name to an attendant
at the line printer by the main exit.
Th is catalogue system was programmed fo r the PDP-8
by Ned Woodman of Art & Technology, Inc. Interesting
features of the program incl ude the ab ility to output to any
display scope, a temporary termi nal history to allow the
forward and return commands, a permanent user history
permitting a final printout. The interactive catalogue for
software consisting of informat ion from the printed catalogue
and additional materials has been ed ited by Theodor
H. Nelson, wh o has been advocating hypertexts as a form
of writing for some ten years. This is the fi rst public
demonstration of a hypertext system.
Scott Bradner (left) and Ned Woodman of ATI program their PDP-B.
18
..
...
22
The gerbils live in a glass-walled house with a roaming electromagnet overhead, picking up and depositing two-inch cube
The Architecture Machine Group, M.I.T.
Seek 1969-70
Seek is a sensing/ effecting device controlled by a small
general purpose computer. In contrast to an input/output
peripheral, Seek is a mechanism that senses the physical
environment, affects that environment, and in turn attempts
to handle local unexpected events within the environment.
Seek deals with toy blocks which it can stack, align and
sort. At the same time, these blocks form the built
environment for a small colony of gerbils which live within
Seek's three-dimensional world.
Unbeknownst to Seek, the little animals are bumping
into blocks,disrupting constructions, and toppling towers.
The result is a substantial mismatch between the three-
dimensional reality and the computed remembrances which
reside in the memory of Seek 's computer. Seek's role is to
deal with these inconsistencies. In the process, Seek
exhibits inklings of a responsive behavior inasmuch as the
actions of the gerbils are not predictable and the
reactions of Seek purposefully correct or amplify
gerbil-provoked dislocations.
Seek consists of a 5x8 foot superstructure supporting a car-
riage which has three dimensions of freedom. Its extremity
is composed of an electromagnet, several micro-switches,
and pressure-sensing devices.This elementary prosthesis is
guided by the blind and handless computer to pick up or
deposit its payload of a single two-inch cube. The nucleus of
the system is an Interdata Model 3 Computer with 65536
sing le (yes/ no) bits of memory which are shared by instruc-
tions and data.
Even in its triviality and simplicity, Seek metaphor-
ically goes beyond the real-world situation, where machines
cannot respond to the unpredictable nature of people
(gerbils).Today machines are poor at handling sudden
changes in context in environment. This lack of adaptability
is the problem Seek confronts in diminutive.
If computers are to be our friends they must understand
our metaphors. If they are to be responsive to changing,
unpredictable, context-dependent human needs,theywill
need an artificial intelligence that can cope with complex
contingencies in a sophisticated manner (drawing upon
these metaphors) much as Seek deals with elementary
uncertainties in a simple-minded fashion.
Seek has been developed and constructed by M.LT.
students who form part of the Architecture Machine Group,
a Ford Foundation sponsored research effort within the
M.LT. Urban Systems Laboratory. The participants have
ranged from freshmen working in an Undergraduate
Research Opportunities Program, to post-graduates
designing elements as part of their research assistantships.
The co-directors of the group are Professors Nicholas
Negroponte and Leon B. Groisser, of the faculty of
Architecture and Planning. Randy Rettberg and Mike
Titelbaum, students in Electrical Engineering, have been in
charge of the electronics-in particular, the interface and
controller. Steven Gregory, a graduate student in the School
of Architecture and Planning, has been in charge of the
programming. Steven Peters and Ernest Vincent have been
responsible for the actual construction of the device.
Following the Software exhibition, Seek will return to M.LT.
to be used with many different detachable heads as a gen-
eral purpose sensor/ effector. Seek will become a frame for
experiments conducted by students in computer-aided
design and in art ificial intelligence.
Reference: Nicholas Neqroponte, The Architecture Machine, M.I.T. Press, 1970.
Computer: courtesy The Interdata Corporation, Oceanport, New Jersey.
Gerb ils: courtesy Tumblebrook Farms, Brant Lake, New York
Nicholas Negroponte (left) with Karl Katz and Steven Gregory
23
I
Sonia Sheridan
Interactive Paper Systems 1969-70
Part of the basic equipment for Interactive Paper Systems,
a 3M Therm ofax machine is simply a revo lving belt which
permits a treated paper to react to carbon as it passes in
seconds through the heated machine. Demanding no special
training , it can be used to produce a variety of color trans-
parencies, spirit masters, stenci ls and opaque co py. Throug h
experimentation we have discovered that some of its
artistic uses lie in making large projection transparencies,
copy for film making,transparencies for pho to screening,
freak color separations, instant textile des ign, image distor-
tion and transparency collages.
The Color-in-Color machine, available fo r a portion of
the exhibition time, is a recent 3M invention whic h translates
into fu ll col or any two or three dimensiona l object which can
fit in its8"x10" format. This instrument is a major break-
th roug h in the graphics fiel d, for it can produce an endless
variation of images with in a span of min utes. In the hands
of a creative person neither the size nor the quality of the
image is limited. It can be adapted to produce images on
eithe r paper or onto a matrix, which is then tran sferable to
any heat resistant material by means of an ordinary iron or
a companion Color Processor. We have co nsidered using
this instrument for rapid film anim ation, instant 2-30 boo ks,
24
rapid textile design, light printing with stencils, colorful and
dynamic correspondence and a variety of other possi bilities.
Michael Schumacher has done some fine photomontage
work with th is machine. Keit h Smith exploded the size
limitation by cutting up Kodal ith positives and ironing them
onto a huge quilt combined with silkscreen and photograph
Cosmo, a team of Robert Frontier and Will iam McCabe,
rephotog rap hed the Adlai Stevenson family album on the
machine, took slides and projected them so that black and
white photos were completely altered. We have been able
to increase the var iety and vol ume of correspondence and
to carryon interactive graphics with artists, inventors and
businessmen.
The capacity of the new graphic machines for instant
production has the most profound implicatio ns for the visual
world. The artist, who once spent hours rendering an orange,
can photograph the orange whole, cut up into any variety of
forms, or squeezed into ju ice , and can rep hotograph it
within minutes. In an hour's time he can produce 120
variations; in eight hours he can have almost 1000 different
versions of the orange. It is obvious that this work process
becomes another kind of time for the art ist as the distance
from conception to con ception is reduced to minutes and
objects change as rapidly as th inking all ows.
Equipment on loan fr om the 3M Corpo ration
John Goodyear
Level of Heat 1970
1. Therma l Experience Zon es identified by tape present
the heat capacity of a variety of surfaces to the viewer's
touch. Sources of heat of the se surfaces include the sun,
the Museum heating system (if operating ) heat from the
interior of the earth, heat of lighting and other electrical
equipment, heat of pollutants, heat of friction , heat of the
bodies of spectators.
2. Museum as Thermal Experience Zone. A test points to the
entire space of the Museum as a Thermal Experience Zone,
and to the bod y of the viewer as the sensing agent. The test
will measure the perspiration of randomly chosen subjects
fo r the duration of their visit to this exhibition. Factors
involved may be the heat of the spaces, the heatof the
sub jects' bod ies,their clothing, their physical and mental
and nervous activity. Persons taking the test will be
identified with a badge stating: " I am taking a thermal
experience (sweat) test."
l •
J
..
.-aIEHCf (SWEAT) cHAll1
J1fflll/Al. tAl'<'"
J- - _ _ --J
Jo
j
i
l
Triangulate
your thoughts
Agnes Denes
Dialectic Triangu lation: A Visual Philosophy 1970
Dialectic Triangulation is a simplificati on and systematic
re-bu ilding of complexes of any subject or matter, through
various methods , such as re-evaluation, re-grouping or
division, at times starting with a sin gle proposition, at others
search ing for the mean between two extre mes. But each
time it is the tri angulation which institutes the interaction
of a particular stati c state, being the activat ing force.
To use an example, if a person feels that within his
know ledge he does not und erstand himself and his universe,
and decides to atta in greater knowledg e, he has instituted
a triangul ation. His initiative, 'the desire to know more',
being here the activ ating force between ignorance
and wisdom.
Dialectic Triangulation is a building of progressive
trichotomies, faili ng and succeeding in a dialectic method,
each time arriving at a better thesis on a higher level-
like changing scientific theories, which always advance
and develop in com plexit y. By app raising the milestones in
human knowl edge and scientific achievement, we take
inventory of it and of ourselves. A new curiosity and insight
is born, a new awareness. And since th is is an artistic
probing, concrete facts are sometimes thrown into abstract
corners, and abstract terms are concretized ; each getting
a sort of bath or soaking in the other's fluids. It is an
explorative evolutionary process, the way of nature and man.
Types of triangulations:
inanimate tr i-g rou ps representing all of a genus , class or category
re-grouping or classification
accepted facts, perceptual or ideational errors re-eva luated, their
importance re-estab lished or denied-new ones created
whenever possibl e
arr iving at a conclusio n derived from two propositions
arriving at a mean between two extremes
the building of one propositi on through dimensional complication
into trichotomies
the building of one proposition through divisional trisection into
t richotom ies
pure idea groups activa ted by controversy
interdependent or progressive ideas becom ing effective through
successive stages of adva ncement
threefold theories interchangeable-threefold theories not
interchangeable, and those forming argum entative conclusions
Agnes Denes (right) programmed her computer display with the
assistance of Theodor H. Nelson and The R.E.S./.S.T.O.R.S. (from left)
Peter Eichenberg er, Lauren Sarno, John Levine (not present: Nat Kuhn).
Agnes Denes
Matrix of Knowledge & Trigonal Ballet 1970
(Work for computer display) with assista nce fr om Members of The
R.E.S.I.S.T.O.R.S., Pennington, N. J.: John Levine, Nat Kuhn,
Peter Eichenberger and from Theodor H. Nelson
Restoration of the triangulation concepts on the screen can
be at best only partial, mentally co nfronting the participant
with the challenge of comparing ideas and the visual
consequences of a new structuring . The art ist's own
structural con jectures are here shared with the viewer.
NOTE : Matrix of Knowledge schedules events in a triangular mesh.
List structu re is kept comparatively simple by rewriting the display file
for eac h new incarn ation of the pictu re.
Tr igonal Ballet anim ates through a succession of frames to
obtain its "infi nite effect."
The IDIIOM, a dynamic display with its own built-in computer', is on loan
from Information Displays, Inc. of Mount Kisco, New York.
'
~ d ' ff
'4 ' ....I"(
I
I
H --'--t- ·J
I
:.::::.:::: :" ,l,~; :",'" ," ,::: ,'. I .'
...L
Studies for thought-complication (completed 1970)
27
-.
JOHN ANTHONY BALDESSAR
MAY 1953
MARC H 1966
32
•
John Baldessari
Painting for Kubler, June 1969.
A lost painting: black on gray ground,
oil on acrylic, 67%" x 56"
from George Kubler's Shape of Time; 1962
"This painting owes its existence to prior paintings. By liking
this solution, you should not be blocked in your continued
acceptance of prior inventions. To atta in this position, ideas
of former paintings had to be rethought in order to transcend
former work. To like this painting, you will have to under-
stand prior work. Ultimately this work will amalgamate with
the existing body of knowledge."
Hans Haacke
Visitors' Profile 1969
with assistance from Scott Bradner (Art & Technology, Inc., Boston)
Digital Equipment Corp orati on (ti me share PDP-8 co mputer)
A teletype terminal with a picture scope is connected with a
digital computer on a time-sharing basis and serves both
as input and output device.
Using the keyboard the visitors can answer questions
which are posed to them on the scope. Due to branches in
the polling program a number of these questions are
personalized and vary from visitor to visitor.
Essentially the questions are of two types. One set asks
the visitors for factual information about themselves, e.g.,
age, sex, educational background, income bracket, etc. The
other set of questions inquires about their opinions on a
variety of subjects.
The computer compiles the answers, compares them
with information received from other visitors and correlates
data relevant for a statistical breakdown.
A terminal prints out the processed information in the
form of statistics giving percentages and cross-tabulation
between answers, opinions and the visitors' demographic
background. The processing speed of the computer make
it possible that at any given time the statistical evaluation
all answers is up to date and available. The constantly
changing data is projected onto a large screen, so that it i
accessible to a great number of people.
Based on thei r own information a statistical profile ofthe
exhibition's visito rs emerges.
Hans Haacke
News
1969
Local, national and international news is being received fr
U.S. as well as from foreign news services. It arrives in the
exhibition via teletype print-out at the same time as it is
being received by the other clients of the various news ser
vices. The print-out acc umulates and piles up behind the
teletype machines.
Visitors peruse N
,
You're the art!
Douglas Huebler
Variable Piece No.4
New York City, May 1969
Anyone who wishes to participate in the transposition of " information"
from one location to another may do so by following the pro cedure
described below. By doing so each participant will exchange an or iginal
secret nor mally located only within his, or her, head , for a photocopy of
a secret submitted by another person at a prior time.
1. Write out, in simple language, an authentic secret never before
revealed by you.
2. Slip this paper (unfolded) into the slot of the box provided fo r the
receipt of " incoming" information. Your secret will be photocop ied and,
in turn, becom e the exchange inf ormation made available on a
subseq uent occasion .
3. The operato r of the photocopy mac hine will acknowledge your sub-
mission by giving you the photocopy of another's secret. (If you choose,
you may submit as many as five sec rets and receive an equal
number in return.)
Douglas Huebler
Variable Piece No.5
Halifax, Nova Scot ia, Octo ber 15,1 969
Ten students at the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design co lla borated
in the process that formed this piece. They did so by fab ricating a myth
and launching it into an or iginal and true existence through ordi nary
information systems ...word of mouth, publication, etc.
This process began in the Fall of 1969 and , although the myth
posse sses the capacity to expand to infinite p oints in time and space,
for the purposes of this piece its destiny was set to be terminated on
Ap ril 1, 1970 at which time all documents relating to its existenc e during
the per iod described and this statem ent join altoge the r to co nstitute
the form of the piece.
Douglas Huebler
Location Piece No. 13
Washington , D. C.; Haverhill, Massachusetts,
November, 1969
On November 13,1969, Joseph Moran, Manag ing Edito r of the Haverhill
Gazette agreed to have th is artist serve as special correspondent and
photographe r for that newspaper and, in that capacity, to return a news
sto ry covering the experience of the so-call ed " Haverhill contingent"
during the period of time that it travell ed to and from Wash ington, D.C.,
and especially of its partici pati on in the Peace March on
November 15, 1969.
•
That report (as pr inted in the Gazette on November 17, 1969) joins
with this statem ent , and three photograph ic contact sheets to con stitute
the fi nal form of this piece.
Douglas Huebler
Variable Piece No. 15
Salem, New Hampshire, March, 1970
6 betti ng systems were devised and tested aga inst the results of 82
nights of racing du ring the Spring, 1970 meeting at Rockingham Park,
Salem, New Hampshire.
A description of each system and a chart recording its suc cess (or
lack the reof) join with 82 " Official Prog rams" and this statem ent to
constitute the final form of this piece.
Reality does not lie beneath the surface of appearance
Everything looks like something: every th ing is access
the purposes of art. No th ing possesses special status
the world: nor does man.
I propose that the percipient is the " subj ect" of art E
gaged in a self producing activity through language, th
itself, repl aced "appearance" and becom e the virtual i
of the work. Perception then , not being available throu
normal sensory experience shifts " empiricism" to " me
piricism": concepts and relations conceived beyond 0
or material known through experience albeit related to
such know ledge.
Ultrasonic waves (40KHz) reflected off interior surfaces, filling selected are
..
lith invisible, changing patterns and forms. (Space chosen at time of installation.)
voltages. Since the ARP is a voltage-controll ed instrume
the computer can thu s control the Synthesizer.
Museum visitors may contribute the ir ideas to the
com pos ition by directly chang ing the computer program
using electro-mechanical devices in front of four seats in
gallery space. Visito rs may also effect changes in the sou
quality of the Synthesized music. Four people at a time m
interact with the system so that the result is four-voice
harmony in quadrophonic sound.
Our own software is what controls thi s composing
system-the Composer computer program.The program
aims at systematically controlling random events: Is it
paradoxical that we can impose a system onto randomne
We set down some musical rules in the program (e.g., " Us
a diatonic scale! " ) and assign numbers to possible music
events (e.g., " a note will sound on the first beat of a measu
- 80% probabi lity" );then the computer gives us a random
list of numbers. When the appropriate number is hit upon
as the computer passes out the random list, then the musi
event happens in acc ordance with the program's musical
rules. The museum visitors are interacting by changing the
skew of randomness of the sequence of numbers that com
from the computer. By the way,this makes the Synthesizer
very happy.
Composer is a study in the possibilities of humans interacti ng
with mac hines for a creative purpose. It presents the
opportunity to share and explore "ideas" with a music
composition system, made up of an electronic music
synthes izer, a digital com puter, and other human beings
(plus the equipment that interfaces these participants).
A music synthesizer is an electronic machine that
prod uces all types of sounds by allowing its user to combine
the essential elements of sound in unlimited variety. The
basic building block is a sound called a sine wave, and any
sound whatever may be put together by the proper combi-
nation of sine waves: a barking dog , an auto horn, a guitar-
these are all comprised of numerous sine waves.
Our system uses the ARP Music Synthesizer built by the
Tonus company, and the DEC PDP-8/ I dig ital computer.
The Composer program instructs the comp uter to produce
sequences of numbers (digits) which are th en translated by
a digital-to-ana log converter into sequences of electr ical
Allen Razdow/Paul Conly (Art & Technology, Inc., Boston)
Composer 1970
with assistance from Scott Bradner, Jon Albertson (visual art co nsultant)
Tonus Inc. (ARP Electron ic Music Synthesizer)
Digital Equipment Corporation (time share PDP-8 computer)
Aco ustic Research (audio equ ipment)
38
".
"
.....
I
I
I'
Paul Conly (lell) and Scott Bredner
39
Theodosius Victoria
Solar Audio Window Transmission 1969-70
Ten solar battery and radio units will be installed on the roof
of The Jewish Museum. The units will be ind ividually
connected to the ten panes of glass (including the two doors)
at the front of the museum , by means of contact sound
reproducers. Each glass surface then will give off sound
with low volume information from the solar units above.
The information will con sist of the following:
1.147-176 MHz VHF Police and public service radio band.
Audio monitor on state and local police, emergency services
and civil defense.
2. VHF/ FM MHz-U.S.Weather Bureau broadcasting
continuous weather bulletins for the immediate area.
3. C.B.S. Television Aud io- Participants will listen to
television, weather conditions permitting.
4. WINS 1010 AM constant international, national, and
loc al news.
40
5.107-136 MHz VHF aircraft band-monitor of pilots, control
towers and weather bulletins.
6. ABC Television Audio.
7. 29-50 MHz VHF Police/ Fire audio mon itor of mobile phone
and medical services, vehicular communications, fire and
police emergency situations.
8. VHF/ FM 162.55 MHz con stant weather broadcasts.
9. N.B.C. Television Aud io.
10. WCBS 880 AM con stant news broadcasts.
Participants will be expected to search out sounds along the
front of the museum. The position of the sun along with
weather conditions will dete rmine which of the units will
operate. Of course the piece will not function at night or
during inc lement weather. Consult your local newspaper as
to the times the piece will be in operation (Le.,times of
sunrise, sunset and weather forecasts).
•
41
David Antin
The Conversationalist 1969-70
Anyone entering the museum can enter the Conversation Room but they
must enter it one at a time because it is a private though not necessarily
intimate experience. Whoever chooses to enter the room wi ll hear on
entering a tape reco rded message to the eff ect that, " If you wait a
moment you 'll hear a word. If you feel like it, listen to the wo rd and then
pick up the microphone and tell a story using the word. It would probably
be more interesti ng if the story you tell is a true story, but that's up to you.
Take as much ti me as you need to feel comfortable before beginning to
speak. When you 're through talking put down the mike and you 'll be able
to hear the work you've been part of." After he's fi nished talking the
person will hear several other peoples' stories and fi nally his own, after
wh ich he leaves the room and someone else can co me in. On some days
whoever chooses to enter will hear two words or th ree words rather tha n
one word. This will probably make it more difficult to tell a sto ry, especi-
ally a true story, and will certai nly take more time. Because of this the
piece will use a voic e-actuated microphone, so that very long
hesitations will not be recorded. If anyone finds the task painful or too
difficult, he has, of course, no obligation to play.
" Conversation is an improvisation on a limited number of words
partly determined by the person you're tal king to and partly by the
weat her." If somebody said that to me I'd have a strong tendency to
answer wit h some of the same words, even if I intended to disagree or
change the subject, e.g., "Yes, but I can ignore the weath er." or " No, it's
not the weather at all ..." and so on. What I want to do is take a list of
words (about 10 of them) and present them 1 by 1 to somebody for a free
imp rovisation, " a story" , to make a poem, a stochastic poem consisting
of a sequence of stories potentially 5 hours long on any given day, all
of them built around the same word. It is something like crystal seeding.
Take the word " born". It might yield a series of stories like;
" . . . She fought it out for three days and by the fou rth day when she was
ready she thought the hell with it and the baby was born with whatever
anesthetics they wanted to use."
"I was born on D-Day."
" My mother said she was born on Christmas and my aunt said she was
born on Easter. I thought everybody I knew was born on a holiday until
somebody told me that in the old co untry they had so many ch ildren they
never paid attention to real birthdays they just adjusted the m
to the nearest holiday."
.. .and so on
43
The Earth belongs to the 1st-Order
Donald Burgy/ Robert Duncan Enzmann
Order Idea 1969
Order Idea is a systematic description of the universe, extendi ng from the
smallest known entities, the fundamental particles which co mprise the
atoms, through the hie rarchy of organized matter, to the largest currently
perceived entity, represented by the optical limit of the universe.
The hierarchy is divi ded into orders. An order, and the entities which
com prise it, may be thought of as a level in a river-like cascade of
" periodic tables" with each level comprised of smaller structures. Atoms
are comprised of their fundamental particles, molecules are comprised
of atom s, and so on, to increasingly larger structural orders. The sizes,
shapes and durations of th ings are a result of the fundamental structure
of the universe; the sizes, shapes and durations of entities within a
particular order are imposed as a fun ction of the entities' composition
and the exte rnal , internal and stored energies acting upon it. The entities
within orders have relatively lon g durations and may be compared with
the hori zontal levels in a cascading stream. The relatively rapid
reorganizations of maller to form larger (lower order) or smalle r (higher
ord er) entities may be seen as the vertical falls of a cascading energy
stream flowing from an unknown thermodynamic sou rce to an unknown
thermodynamic sink.
An example of solid maller " flowing" in a source-sink cascade
on earth is: The 1st-Order stone shell of the Earth is heaved into
2nd-Order continental platforms and oceanic basins by the
inte rnal forces of the Earth. The continents are worn into 3rd -Order
belts of plains , hills and mountains by rains driven by the Sun, even as
the continents are lifted by forces within the Earth. Single 4th-Order
mountains are broken into 5th-Order masses and boulders by frost,
rains and imp acts. These masses are broken into 6th-Order
pebb les and 7th-Order sil t which flows to the sea to be recon stituted
again into the rocky rim of the mother continent.
Order Idea , and the visual, verbal and mathematical statements
which comprise it, is a description, not an explanation, and represents a
cross-sect ion of a model of the universe intersecting perpendicular
to its time-line and describing only selecte d events within one state of
maller at the moment the events flow th rough this cross-sectional pla ne.
An ordinary stone belongs to the 6th-Order
47
I •
Guerrilla Radio
Giorno Poetry Systems
Various transmitting equipment has been checked out, the
most efficient assembl ed and operated at The Jewish
Museum and The Smithsonian as a test guerrilla radio station.
We processed out the problems and developed systems
of programming,so that with simple instructions, anyone
anywhere can set up a transmitter and start broadcasting.
Under FCC Low Power Transmission Regulations, it is
legal to broadcast on the AM band without a license, if one
transmits with 100 milliwatts or less power in a free space,
not interfering with licensed stations, and have a 12 foot
antenna or use carrier-current transmission. How to do it:
buy the AM transmitter manufactured by Low Power
Broadcast Co., 520 Lincoln Hwy., Frazer, Penna., 19355.
Tel. no.: (21 5) Ni 4-4096. The guy to speak to is Dic k
Crompton. The tran smitter costs $1 99 plus $30 for the
capacitor, if you're going to do carrier-current. Other
equipment needed: a microphone and tape recorder (the
better the quality, the better the broadcast quality), an
AM radio, and depending on how much bread you have,
one or two turntables, a mixer and more tape facilities.
Carrier-current transmission is being used in the
Software Show. The transmitter with the capacitor plugs
into a wall outlet, drawing its power from the line like any
electrical appliance, and feeding its signal into the power
line so that the signal can be heard on any AM radio
(transistors, etc.) tuned into the operating frequency of the
transmitter. The frequency is adju stable to a clear broadcast
frequency in your area. The signal will travel on the electrical
wiring until it hits a tra nsformer, where it is wiped out. There
are transformers every couple of blocks or in one large
office or apartment build ing.
In using a 12 foot antenna, there is also the limited range
of a few hundred feet or a couple of blocks. However,
increasing the length of the antenna radically inc reases
the range of reception. Penalties for knowing violation of
FCC regulations are heavy. At SI. Mark's Church, we
ran the antenna to the top of the bell tower and as we
were testing it out, these two guys in blue business suits and
grey crew-cuts, came in and said "We're looking for Joh n
Giorno." They flashed their badges and said, "We're from
the FCC." They checked everything out and suggested the
antenna be cut. One of them got up to me real close, looked
in my eyes, smiled and said warmly "This is just a warning. If
you violate it, it means a $10,000 fine and 10 years in prison. "
So we cut the anten na and hooked up the transmitter to the
organ pipes. You can also use the heating pipes in a build-
ing for transmission. They had apparently come because
Howard Smith had written about Guerrilla Radio in The
Village Voic e that week. Since then we've heard that the FCC
won't hassle you, if you don't advertise or become commer-
cial and are not in com peti tion with licensed stations.We
hear kids in Connecticut have a hundred foot antenna and
are broadcasting over a 30 mile area. Be sure they wi ll hassle
you if it's a political trip.
Other ways of extending your range is to send your signal
over the telephone lines to other transmitters which wi ll
broadcast it immediately. Perhaps in several areas in one
city and from one city to another. There shou ld be an
exchange of tapes and information between guerrilla
stations. Also it is possible to be mobile, broadcast from a
truck and keep moving. The FCC has equipment that can
pin-point the source of a signal in 15 minutes. Guerrilla
Radio will be a web or grid of small radio stations linking
everyone across the country and having no center.
The airways are free. The airwaves belong to the people.
52
Nam June Paik
... confessions of a 'cafe revolutionary,' May 1969
Letter from the artist in response to a request to participate in Softwa re
Dear Susan:
As you see,
I am very lazy man .. . . .
just Cafe revolutionary.... .
Village Voice readerlll
I have waked up noon.. .on a beautiful
Monday morning.
How much work I have DONE !!!
I picked up mail.
sent 1 $ 37 ¢ to Reader's Digest, beca use
they sca red me to send me law enforcement
officials.
I had swallowed 99 ¢ lunch at DAVE's corner
made two phone calls and it is the th ird letter
to write
.. . .. it is already 3 PM . .
time for nap . . .
maybe I read too much FEIFFER cartoon
if I were not lazy . .. .
i would be teaching Gregorian Chant in the
Nat ional University of Seoul
in the Gre at Republic of KOREA,
to underdevelo p our developed cultural heritage.. . .
flying Kore an Nat ional Airlin es
(c-37 WW II-transport plane)
Joh n Cage said .. Venice is the most advanced
town in the world, because it has abolished
automob ile...
According to this theory
Korea is most advanced co untry, because it
legal ized POT.
our peasant is growing pot and sell ing openly to
G.I.'s ... since no Koreans know what it is
how to enjoy . . . there is no law to prohi bit . . .
and our country is the only producer of
Ginseng . . .new darling of hippie
and my father was salesman of that Ginseng . . .
it is, how i could get exitvisa
fro m my beloved country and
skipped draft and glory of
dying for the Freedom and democracy
well, Have I read too much
Jill Johnston????
I am so lazy that I postpone a letter, which could be
just th ree lines, but end up wr iting 3 pages
apology . . . .
it helps to exercise my English
Encl osed are
1) CONFIDE NTIAL PLAN OF STP COLOR TV synthesiser.
two versions of essay, of which one chapte r is deal t
with Input-Out unit!
there are some more hippier projects, which I
wi ll tell you in August. . .1think , I bette r
visit yo u personally, in Augu st, Because I move
to Boston at the end of August. ..
Korean astrologer said that Lindsay will win with big margin,
provided he drinks Ginseng tonic every morn ing ..
S W ITC H
TO
EV O
53
Visual images make a real impression
Linda Berr is has a feeling for tactife-films.
54
Smith-Kettlewell Institute of Visual Sciences
Vision SUbstitution System begun in 1959
This strange wheel chair with electronic components on
its back and a television camera attached is the prototype
of a Tactile Vision Substitution System being developed
at the Smith-Kettl ewell Institute of Visua l Sciences, Pacific
Medical Center, San Francisco, Californ ia. It is the work
of a team of scientists including Paul Bach-Y-Rita, M.D.,
Carter C. Collins, Ph.D., and Benjamin W. White, Ph.D.
The System is designed to take an image picked up by the
television camera and transforms it into a tactile image on
the 400 vibrato rs mounted on the back of the wheel chair.
A number of co ngenitally blind young peo ple have been
usin g the System, performing various experiments desig ned
to see what the capabilities and limitations of such a dev ice
are. The hope is that such a machine may enable the blind
to receive information by way of their skin s which the sig hted
person would normally rece ive th rough his eyes. Thus far
these blind subjects have been able to identify three dimen-
sional objects and letters of the alphabet. Some are now
able to discern the arrangement of several objects on a
table top , co rrectly telli ng which one is in front and which
in bac k. The limitations of the system encountered to date
appear to be attributable to the crudeness of the device
rather than to inherent limitations in the hum an skin as a
ch annel for receiving visual information.
Linda Berris
Taclile Film
This is the first motion pict ure created to be felt as well
as seen and heard. It is designed to be played back through
the Vision Substitution System, which converts light images
into tactile dotted images. Use of the System to transmit
specially designed motion pictures is a new application for
th is System-one which is not part of the basi c laboratory
resea rch. Work on the present film began over a year ago
whe n Linda Berris conducted independent explorations
to find out what kinds of images and movements could be
most successfully conveye d throug h the System. The film
reflects her findings in th is personal project.
The fil m is both an explanation and a work of art. Poet ic
images are used to suggest scientific concepts related to
tou ch and othe r senses and to demonstrate some of the
possibilities of the System. The sense of touch is the primary
co nsideration in the organization of the film and in the design
of each image. Sim ple abstract forms- such as lines, circles.
and squares-convey the meaning of the film in universal
symbols. (To ident ify more complex shapes, participants
woul d need hours of training with the System.)
William Vandouris
Light Pattern Box (Electrochrome)
The Electrochrome is a type of visual org an or piano. When
the viewer presses one of the keys on the keyboard, a pattern
of colored lights appears on the screen. He can play in any
rhythm he likes, or he can set the machine to change patterns
automatically.The Electrochrome, an independent project
of Will iam Vandouris, was designed for use by the sighted.
The Electrochrome is not part of the basic laborato ry
research being conducted with the Vision Substitution
System. However, combining the Electrochrome with the
Vis ion Substitution System in th is exhibit enables partici-
pants to choose patterns which they can feel on their backs
as well as see.
The tactile image. sim ulated here on the seated girl's bare back.
corresponds to the visual image on the screen.
55
I
I
I
"
~,
•
The message behind the media
56
T
A
1
3U
5 .
p/
u
0
R
6
0
U
H
1
8
T
2
3
A
U
6
T
1
"..
P
4 '
u
0
T
3
1
0
H
0
2
0
M
T
7
6
A
u
H
1
7
M
P
1
T
0
R
7
T
p
"..
0
M
N
ON
0
A
I o
R
o
M
A
I
N
N
I
\
3
A
o
o
p
N
p
o
D
N
A
p
I
o
M
p
M
R
M
N
1
9
M
9
6
4
S
G
1
6
7
3
8
~--
1
u
1
7
4
3
1
N
6
6
7
1
1
0
1
Photo by Tillman
I•I
Carl Fernbach-Fl arsheim
The Boolean Image/Conceptual Typewriter
1970
We are surro unded by a causal reality, bordered by our
concepts of bi rth and death. Inside this reality we stabilize
ourselves by making decisions.The Boolean Image is a
matrix built upon this supposition. It is a womb containing
decisional cues.These cues are neut ral elements placed into
specific relat ionships with each other.On the se elements
we hang decisions, labels which make them into anything we
decide them to be. Since such decisional cues often occur
in relational groupings or sets the matrix was named after
George Boole,the originator of set theory.
The Boolean Image is the esthetic. It is the ground upon
wh ich we make the rules for the game. It is the message
behind the media. The neutral ity of its cues can easily be
mistaken as being mean ingless or trifling.
Computer realizations displayed on the scopes in this
exhibition are based upon Boolean Images whose decisional
cues are alphanumerical. The computer can most easily
sense this type of cue and convert it into the deci sions of the
artist, programmer, audience-collective.
Boolean Images may not be immediately perceivab le.
In the Conceptual Typewriter program the Boolean Image is
fairly easy to recognize.
The Boolean Image can also be understood as a medium
in its own right,as shown in the photographs.While software
might be thought of as a psychic integration of our own
biolog ical DNA program,the Boolean Image might be thought
of as sensing into the nature of thi s prog ram, by dealing
with the triggering devices of which it is composed.
Note: Conceptual Typewriter is effectively table-driven from a scheduler
(a virtual time-table). but pac ked into a curious list stru cture as well, for
the handling of interact ions and animations. This computer display
was done with the assistance of The R.E.S.I.S.T.O.R.S., Pennington, N.J.:
Joh n Levine, Nat Kuhn, Peter Eichenberger & Lauren Sarno.
The Conceptual Typ ewriter may be thoug ht of as the instrument created
whe n the " Conceptual Typewriter" progra m is loaded into the IDIIOM.
Ten illuminated buttons on the control button-box represent ten con cepts
suggested by the I Ching . The view er may add concepts or replace them
with the buttons, or alter them with the light-pen.
The IDIIOM, a dynam ic display with its own built-in computer, is on loan
from Information Displays, Inc. of Mount Kisco, New York.
57
I,
~
iI
"
Evander D. Schley
Software Films 1969-70
The films rep resent both the views of the participating artists
on the natu re of Software, accomplished through direct
interviews and group discussions, plus on location filming
of the artists in their working environments. Emphasize d
is the particular relationship of the artist to the computer and
other less sophisticated machines as opposed to the
utilitarian and commercial usage for which they were
originally intended.
The films will make no direct statement. Their purpose
lies in accumulating the data forwarded by the participants
in the show and disseminating it continually to each entrant
to the museum . There will be no beginning nor end. Each
will be simultaneously projected on a continuous loo p.
The techniques employed by the fi lms are straight-
forward in the "cinema verite" tradition ; no tricks or
gimmicks are used. Since we were shooting at a ratio of
10-1 it was possible to explore informally the views of the
art ists which should provide insights not normally ac hieved
in more structured interviews. The informality should assist
the viewer to grasp the natu re of his technological environ-
ment by the exposure of var ious aspects of it being used in
ways to which he is unaccustomed.
58
The shooting schedule was spread out over an extended
period, so that the crew with the assistance of the exhibition
coordinator cou ld arrange the most interesting and relevant
coverage of the process of the exh ibition in addition to the
interviews, discussions and location filming .
Sponsored by Dr. Sanford Greenberg
I
Allan Kaprow
Work
'AHappening
Septe.mber,1 969 .
~
1. A Basement hallway is painted, and repainted, by profes-
sional contractors every Tues., Thurs., and Sunday, for three
continuous weeks. Sprayers, rollers or brushes may be used.
2. Color for successive coats of paint to be chosen on the
spot by the sponsors, at completion of each stage. Discus-
sions with painters.
3. Whole process recorded on color video (with cooperation
of painters). Transmitted live on full-screen enlargement for
one week each, as a "selected short subject" , at the follow-
ing types of movie houses: a) art films, b) skin flicks, and
c) regular run theaters.
-
4. A slide transparency, superposed on each day's transmis-
sion, will read: " 'Painting a Hallway' by (Name of painting
contractor)" thus providing him with free adverti sing.
.
Painters will be free to demonstrate their skills, dedication
and honesty, as well as make commercial spiels for
their company.
5. Broadcast time each night is exactly one half hour, say
7:00-7:30 P.M. Painting time, including setup and cleanup,
about one and a half hours, say from 6:30-8:00 P.M. Video
technician's time, about the same, assuming equipment is
set up in place at beginning of each week.
6. Ads will be placed in advance in the classified columns of
newspapers and upon the bulletin boards of schools and.
shopping centers saying: "Painting a Hallway-Underground
Film, at 7:30 P.M. at the (name of theater), Tues., Thurs., Sun.,
(dates)," thus giving the theater its advertising. Other ads
will state that "Jewish Museum spon sors avant-garde
television. For information call RI 9-3770". A pre-recorded
answer will tell about the Happening and direct the caller to
the theater of the week. Thus the Museum will be advertised.
The name of the artist need not be mentiened in any of this.
But in a different area of communication, namely that of the
arts journalists, his name may be mentioned. Thus he will
get his advertising, too.
Brief Observations about Work:
• A room is repainted over and over again when it doesn't need it.
• A live TV activity, i.e. video-verite, is received as a pre-shot movie
(ci nema verite).
• A roughly similar Happ ening program is presented in three different
socio-cultural contexts: arty, pornographic, and middlebrow.
• Real time is introduced into fi ctional time of the movie audience for
whom the convent ion is to suspend the r eal; while for the painters,
fictional time is introduced into real time, since the ordinary job has
been made for them pointless but perhaps flattering, in view of its
new function as communication.
• Information is less a matter of direct conveyance than lt .is a reproces-
sing and alteration: a hallway is repainted any number of times. The
paint job is recreated literally and in the rmndsof the painters and
others who are informed: it, therefore, becomes recreational
instead of laborious....
• A presumptive work of art becomes a business commercial. But the
advertising engaged in is so minimal and so misapplied that it becomes
an absurdity (li ke repainting a room continuously). Hence,
recreation, again.
• A museum presentation is accessible only at other non-museum
showcases. In either case the institutions are engaged in
" abnormal" functions.
I
- 1
DENNIS OPPENHEIM
iKHARD LONG
Phyllis Kind Gallery, Chicago. Most were rando mly distrib-
uted on the floor and covered with jello; some were stuck to
the wall with chewing gum; the rest were for sale.
" Software is the programming material which any system
uses, l.e. in a computer it would be the flow charts or sub-
routines for the computer program. In effect software in
'real' terms is the mental intelligence required for any
experience. It can also be described as the knowledge
required for the performance of any task or transmission of
GUNTHER UECKER
EARTH
,,
".
Les Levine
Systems Burn-off X Residual Software 1969
The 33 photographs on exh ibition were originally taken by
the artist in March of 1969 during an excursion by New York
critics and press to view the opening of the Cornell University
" Earth Works" exhibition in Ithaca, New York.
In April, 1969, Les Levine exhibited 31,000 photographs
consisting of 31 separate images, 1,000copies each, at the
60
'l~'"
,
.
\
l .~-;"' ·~
'· · ,
I ' ,
',)',
.''.t'i
~
' ~
,
.
AI
• '
1
,~
.
4
' . -
, 'J- . ,_
j
I
I
\
1
co mmun ication. They say, 'It's going to be raining
tomorrow.' is software. All activit ies which have no connec-
tion with object or material mass are the result of software.
Images themselves are hardw are. Information about these
images is software. All software carries its own residuals.
The resi dual may take the form of news, paint, television
tapes or oth er so-called 'media'. In many cases an object
is of much less value than the software concerning the
object. The object is the end of a syste m. The software is an
open continuing system. The experience of seeing some-
th ing first hand is no longer of value in a software controlled
society, as anything seen through the med ia carries just as
much energy as first hand experience. We do not question
whether the things that happen on rad io or television have
actually occurred. The fact that we can confront them
mentally through electronics is sufficient for us to know that
they exist. . . . In the same way, most of the art that is
produced today ends up as information about art." L. L.
61
New generation of whiz kids
.. ---"""-
I
iii
I
j
nI.
t
64
At the 1970 Conference, they set a precedent by giving the
first student techn ical talk, which drew the largest audience
of the entire conference program. They will soon publish a
primer on computer language (Trac).
"Radically Emphatic Students Interested in Science, Technology and
Other Research Studies
(
pop·II
The R.E.S.I.S.T.O.R.S.*are a group of students form the
Princeton, N.J. area who are whizzes with computers. In
the ir barn headquarters, they do highly technical work with
five computers which they either own or use on loan. They
have exhibited in the last three Spring Joint Computer
Conferences. Their enterprising spirit was the highlight of
one conference whe re, during a strike when no telephone
equ ipment was availab le,they successfully managed to
activate their disp lay by hoo king into a pay telephone.
65
Joseph Kosuth
The Seventh Investigation (Art as Idea as Idea)
Proposition One 1970
Form of presentation: One paragraph of text, ambiguous in
meaning, will be placed in four contexts: billboard in
Chinatown, New York City (in English and Chinese) ;
advertisement in The Daily World; a banner in Turin (in
Italian); temporarily in The Museum of Modern Art's
Information Exhibition.
Museum presentation installation: One area wi ll be
filled in the fo llowing manner-On the walls will be photo-
graphic blow-ups of each section of the proposition's form
of presentation, and on a tab le will be placed an assortment
of information reievent to the work.
While certainly some of the elements I use in my
investigations are of more importance than others, it is not
possible to construct a mental image or 'icon' from the
elements used-as you could in my work of a couple years
ago. The elements I use in my propositions consist of infor-
mation. The groups of information types exist often as 'sets'
with these sets coupling out in such a manner that an iconic
grasp is very difficult, if not impossible. Yet the structure of
this set coupl ing is not the 'art' . The art consists of my action
of placing this activity (investigation) in an art co ntext
(i.e. art as idea as idea) .
The specific qua lity of the items used in a form of
presentation and in a museum presentation installation are
of a temporal nature directly related to taste. In other words
it is necessary for me to choose a particular way at this time
which is neither 'important' in its own right, nor deliberately
! I
'unimportant' in an arty manner. This problem exists because
of the still prevalent bel ief that there is a conceptual
connection between art and esthetics-thus it becomes
assumed that there is artistic relevance to my choices based
on taste. Fifty years from now if my idea of art is extant it
will be so only through the activities of living artists,and the
taste I showed in my choices of the installation for this show
will be dated and irrelevant.
Chinese translation and graph ics by H. Kwan Lau.
I
'/
68
Artists
Acconci, Vito, Born 1940, Bronx, N.Y. Lives in N.Y.C. Educati on: Holy
Cross, A.B.; University of Iowa, M.F.A. Currentl y teach ing at the School
of Visual Arts, N.Y. One man exhibition at Gain Ground Gallery, N.Y.,
1970. Group Exhibitions: Dwan Gall ery , N.Y., " Language III" , 1969;
Seattle Art Museum, "557087", 1969; Vancouver Art Gallery, " 955000",
1970; Oberlin College, " Art of the Mind", 1970. Street Works, N.Y.C.,
1969. Performances at New York University, Wesleyan University,
Rhode Island School of Design, Paula Cooper Gallery, N.Y., Hunter
College, Wadsworth Atheneum.
Antin, David, Born 1932, New York. Lives in Solana Beach, Calif.
Education: science and language studies; graduate work in linguistics.
Occupation : poet, or artist working in lang uage, art cr itic, Director of the
Gallery for the University of California at San Diego, where he is a
member of the Visua l Arts Department. Currently working on a film
exploring the relations between inte rmittently overlappi ng sou nd track
and image seq uences, a set of scenarios for dancers and actors, a
volume of " poems" called Meditations (to be publ ished by Black
Sparrow Press in September 1970), and a book on Art and Technology
for Viking Press.
Bald essari, John, Born 1931, National City, Calif. Lives in National City,
Calif. Education: San Diego State College, B.A. 1953, M.A. 1957.
Assistant Professor, University of Cal ifo rnia , San Diego, 1969-70;
Professor, California Institute of the Arts, L.A., 1970. One man
exhibitions: La Jolla Museum of Art, Calif., 1960, 1966; Southwestern
College, Chula Vista , Calif., 1962,1964; Molly Barnes Gallery, L.A., 1968;
Eugenia Butler Gallery, L.A., 1970; Richa rd Feigen Gallery, N.Y., 1970.
Barry, Robert, Born 1936, New York City. Lives in N.Y.C. Education:
Hunter College, B.F.A., M.A. Currently teachi ng at Hunter College.
Selected recent exhibitions: Seattle Art Museum, " 557087", 1969;
Vancouver Art Gallery, " 955000" , 1970; The New York Cultural Center,
" Conceptual Art and Conceptual Aspe cts " , 1970; " 20 Paris IV", 1970;
Gallery Closing: "Art and Project" , Amsterdam, Dec. 17-31, 1969;
Sperone Gallery, Turin, Italy, Dec. 31-Jan. 8,1969-70; Eugenia Butler
Gallery, L.A., March 10-21,1970. Untitled piece published by Gian
Enzo Sperone, Turin, 1970.
Bradner, Scott, Born 1944, Sharon, Penna. Lives in Boston. Education:
Boston University, 1960-64, 1966. Researched in cancer and air
pollution, 1965, Children's Cancer Research Foundation. Experienced in
all phase s of programm ing, electro mechanical hardware design, and
personnel management. Currently manager of Computer Based Lab,
Psychology Department, Harvard University.
Burgy, Donald, Born 1937, New York City. Lives in Bradford, Mass.
Education: Massachusetts College of Art , 1955-59; Rutgers University,
1961-63. Currently teaching at Bradford Junior College. Selected group
exhibitions, 1969: Paula Cooper Gallery, N.Y.,"Number 7"; Dwan Galle ry,
N.Y., " Language III" ; Stiidtisches Museum, Leverkusen, Germany,
"Concept Art" ; Seattle Art Museum Pavillion, " 557087" ; Vancouver Art
Gallery, " 995000" ; Kunsthalle, Bern; "Art After Plans"; New York
Cultural Center, N.Y., " Conceptual Art and Conceptual Aspects".
Conly, Paul F., Born 1944, Sacramento, Calif. Lives in Colorado, Boston ,
and N.Y.C. Education: University of Colorado, 1962-66; Signal Radio-T.V.
Career School, Denver, 1965. Composer-performer-producer. Made
record albums with Lothar and the Hand People, performing inter-
nati onally in concerts and on U.S. and European television, composer of
television and radio commercials and music for Sam Shepard's
"The Unseen Hand," off-Broadway.
Denes, Agnes, Born Budapest, Hungary. Lives in N.Y.C. Education:
City College, New School fo r Social Research, Columbia University.
Awards: Alfred P. Cohen Art Scholarship 1961-62, John J. Myers Art
Scholarship 1959-63, The M.L. Robi nson Scholarship from Columbia
1964-66. Selected exhibitions: " Exposition Interconti nentale de
Monaco", New York, Athens, Deauville, Monaco, 1967-68; International
Art Show, United Nations, 1967; Ruth White Gallery, N.Y., 1969, 1970;
National Aca demy Gall eries, 1970; Dwan Gallery, N.Y., 1970.
Enzmann, Robert Duncan, Born in Peking, China. Lives in Lexington,
Mass. Education: Harvard Univers ity, B.A.; Royal University of Uppsala,
Sweden, Ph.D. Affi liated with Northeastern University, Boston, and
Raytheon Corp.
70
Fernbach-Flarsheim, Carl, Born 1921, Germany. Lives in N.Y.C.
Education: Illinois Institute ofTechnology, B.S. and M.S. in Art Education
1961. Artist and lecturer in Intermedia, Concept Art , computer-
generated works. Selected group exhi bitions: Kunsthalle, Bern,
" Art After Plans ", 1969; Dwan Gallery, N.Y., " Language III" , 1969;
Brooklyn Museum, N.Y., " Some More Beginnings " , 1968; Kornblee
Gallery, N.Y., Concrete Poetry Exhibition, Winter 1966/67. Selected
publications: Conceptual Cloud: Game, Book 1, Cypher Press, Phila.,
1967; Con ceptual Cloud: Game, THE BOOLEAN PACKAGE, University
Press, N.Y., 1969.
Glorno Poetry Systems, (n. John Giorno), Born 1936, N.Y.C.
Lives in N.Y.C. Education: Columbia University, B.A., 1958. Worked as
a seaman on freighters , was a stockbroke r and is the man sleeping in
Andy Warhol's movie Sleep. Works: Dia/-A-P oem at The Arch itectural
Leagu e of New York and The Museum of Contempora ry Art , Chicago;
ESPE (Electronic Sensory Poetry Environments). Books: Poems by John
Giorno, Moth er Press, 1967; Ball ing Buddha, Kulchur Press, 1970.
Anthologies: The World Anthology, Bobbs-Merrill, 1969; An Anthology
of New York Poetry, Random House, 1970. LP record Raspberry &
Pornographic Poem, Intravenus Mind, 1967.
Goodyear, John, Born 1930, Los Angeles. Lives in Lebanon, N.J.
Education: Universit y of Michigan, Master of Design , 1954. Cur rentl y
teac hing at Dougl ass Coll ege, Rutgers University, and a Fellow of Visual
Design Center, M.I.T. One-man exhibitions: Amel Gall ery, N.Y., 1964,
1965, 1966. Selected group exh ibi tions: Museum of Modern Art , N.Y.,
" The Responsive Eye" , 1965; Whit ney Museum of Ameri can Art ,
" 400 Years of American Art " , 1966; Walker Art Center, " Light, Mot ion,
Space", 1968; Mil waukee Art Center, " Options", 1968; National Collec-
tion of Fine Arts, Washington, D.C., " Explo ration", 1970.
Haacke, Hans, Born 1936, Cologn e, Germany. Lives in N.Y.C. Education:
Staatliche Hochschule fu r bildende Kunste, Kassel, 1956-60. Atelier 17
Paris, 1960-61. Fulbright Grant, Templ e University, 1961-62. Currentl y
teachi ng at Cooper Union, N.Y. Selected one man exhi bitions: Galerie
Schmela, Dusseldorf 1965; Howard Wise Gallery, N.Y., 1966, 1968, 1969;
M.I.T., 1967. Group exhibitions 1969: Cornell University, " Earth Art" ;
Kunsthall e, Bern, " When Atti tud es Become Form" ; Seattle Art Museum,
" 557087"; Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto, " New Alch emy"; Kunsthalle,
Dusseldorf " Prospect 69".
..
Huebler, Douglas, Born 1924, Ann Arb or, Mich . Lives in Bradford, Mass.
Education: University of Mich igan, B.S., M.F.A.; Academie Julien, Paris;
Cleveland School of Art. Currently teach ing at Bradford Junior Coll ege,
Mass. Selected group exhibit ions: Xerox, 1968, and March, 1969,
published by Seth Siegelaub, N.Y., 1969; Kunsthall e, Bern , " When
Attitudes Become Form " ; Seth Siege laub, N.Y., summer show;
Seattle Art Museum, " 557087"; Kunsthalle, Dusseldorf, " Prospect 69",
1970; M. Claura's " Paris IV 70" and L. Lippard 's " Situations" (in
Studio International, Summer).
Kaprow, Alla n, Born 1927, Atlantic City, N.J. Lives in Pasadena, Calif.
Education: New York Universit y, B.A., 1949; Columbia University, M.A.,
1951. Currently teaching at California Institute of the Arts. Since 1958,
has executed more than 50 Happenings, sponsored by such institutions
as The Museum of Modern Art in N.Y., The Museum of Contemporary
Art in Chicago, The Walk er Art Center, The Theater of Nations in Paris
and the Edinburgh Festival. Retrospective exhibition: The Pasadena Art
Museum, 1967. Author of Assemblage, Environments and Happenings,
Harry N. Abrams, Inc., N.Y., 1965.
Kosuth, Joseph, Born U.S.A. Lives in N.Y.C. Currently teaching at
The School of Visual Arts, N.Y. Ameri can Editor of Art & Language Press,
England. Selected Exhibitions: Gall ery 669, L.A., 1968; Bradford Jr.
College, Mass., 1968; Douglas Gallery, Vancouver, B.C., 1969; instituto
Torcuato Di Tella, BuenosAires, 1969; Nova Scot ia College of Art , 1969;
Coventry College of Art , England, 1969; " Art and Proj ect" , Amst erdam,
1969; Galleria Sperone, Turin, Italy, 1969, 1970; Pinacotheca, St. Kilda,
Australia, 1969; Leo Castelli Gall ery , N.Y., 1969; The Art Gallery of
Ontario, Toronto, 1969-70; The Pasadena Art Museum, 1970.
Levine, Les, Born 1935, Dublin, Ireland. Lives in N.Y.C. Education:
Central School of Arts & Crafts , London. Selected one-man exhib itions:
Art Gall ery of Ontario,Toronto, 1966; Fischb ach Gall ery, N.Y., 1966,1967,
1968, 1969; Museum of Modern Art, N.Y., 1967; Waike r Art Center, 1967;
Architectural League of New York, 1967; Gibson Gallery, N.Y., 1968;
New York City Department of Par ks, 1969; Phyllis Kind Gallery, Chicago,
1969; University of Michigan, 1969; The Molly Barnes Gallery, L.A., 1969;
Rowan Gallery, London , 1969; " Levine's Restaurant" , N.Y., 1969.
Publisher of Culture Hero, monthly newspaper, N.Y.
Nelson, Theodor H., Born 1937. Lives in N.Y.C. Education: Swarthmore
College, 1959; Harvard University, M.A., 1963.Taugh t soci ology at Vassar
College, 1964-66. In charge of computer resea rch at Harcourt , Bra ce &
World publish ers, 1966-67. Consultant to Bell Laboratories, 1967-68.
Consultant to CBS Laboratories, 1968-69. Currently president of The
Nelson Organization, Inc., N.Y.C., a small resea rch and deve lopment
corporation designing computer-controlled presentational syste ms.
Nolan, Jack, Born 1924, Lawrence, Mass. Lives in Lexington, Mass.
Education: Boston Univers ity, B.A. in mathematics, 1952; M.I.T., M.S. in
mathematics, 1953. Research in advanced development of com pute r
information systems fo r the past fifteen years . Presently President of
Massachusetts College of Art, Boston.
R.E.S.I.S.T.O.R.S. (Radically Emphatic Stud ents Inte rested in Science,
Techn ology and Other Research Studies) founded 1967. Bases in
Hopewell , N. J. A self-educating coeducational group of Elementary
School, Jun ior High and High School age members with their own
PDP-Eight computer, donated by the Digital Equipment Corporation.
Selected projects; sponsors of the first student technical session at
the 1970 Spring Joint Computer Conference. Educational program
for disadvantaged students from Trenton, N. J. Trac language primer
to be published 1970.
Razdow, All en M., Born 1946, N.Y.C. Lives in Allston, Mass. Education:
Stevens Institute of Technology, N.J., 1964-66; Boston University;
New School fo r Social Research , and New York University, 1966-67;
Berkiee School of Mus ic, Boston, 1968. Composer-arranger, pianist,
guitarist. Worked with jazz and rock groups. System level prog rammer,
analog and dig ital hard ware des ign. Experienced in bioelectronics,
electro-optics, dig ital-a nalo g systems. Curre ntly system programmer
at Harvard University Departm ent of Psychology Computer Based
Laboratory.
Schley Evander D., Born 1941, Montreal, Canada. Lives in N.Y.C.
Attended Duke University. Filmmaker, affi liated with Great Balls of Fire,
lnc., N.Y.C. Previous fi lms: " The Les Levine Movie" , " Place & Process" ,
" Earth", " The Love Statue".
Sheridan, Sonia, Born 1925, Newark, Ohio. Lives in Wilmette, III.
Education: Hunter College, A.B. ; the California College of Art s and
Crafts, M.F.A.; Columbia University ; the Taiwan She Da University.
Associate professor at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago.
Numerous museum group shows, last one man show at the Rosenberg
Gallery in Chicago in 1967. Most recent work in electric graphics.
Vict oria, Theodosius W., Born 1942, Riverh ead, N.Y. Lives in Montclair,
N.J. Education: Suffolk County Commun ity Coll ege, A.A.S.; State
University at New Paltz, N.Y., B.S.; Rutgers University, N.J., M.F.A.
Currently teaching at Newark State Colle ge. One man exhibitions: Loeb
Student Center, N.Y.U., N.Y., 1967; Douglass College, N.J., 1968.
Selected grou p exhibitions: Milwaukee Art Center, " Directions 1,
Options" , 1968; Rutgers University, "The Gun" , 1968; Museum of
Contemporary Crafts, N.Y., " Sound", 1969; " Form 1" , Philadelp hia, 1969.
Weiner, Lawrence, Born 1940, Bronx, N.Y. Lives in N.Y.C. One man
exh ibi tions: Cratering piece, Mill Vall ey, Calif., 1960; Seth Siegelaub,
N.Y., 1964, 1965; State ments, published by Siegelaub/ Kelln er, 1968;
Konrad Fischer, Dusseldorf, 1969; Nova Scot ia College of Art, Canada,
1969; Wide White Space, Antwerp, 1969; " Art and Pro ject" , Amsterdam ,
1969; Galleria Speron e, Turin, Ital y, 1969; Terminal Boundaries, pub-
lished by Siegelaub (N.Y.C.)/Konig (Cologne) 1969-70. Yvon Lambert,
Paris, 1970; Traces, published by Editions Sperone, Turin, 1970.
Woodm an, Ned, Bo rn 1950, Riverside, Calif. Lives in Cambridge, Mass.
General purpo se programmer and experienced in hardware; sailing
enthusiast and sometime artist. Presently seni or technical assistant at
Computer Based Lab, Psycholog y Department, Harvard University.
Board of Governors
of The Jewish Museum
Joachim Jean Aberbach
Harry N. Ab rams
Charles B. Benenson
Richard Cash
Henry David Epstein
Eugene Ferkauf
David Finn
Alvin N. Haas
Joseph H. Hazen
Ben Hell er'
H. Lawrence Herring '
Robert B. Hodes
Dr. Arthur T. Jacobs
William B. Jaffe'
Wilto n L. Jaffe e
Morton L. Janklow
Joseph Kahn
S. Sidney Kah n
Dr. Ab ram Kanof
Jacq ues Kaplan
Mrs. Jacob M. Kapla n'
Harvey Karp
Bert Kleiner
Mrs. Samuel Lemberg'
Mrs. Morris L. Levinson
Gustave L. Levy
Mrs. Albert A. List
Jack Nash
Horace Richter
Mrs. Derald Ruttenberg
Professor Meyer Schapiro
Mr. Richard Scheuer'
Bernard L. Schwartz
Dr. Seymour Siegel
Mrs. Jacob Sincoff*
Saul Steinberg
Je rome L. Stern
Lau rence A. Tisch
Mrs. Samuel Unge rleider'
Mr. Max Wasserman '
Mrs. Samuel Weiner
' honorary
Copyright © 1970
by The Jewish Museum
1109 Fifth Avenue
New York, New York 10028
The Jewish Museum is
unde r the auspices of
The Jewish Theological
Seminary of America
Library of Congress
Catalog Card No.: 70-130192
Printed in the United
States of America
71
t.t
..
t
~.
•
(
--
