Quantum mechanics writ large
John W. M. Bush1
Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
S
ome two centuries before the
quantum revolution, Newton (1)
suggested that corpuscles of light
generate waves in an aethereal
medium like skipping stones generate
waves in water, with their motion then
being affected by these aether waves.
Times have changed. Light corpuscles are
now known as photons, and the majority of
physicists have dispensed with the notion
of aether. Nevertheless, certain features
of Newton’s metaphor live on in one par-
ticular version of quantum mechanics.
According to pilot wave theory, ﬁrst pro-
posed by de Broglie (2) and later de-
veloped by Bohm (3) with Einstein’s
encouragement, microscopic elements
such as photons and electrons consist of
both particle and wave, the former being
guided by the latter. Although this physical
picture has not been widely accepted, it
has had some notable proponents, in-
cluding Bell (4). Its principal appeal is that
it restores realism and determinism to
quantum mechanics, its weakness that
the physical nature of the guiding wave
ﬁeld remains unclear. At the time that
pilot wave theory was developed and then
overtaken by the Copenhagen inter-
pretation as the standard view of quantum
mechanics, there was no macroscopic
pilot wave analog to draw upon. Now
there is.
“Path-memory induced quantization of
classical orbits” [Fort et al. (5)] is the
latest in a remarkable series of papers by
Couder and coworkers (6–12), who have
discovered a macroscopic pilot wave sys-
tem that exhibits several features pre-
viously thought to be peculiar to the
microscopic realm. When a ﬂuid bath is
driven up and down in a periodic fashion,
there is a critical acceleration that depends
on the ﬂuid viscosity, depth, and surface
tension, below which the interface remains
horizontal and above which the surface
goes unstable to a regular pattern of mil-
limetric Faraday waves (Fig. 1A) whose
period is twice that of the forcing (13, 14).
When a droplet of characteristic diameter
1 mm is placed on the vibrating surface of
a ﬂuid bath, it may lift off provided
that the vertical acceleration of the free
surface exceeds that due to gravity. When
it lands, it can avoid coalescing provided
that the impact time is less than the time
required for the air layer between the drop
and bath to drain to some critical distance
at which merger is initiated by van der
Waals forces. The experiments of Couder
involve placing a droplet on a bath of sil-
icone oil (with viscosity 20–50 times that of
water) in a driving regime above the
bouncing threshold but below the Faraday
threshold. There, an appropriately sized
drop may bounce indeﬁnitely on the free
surface, generating a localized ﬁeld of
surface waves that decays with distance
from the drop (6). If multiple bouncers are
placed on the free surface, they commu-
nicate through their wave ﬁelds (Fig. 1B).
An assemblage of equal-sized bouncers
may lock into lattices corresponding to
Archimedean tilings (7). Neighboring
bouncers of unequal size may lock to-
gether and ratchet across the free surface
in pairs or form larger aggregates of ro-
tating, drifting rafts (8).
At the bouncing threshold, a single
droplet will bounce with the forcing pe-
riod. Increasing the driving amplitude
eventually prompts a period doubling
transition, after which the period of the
bouncer becomes twice that of the driving
and so commensurate with that of Fara-
day waves (9, 10). The waves generated by
the bouncer may then destabilize the ver-
tical bouncing state. If slightly perturbed in
a given direction, the drop lands on
a sloping interface and so is nudged in that
same direction. Remarkably, the droplet
can thus walk in a steady fashion across
the surface, being piloted along at each
step by its wave ﬁeld (9). A simple time-
averaged model for the walker dynamics
and criterion for walking was developed by
Protière et al. (10). Walking is only possi-
ble when the guiding wave ﬁeld is large
(that is, as the Faraday threshold is ap-
proached); consequently, drops walk more
readily in deeper ﬂuid. As in the case of
bouncers, multiple walkers interact
through their wave ﬁelds: an approaching
pair of walking droplets may either scatter,
lock into orbit, or coalesce (Fig. 1C).
To explore the wave-particle nature of
the walking droplets, Couder and Fort
(11) examined their behavior as they
passed through obstructions; speciﬁcally,
they undertook macroscopic versions of
single-particle single- and double-slit ex-
periments. In their experiments, the
walkers were directed toward a slit, spe-
ciﬁcally, a gap in a subsurface barrier that
reduced the ﬂuid depth below that re-
quired for walking. In the single-slit ex-
periment, they found that the walker’s
path was deﬂected owing to the in-
teraction of its wave ﬁeld with the barrier.
Repetition of the experiment revealed the
emergence of a diffraction pattern in the
distribution of droplet trajectories; thus,
their experiments are a macroscopic ana-
log of the classic single-photon diffraction
experiments of Taylor (15). In the double-
slit experiment, repetition of the experi-
ments revealed the emergence of in-
terference patterns: while the drop passed
through one slit or the other, its accom-
panying wave passed through both, and
Fig. 1.
(A) Millimetric Faraday waves are gener-
ated on the surface of silicone oil by driving the
ﬂuid layer vertically in a periodic fashion above
the Faraday threshold. (B) A pair of droplets (diam-
eter = 1 mm) on the surface of silicone oil, above
the bouncing threshold but below the Faraday
threshold. The droplets communicate through
their wave ﬁelds, locking into phase at a ﬁxed
distance apart. (C) Three walking droplets lock
into a collective orbit. All orbits are counter-
clockwise, the largest being 8 mm in diameter.
Author contributions: J.W.M.B. wrote the paper.
The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
See companion article on page 17515.
1E-mail: bush@math.mit.edu.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1012399107
PNAS Early Edition
|
1 of 2
COMMENTARY
the wave interference led to the in-
terference pattern apparent in the distri-
bution of droplet trajectories.
The double-slit experiment (16) holds
a central place in the development of
quantum theory. In the words of Feynman
et al. (17), it is “impossible, absolutely
impossible to explain in any classical way,
and which has in it the heart of quantum
mechanics.” Indeed, unless one ascribes to
pilot wave theory, an unsettling feature
of the experiment is that interference
patterns persist even when the electrons
pass through the slit one at a time, an ef-
fect shown to persist with particles as large
as fullerenes (18). Couder and Fort (11)
showed that pilot waves readily produce
such an effect on a macroscopic scale, with
droplets a million times larger than full-
erenes. Another peculiar feature of the
single-electron double-slit experiment is
that if one observes which slit the electron
passes through, the interference pattern
vanishes (16). Of course, owing to the
enormous difference in scale between the
droplets and the photons that allow us to
see them, there is no such measurement
problem in the experiments of Couder and
Fort (11): one can readily observe the fate
of both droplet and wave. Nevertheless, it
is not difﬁcult to imagine a measurement
technique so heavy-handed that it would
disturb the free surface sufﬁciently to
destroy the interference pattern (for
example, if the drops could only be seen
by their effect on a stream of droplets
impinging on the two slits). Finally, it is
noteworthy that the droplet diffraction
system presumably exhibits statistical be-
havior not because it is intrinsically prob-
abilistic, but because the interaction
between the droplet, its wave ﬁeld, and
the slit is sufﬁciently complex to render the
system sensitive to initial conditions.
Eddi et al. (12) examined the inter-
action of a walker with a barrier and so
developed a macroscopic version of
quantum tunneling (19). Tunneling arises
in quantum mechanics when a microscopic
particle beats the odds by crossing a bar-
rier, an effect that has recently led to
a new generation of microscopes; for ex-
ample, the scanning tunneling micro-
scope has yielded unprecedented insights
into the dynamics of electrons in conﬁned
geometries (20). In the experiments of
Eddi et al. (12), walkers are conﬁned by
four walls corresponding to vertical bar-
riers, above which the droplets can bounce
but not walk. The incidence of the walker’s
wave ﬁeld on the barrier leads to partial
reﬂection and an evanescent tail that de-
cays across the barrier. The reﬂected wave
typically causes an approaching walker to
be reﬂected from the barrier; however, the
particle-wave–barrier interaction does oc-
casionally permit the droplet to tunnel
across. The tunneling probability is shown
to decrease with the width of the wall and
increase as the Faraday threshold is ap-
proached (12). Once again, the analog
quantum behavior is caused by the in-
teraction between the droplet and its
guiding wave.
In their latest contribution, Fort et al.
(5) examine the dynamics of droplets
walking in a rotating frame. One expects
the walkers to follow a circular orbit on
which the radially outward centripetal
force and the inward Coriolis force bal-
ance, the radius of which is given by R =
V/2Ω, where V is the walking speed and Ω
the rotation rate. Although such is the case
far below the Faraday threshold, the orbits
become quantized as this threshold is
approached and the wave ﬁeld becomes
more pronounced. Once again, the
anomalous quantum behavior is associated
with the interaction of the droplet with
its wave ﬁeld, which the authors refer to as
its path memory. Their numerical model
captures the interaction between the
droplet and its wave ﬁeld and allows them
to rationalize the orbital quantization
arising when the walker’s memory is deep.
In an elegant theoretical development,
they show that the effective wave force in
this deep-memory limit is equivalent to
that generated by a single image droplet
on the opposite side of the orbit. The au-
thors draw a provocative analogy with
Landau levels, the quantized orbits arising
in quantum mechanics when a charge
translates in a magnetic ﬁeld, pointing out
the nearly exact equivalence of the two
systems when the Faraday wavelength is
identiﬁed with the de Broglie wavelength.
One is currently taught that the
macroscopic and microscopic worlds are
intrinsically different, the former being
deterministic and the latter probabilistic.
By virtue of its wave particle nature, the
walking drop exhibits several features
previously thought to be peculiar to the
microscopic realm, including single-parti-
cle diffraction, interference, tunneling,
and now, quantized orbits. These studies
raise a number of fascinating questions.
Are the macroscopic and microscopic
worlds really so different? Might the for-
mer yet yield insight into the latter? Is
there really a connection between this
bouncing droplet system and the micro-
scopic world of subatomic particles? Or
is it all just an odd coincidence? By virtue
of its accompanying pilot wave, the
walker’s dynamics are temporally non-
local, depending on its bouncing history,
its memory. Indeed, this memory is re-
sponsible for all of their anomalous
quantum behavior. Might such nonlocality
give rise to something equivalent to en-
tanglement, one of the central mysteries
of modern quantum theory? Might it be
possible to impart to the walkers an attri-
bute equivalent to quantum spin? When
this exciting line of research has run its
course, what dynamical features will re-
main exclusive to the microscopic world?
Time will tell. One thing, though, is
certain. In physics, as in life, things would
be much simpler, but far less interesting,
were it not for the depth of memory.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. J.B. thanks Tristan Gilet
and Anand Oza for assistance with Fig. 1, and the
National Science Foundation for ﬁnancial support
through Grant CBET-0966452.
1. Newton I (1979) Opticks (Dover, New York).
2. de Broglie L (1926) Ondes et mouvements (Gautier Vil-
lars, Paris).
3. Bohm D (1952) A suggested interpretation of the
quantum theory in terms of hidden variables. Phys
Rev 85:166–179.
4. Bell JS (1987) Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum
Mechanics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK).
5. Fort E, Eddi A, Boudaoud A, Moukhtar J, Couder Y (2010)
Path-memory induced quantization of classical orbits.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:17515–17520.
6. Couder Y, Fort E, Gautier CH, Boudaoud A (2005) From
bouncing to ﬂoating: Noncoalescence of drops on
a ﬂuid bath. Phys Rev Lett 94:177801-1–177801-4.
7. Eddi A, Decelle A, Fort E, Couder Y (2009) Archimedean
lattices in the bound states of wave interacting par-
ticles. Europhys Lett 87:56002-p1–56002-p6.
8. Eddi A, Terwagne D, Fort E, Couder Y (2008) Wave
propelled ratchets and drifting rafts. Europhys Lett
87:44001-p1–44001-p6.
9. Couder Y, Protière S, Fort E, Boudaoud A (2005) Dy-
namical phenomena: Walking and orbiting droplets.
Nature 437:208.
10. Protière S, Boudaoud A, Couder Y (2006) Particle wave
association on a ﬂuid interface. J Fluid Mech 554:
85–108.
11. Couder Y, Fort E (2006) Single-particle diffraction and
interference at a macroscopic scale. Phys Rev Lett 97:
154101-1–154101-4.
12. Eddi A, Fort E, Moisy F, Couder Y (2009) Unpredictable
tunneling of a classical wave-particle association. Phys
Rev Lett 102:240401-1–240401-4.
13. Faraday M (1831) On the forms and states of ﬂuids on
vibrating elastic surfaces. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 121:
319–340.
14. Kumar K, Tuckerman LS (1994) Parametric instability of
the interface between two ﬂuids. J Fluid Mech 279:
49–68.
15. Taylor GI (1909) Interference fringes with feeble light.
Proc Camb Philos Soc 15:114–115.
16. Tonomura A, Endo J, Matsuda T, Kawasaki T, Ezawa H
(1989) Demonstration of single-electron buildup of an
interference pattern. Am J Phys 57:117–120.
17. Feynman RP, Leighton RB, Sands M (1963) The Feyn-
man Lectures on Physics (Addison–Wesley, Reading,
MA), Vol 3.
18. Arndt M, et al. (1999) Wave-particle duality of C(60)
molecules. Nature 401:680–682.
19. Gamow G (1928) The theory of nuclear disintegration.
Nature 122:805–807.
20. Fiete GA, Heller EJ (2003) Theory of quantum corrals
and quantum mirages. Rev Mod Phys 75:933–948.
2 of 2
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1012399107
Bush
