THE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
A NEW MACHINE 
FOR SOLVING DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS. 
BY 
V. BUSH) Eng.D., 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
I. This paper will describe a new machine for the solution 
of ordinary differential equations recently placed in service 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
First, there 
will be outlined some of the objectives in view, and the 
general philosophy underlying the development of this type 
of analyzing device. 
Various serious mechanical problems 
have of necessity been met in the effort to produce a machine 
which is versatile and accurate, and the means by which 
these have been attacked will be treated. 
The general 
method of placing an equation on the machine will be pre- 
sented and illustrated. 
Finally, a brief discussion will be 
given of a method of successive approximations for obtaining 
solutions of high accuracy, a method for avoiding difficulties 
due to singularities in coefficients, and a treatment of the 
problem of obtaining critical values of a parameter in an 
equation. 
2. The handling of the processes of arithmetic by me- 
chanical computation has recently revolutionized business 
accounting methods. 
The use in mechanical analysis of more 
advanced mathematical processes will ultimately be of com- 
parable importance in scientific research and its applications 
in engineering. 
This idea is far from original, for Leibnitz 
envisaged it comprehensively over two hundred years ago. 
The far-reaching project of utilizing complex mechanical 
interrelationships as substitutes for intricate processes of 
reasoning owes its inception to an inventor of the calculus 
itself. I 
Leibnitz lived in an age when any comprehensive 
1 See "La Logique de Leibnitz," L. Couturat, Chap. IV, p. II 5. 
Leibnitz 
invented the calculus as one step in a general program of symbolic reasoning. 
As steps in the program of the mechanization of reasoning he invented a machine 
447 
448 
V. BusH. 
[J. F. I. 
realization of his plan was prevented by lack of the devices 
and technique by which we are now surrounded. 
Had he 
been able to utilize thermionic tubes, photoelectric cells, 
accurate machine tools, and new alloys, he would certainly 
have built him many a strange device; for he was a genius 
and an inventor in the highest sense of the term, and he was 
fired with the idea of relegating to the machine those parts 
of the processes of thought which are inherently mechanical 
and repetitive. 
The status of physics and engineering at the present time 
is peculiarly favorable to a development of this sort. 
Elec- 
trical engineering~ for example, having dealt with substantially 
linear networks throughout the greater part of its history, 
is now rapidly introducing into these networks elements the 
non-linearity of which is their salient feature, and is baffled 
by the mathematics thus presented and requiring solution. 
Mathematical physicists are continually being hampered by 
the complexity rather than the profundity of the equations 
they employ; and here also even a numerical solution or two 
would often be a relief. 
Not any one machine, nor even any one program of 
development can meet these needs. 
It was a long hard road 
from the adding machine of Pascal to the perforated card 
accounting machines of the present day. 
There must be 
much of labor and many struggles before the full ideal of 
Leibnitz can be consummated. 
In the Department of Electrical Engineering of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology the development has 
followed three lines. 
First is the process of solving compli- 
cated simultaneous algebraic equations as they occur for 
example in the treatment of modern power networks, by 
means of alternating-current measurements made on an 
electrical replica of the power system. 
The flexible congeries 
of coils, resistances, and condensers by which this is accom- 
plished is called a network analyzer3 
Second is the attack 
for performing arithmetical processes (see the "Source Book in Mathematics," 
McGraw-Hill) and an algebraic machine for solving equations. 
(Various refer- 
ences in Couturat.) 
2 Hazen, H. L., Schurig, O. R., and Gardner, M. F., "The M. I. T. Network 
Analyzer, Design and Application to Power System Problems," Trans. A. L E. E., 
October, 193o. 
M.I.T. 
E.E. Research Bulletin No. 66. 
Oct., I93I.] 
TIlE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
449 
on the integral with a variable parameter by an optical 
method 3 first suggested by Wiener. ~ This gives an approach 
to the integral equation and to certain processes of statistical 
analysis. 
The device itself is called a photoelectric integraph. 
The third deals with the ordinary differential equation, and 
provides solutions in the form of plotted curves for specified 
boundary conditions. 
The machine treated in this present 
paper is the latest step 4 along this third line. 
It is called a 
differential analyzer. ~ 
3- The machine for solving second-order ordinary differ- 
ential equations which was described in this journal in 1928 
has, in spite of its limitations, been successfully used in a large 
number of problems, some of which have been described in 
the literature. 6 
It has proved very definitely that such a 
machine, if flexible, rugged, and precise, could be of much 
3 Gould, K. E., "A New Machine for Integrating a Functional Product," 
Jour. Math. & Physics, I7, 3o5-316, I929. 
Gray, T. S., "A Photoelectric 
Integraph," JouR. FRANK. INST., July, 1931. 
4 Bush, V., Gage, F. D., and Stewart, H. R., "A Continuous Integraph," 
JouR. FRANK. INST., 63--84, 1927. 
M.I.T. 
E.E. Research Bulletin No. 56. 
Bush, V., and Hazen, H. L., "Integraph Solution of Differential Equations," 
JOUR. FRANK. INST., 575--615, I927. 
M.I.T. 
E.E. Research Bulletin No. 59. 
5 This name was suggested by Prof. W. V. Lyon. 
6 Bush, V., and Gould, t(. E., "Temperature Distribution along an Emitting 
Filament," Physical Review, 337-345, February, I927. 
Bush, V., "Mechanical 
Solution of Engineering Problems," The Tech. Engineering News, IX, No. 2, 52, 
March, I928. 
Bush, V., "Transmission Line Transients," M. I.T.E.E. Research 
Bulletin No. 5o. 
Teplow, L., "Stability of Synchronous Motors under Variable 
Load," General Electric Review, 356, June, 1928. 
Summers, I. It., and McClure, 
J. B., "Progress in the Study of System Stability," Presented at the Pacific 
Coast Convention of the A. I. E. E., Santa Monica, Calif., September 3-6, 1929. 
Gardner, M. F., "The M. I. T. Integraph, Its Operation and Use," Report of 
the Colloquium on Power-Circuit Analysis, 9I-IOO, June, 1929. 
Spencer, H. H., 
"The Solution of a Typical Stability Problem by Means of the Integraph," 
Report of the Colloquium on Power-Circuit Analysis, IO2-II2, June, 1929. 
Lyon, W. V., and Edgerton, H. E., "Transient Torque-Angle Characteristics of 
Synchronous Machines," Presented at the Mid-Winter Convention of the A. I. 
E. E., New York, January 31, i93o. 
Edgerton, H. E., and Zak, F. J., "The 
Pulling into Step of a Synchronous Induction Motor," Jour. I. E. E. (London), 
68, No. 4o5, 12o5, September, 193o. 
Sears, F. W., "A Study of Electron Orbits 
in the Barkhausen-Kurz Effect," JOUR. FRANK. I~ST., 209, No. 4, 459, April, 193o. 
Edgerton, H. E., and Fourmarier, D., "The Pulling into Step of a Salient-Pole Syn- 
chronous Motor," Presented at the Mid-Winter Convention of the A. I. E. E., 
January, 1931 . 
450 
V. BusI-i. 
[J. F. I. 
service in the problems of engineering and physics. 
It was 
because of a conviction that such devices are destined to fill 
an increasing need that the present development was under- 
taken. 
There has been an enormous change in technique since the 
time when Sir William Thomson first suggested, more than 
fifty years ago,7 that the integrators developed by his brother 
could be connected together and thus forced to produce 
solutions of differential equations. 
The idea could then 
hardly be carried out, for one reason because an integrator, 
which is simply a variable-speed drive, could not then be 
built both accurate and capable of carrying sufficient load to 
move numerous mechanical parts. 
The present device incorporates the same basic idea of 
interconnection of integrating units as did the machine 
previously described. 
In detail, however, there is little 
resemblance to the earlier model. 
The addition of torque 
amplifiers has rendered the integrating units capable of 
carrying a considerable load. 
A very flexible system of 
"bus" shafts has been provided by means of which these 
units can be interconnected or "back coupled" at will. 
Large size has been preserved in order to obtain accuracy of 
plotting of the variable coefficients and of the result. 
Various 
auxiliary units, such as multipliers, have been provided. 
The aim has been to produce extreme flexibility, sufficient 
ruggedness, and reasonable precision. 
A precision of one 
part in one thousand under ordinary conditions of use has 
been arrived at in individual units, with the intention of 
achieving a somewhat less overall precision except in extra- 
ordinary circumstances. 
The arrangement is still based on 
the use of integrators because of their inherent average 
precision, due to the important balancing of momentary 
errors which occurs in their use. 
Such effects as are due, 
for example, to failure of an operator to exactly follow a 
plotted coefficient are integrated out to an extent which is 
really surprising, unless one has experienced the balancing of 
deviations when using a planimeter or steering a ship. 
A 
Thomson, Sir William, "Mechanical Integration of the Linear Differential 
Equations of the Second Order with Variable Coefficients," Proceedings of the 
Royal Society, 24, 269, I876. 
Oct., I93I. ] 
TIlE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
45I 
precise differentiator lending itself to automatic operation 
has never been produced. 
Electrical integration by watthour 
meter, very useful in the previous device on account of the 
possibility of simultaneously multiplying functions, had to 
be abandoned when precision was extended to the next 
decimal place in the present machine. 
All main operations 
are now mechanical, with electrical devices used only for 
drives and controls. 
The machine as constructed is intended for the solution of 
ordinary differential equations of any order up to the sixth, 
and with any amount of complexity within reason. 
The 
frequency with which problems are encountered involving 
two or three simultaneous second-order equations made this 
range desirable, although it could readily be extended. 
It is 
readily possible, when plots have been made and a schematic 
diagram giving scales and connections prepared, to set up the 
machine for a given problem in a few hours. 
The time 
necessary for solutions varies with the complexity of the 
problem and the precision desired, and in representative cases 
is about ten minutes for each solution corresponding to a 
given set of boundary conditions. 
Experience is necessary, 
of course, in order to use the device effectively. 
This is 
actually one of the most attractive aspects of the machine; 
one acquires an entirely new appreciation of the innate nature 
of a differential equation as that experience is gained. 
The attainment of precision in a device of this sort, 
granted sound mechanical design and accurate construction, 
is largely a struggle with the problems of backlash and 
integrator slip, and these will hence receive most attention 
below. 
First, however, it will be well to consider briefly the 
general nature of the units of the machine and the manner 
in which these various units may be interconnected to solve 
an equation, assuming that each unit performs exactly as 
intended. 
4- A photograph of the machine is shown in Fig. I, and a 
schematic diagram of the layout in Fig. 2. 
It will be noted 
that there are provided eighteen longitudinal or bus shafts, 
and that these can be readily uncoupled at many points. 
Along the sides of the device are ranged the main units: 
the integrators, input tables, multipliers and output table, 
452 
V. BUSH. 
[J. F. I. 
FIG. I. 
The differential analyzer. 
,-,!!~!!!! 
tll 1111711111 
FIG. 2. 
M 
Schematic diagram of the analyzer. 
_
_
m
 
I'! 
Oct., I93L ] 
THE DIFFERENTIAl/. ANALYZER. 
453 
each connected to cross shafts. 
An integrator, Fig. 3, may 
be considered as a unit with three shafts, the angular move- 
ments of which are u, v, and w, so connected that at all 
instants u = Kfwdv. 
An input table, Fig. 4, has two shafts 
with revolutions p and g, one of which moves a pointer 
horizontally in the direction of abscissas and the other 
vertically in the direction of ordinates across a plot of a 
function. 
One shaft is controlled manually to keep the 
pointer on the plot, thus giving at all times p = f(g). 
A 
FIG. 3. 
An integrator. 
multiplier is obtained by using an attachment on an input 
table. 
There are then three shafts, and the revolutions or 
total angle turned through by one is, at any instant, equal 
to the product of the revolutions of the other two. 
An output 
table, Fig. 8, has three shafts, one of which moves a carriage 
horizontally, and the other two of which move recording 
pencils carried by this carriage vertically over the recording 
paper. 
Thus two quantities may be simultaneously recorded 
as a function of any chosen variable. 
Any cross shaft can be 
454 
V. Busm 
[J. F. I. 
FIG. 4' 
!¸¸%¸¸¸¸¸¸¸¸ 
i 
An input table. 
FIG. 5. 
The output table. 
Oct., 193z.1 
THE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
455 
readily connected to any bus shaft by inserting a spiral gear 
box between them, and one will then drive the other. 
Right- 
and left-hand boxes are supplied in order to secure correctly 
related directions of rotation. 
One bus shaft, assigned perma- 
nently to the independent variable, is driven by a variable- 
speed motor. 
There are provided also sets of spur gears 
which can be connected between adjacent shafts so that one 
will drive the other with a chosen ratio of speed, and differ- 
ential gears or "adders" which can be connected to three 
shafts so that the revolutions of one will be the sum of the 
revolutions of the other two. 
These last units are inserted 
as needed in the body of the table. 
It is interesting to contrast the integrators, multipliers, 
and adders. 
Each has three shafts. 
If the angles turned 
through by these shafts are 01, 02, 03, and their speeds are 
01, 02, 03, then at any instant for the integrator 
01 = f 
O2d03 
or 
01 = 0203, 
for the multiplier 
01 = 0203 or 
01 = 0203A- 0302, 
for the adder 
O1 : 
02 -Jr- 03 or 
O1 : 
02 "~- 03. 
It is convenient to have standard symbols for all these 
various units, and these are shown in Fig. 6. 
5. Let us now examine somewhat in detail the method of 
placing a simple equation on the machine. 
As an example 
consider the equation 
d2x 
dx 
dt---~ + k-d[-4- g = o 
of a body projected vertically in a constant gravitational 
field, the resistance being assumed proportional to the first 
power of the speed. 
Disregarding scales and directions of 
rotation for the present we may place this on the machine 
as shown in Fig. 7. 
The connections will be more apparent 
if the equation is written in the form: 
) 
dt - 
-- 
dt -4- g 
dt. 
456 
V. Busm 
[J. F. I. 
FIG. 6. 
Spiral Gear Box 
1 
l 
Right Hand 
Spiral Gear Box + 
Left Hand 
Pair of Spur Gears 
rT] 
i-xl 
Ratio in Figures 
Frontlash Unit 
Adder 
¢ 
ILl 
c=aWb 
Integrator 
U 
V 
70 
u = fw 
dv 
p~ 
q- 
Input Table 
P = F (9) 
1_ 
Output Table 
Multiplier 
s=rXt 
L 
1.. 
Polar Input Table 
Standard symbols for units. 
Oct., I931.1 
THE 
DIF]~'ERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
457 
The symbols entered at the end of each bus shaft indicate the 
equivalent of unit angular rotation of the shaft. 
We have 
assumed that k is exactly a certain gear ratio. 
The procedure, 
if it is not, will be apparent below. 
The value of g is, for 
convenience, placed on an index on an input table where it 
may be readily adjusted to any desired value. 
In this 
problem, of constant coefficients, there are no manual opera- 
I 
FIG. 7. 
.3 
1 
ir 
Analyzer connections for simple problem of falling body. 
d~x 
dx 
~+k~t 
+g =o. 
t 
dx 
dt 
~ 
KdX 
dt 
K~t+g 
tions. 
When the time shaft is started, by motor drive, all 
other shafts are driven. 
The values of x and dx/dt will be 
recorded on the output table as functions of the time. 
The 
initial values of x and of dx/dt, that is the boundary conditions 
for the problem, are assigned by specifying the initial dis- 
placements of the carriages of the two integrators. 
For 
example, suppose we are to start at x = o, t = o, with 
458 
V. BUSH. 
[J. F. 1. 
dx/dt = V. 
We initially displace integrator I by an amount 
V, and integrator I I by an amount (kV Jr-g) from their 
mid positions. 
Now let us pass to the problem which arises when the 
gravitational force varies with the distance x, and where the 
resistance is a complicated but known function of the speed: 
f(dx/dt). 
The equation is now 
d~x + f ( dx ) 
dt ~ 
"d-[ 
-k g(x) -- o 
or 
It should be emphasized that, from the standpoint of the 
machine, the problem is now but little more difficult than 
before; although formally it may be very troublesome. 
The scheme of connections is shown in Fig. 8. 
Note that 
'it, 
T 
2 
1 
2g_ 
FIG. 8. 
I" 
Falling-body problem, somewhat generalized. 
a~ +s(d.) +g~.) =o. 
dti 
', dt 
l 
x 
dx 
g (x) 
we have simply entered the variable coefficients by the use 
of input tables. 
An operator is stationed at each of these 
points, and, as the solution proceeds, he turns a crank keeping 
an index on a plotted curve. 
Otherwise nothing is altered. 
Oct., 19,31. ] 
THE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
459 
The machine, as before, causes the distance and speed to be 
recorded on the output table as functions of the time. 
In each of these problems it will be noted that the pro- 
cedure of placing the equation on the machine is somewhat 
as follows: A bus shaft is assigned to each significant quantity 
appearing in the equation. 
The several relations existing 
between these are then set up by means of connections to the 
operating units: a functional relation by connecting the two 
corresponding shafts to an input table, a sum by placing an 
adder in position, an integral relationship by an integrator, 
and so on. 
When all the relationships which are involved 
have been thus represented a final connection is made which 
represents the equality expressed in the equation. 
In the 
example above this connection is through an integrating unit, 
for it is desired to represent the fact that the integral of a 
certain function is equal to the first derivative of the de- 
pendent variable. 
When this has been done the machine is 
locked, and the rotation of the independent-variable shaft 
will drive everything else, thus forcing the machine to move 
in accordance with the expressed relationship of the equation. 
The speed of this independent shaft, within mechanical 
limits, makes no difference. 
It is, in fact, driven for con- 
venience by a variable-speed motor. 
This enables everything 
to be run slowly when an operator is called upon to follow a 
difficult part of a plot. 
The scheme of connecting the machine for a specific 
problem which has been illustrated is quite general; more so 
in fact than might at first appear. 
It has certain features in 
common with the "plugging" of a desired circuit on a switch- 
board, and the resulting diagrams have something of an 
electrical atmosphere about them. 
Evidently the complexity 
of the equations which can be handled is limited only by the 
number of units available. 
There will be discussed below more complex situations in 
connection with matters of discontinuities in coefficients, and 
successive approximations; and the ways in which precision 
may be attained in difficult situations will then be apparent. 
In order that this matter may be clear, however, the design 
of various individual units will first be treated, with particular 
attention to precision and reliability of operation. 
VOL. 212~ NO. 1270--32 
460 
V. BusH. 
[J. F. I. 
6. There are six integrating units in the present machine, 
which form the central feature of the device. 
Their design 
constituted a major problem in the development. 
The task 
of making a satisfactory integrating unit is that of building a 
variable-speed drive capable of substantial mechanical power 
output, accurate in ratio at all speeds and loads, and with 
this ratio accurately adjustable. 
Meeting these requirements 
resulted in a compact rigid mechanical construction, with the 
backlash in the drives carefully removed, and with a high- 
ratio torque amplifier added to relieve the friction drive from 
the necessity of supplying more than a minute torque. 
A complete integrating unit is shown in Fig. 3 
A massive 
carriage is moved horizontally on ways by means of an 
accurate lead screw. 
This carries a disc in a horizontal 
plane which can be revolved, independently of the carriage 
position, by means of splined shafts. 
Resting on this disc, 
and pivoted in accurate bearings, is a wheel or roller with its 
axis parallel to the ways and lying in a vertical plane through 
the center of the disc. 
Disc and roller are of hardened steel, 
ground and lapped. 
The edge of the roller is given a radius 
of about 0.002 inch. 
The outer bearing of the roller shaft is 
carried by a hinged carriage from the base. 
This bearing is 
jewelled and is located directly over the point of contact. 
End play in roller-shaft and carriage pivots is removable by 
fine screw adjustment. 
There are also provided adjustments 
by which the roller shaft can be brought accurately to its 
correct position. 
Backlash in the lead-screw drive is almost completely 
removed by using two nuts on the screw, with spring-backed 
wedges between them forcing the nuts apart, the wedge 
supports being rigidly fastened to the carriage. 
By proper 
choice of the wedge angle this scheme gives a positive drive 
in either direction, while allowing the slight irregularities of 
the screw to be taken up without binding. 
This device, 
called a "lashlock," was developed by Mr. C. W. Nieman of 
the Bethlehem Steel Corporation, and, as it has been described 
elsewhere, s will not be discussed in detail here. 
The same idea is utilized in the disc drive. 
On the disc 
shaft is a spiral gear meshing with two spiral pinions located 
s American Machinist, 66, 921-924, June 2, 1927. 
Oct., I931. ] 
TIlE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
46i 
in the carriage and driven by two symmetrically-disposed 
horizontal splined shafts. 
This is illustrated diagrammati- 
cally in Fig. 9. 
These shafts are coupled by a pair of spur 
gears, and at this point is introduced the lashlock. 
The 
lashlock-wedge tends to separate the parts against which it 
presses in such manner as to bring gear teeth into contact all 
the way around the double drive to the disc. 
The stud on 
which the wedge moves is driven by the main disc-drive 
shaft which projects from the base. 
Thus backlash in this 
drive is also eliminated. 
More care was taken in removing 
backlash from the integrating units than was perhaps entirely 
necessary, as will be seen below. 
It is very convenient, 
FI(L 9. 
"~ ,,.![ 
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
Diagram of integrator drive. 
however, to have these integrators precise self-contained units 
free from substantial errors due to this cause, in order more 
readily to isolate other possible sources of error. 
When the roller is entirely free in its bearings, and when 
all construction has been made accurately, free from play or 
backlash, and rigid, the integrator becomes a very precise unit. 
It takes only an extremely small torque opposing the rotation 
of the roller entirely to remove this precision. 
Offhand it 
might be thought that there would be a threshold value of 
torque which would cause the roller to slip, and below which 
precision would be obtained. 
Actually, however, there is an 
error caused by any load torque however small ; and tests show 
462 
V. BUSH. 
[J. F. I. 
that the departure from the correct ratio of disc to roller 
speeds varies continuously with the torque and is nearly 
proportional thereto in the range of small values. 
This effect 
is undoubtedly caused by the existence of a finite area of 
contact between disc and roller, at only one point of which is 
there at any instant zero relative velocity between the 
surfaces in contact. 
Such a point will shift its position in the 
area slightly for any small load increment, and hence cause a 
small change in drive ratio. 
It is interesting to note that 
the error thus caused was found to be substantially the same 
whether the surfaces were washed free from grease and dried, 
or thoroughly lubricated with a light oil. 
In the previous machine this fundamentally important 
difficulty was met by the use of servo-mechanisms, the 
integrating units being then called upon only to move very 
light contacts, while a motor controlled thereby did the actual 
work. 
Unfortunately this almost necessarily involves an 
oscillatory output drive which is very inconvenient and 
hardly compatible with extreme precision when complicated 
interconnection is involved. 
Thanks to the much-appreciated 
assistance of Mr. Nieman a much better solution was available 
for the present machine in the form of the torque amplifier 
which has been recently developed by the Bethlehem Steel 
Corporation.9 
This is, in brief, a device having an input and 
an output shaft, and so arranged that, when the input shaft 
is turned, the output shaft will turn an equal amount, but 
with a greatly increased torque, so that a small torque 
applied to the input shaft is magnified and applied to a load. 
The energy is supplied by an independent and constantly- 
running motor which drives a pair of drums in opposite 
directions. 
The central idea involved is the use of friction 
bands wrapped around the rotating drums. 
A small force 
applied at one end of such a band produces a much amplified 
force at the other end, the ratio of these forces varying 
exponentially with the angle of wrap. 
The two drums 
9American Machinist, 66, 895-7, May 26, I927. 
Automotive Ind., 56, 
896-7, June II, 1927 . Chem. ~ Met. Eng., 34, 443-4, July, I927. 
Elec. Ry. 
Jour., 7o, I8, July 2, I927. 
Mech. Eng., 49, Ioi7-I8, September, 1927. 
Power, 
66, 413, Sept. I3, I927. 
Railway Age, 83, I3IO-II, 5ec. 2, Dee. 24, I927. 
Power 
Plant Eng., 33, 772-3, July I, I929. 
Oct., ~93L] 
TItE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
463 
provide for rotation in both directions. 
Fig. IO shows the 
basic idea somewhat diagrammatically. 
A study showed that about a pound-foot of output torque 
from integrators would probably be ample, and that, in order 
that errors due to load might be negligible within the limits of 
precision aimed at, the torque supplied by the roller could 
not well be more than a ten-thousandth part of this. 
It was 
therefore necessary to develop the torque amplifier along the 
Output Shaft 
FIG. I0. 
Out )ut Arm 
't II1'1tl 
U 
/ 
Input Ann 
Friction 
Drums 
Simplified diagram of torque amplifier. 
lines of very high torque-ratio and very low input-torque. 
A "two-stage device was found necessary in order that the 
bands on the first stage might be exceedingly flexible and 
thus properly controlled by small forces, while the bands of 
the second stage might be sufficiently rugged to carry the load. 
The output of the first stage simply moves a pivoted lever 
which in turn supplies the input to the second stage. 
The 
final model is shown in Fig. I I. 
The rotating drums are 
belt-driven in opposite directions, and are stepped to furnish 
two small-diameter friction surfaces for the first-stage bands, 
and larger ones for the second-stage bands. 
There are two 
concentric shafts. 
The internal shaft is the roller shaft, held 
464 
V. Bust~. 
[J. F. I. 
in a light bearing mounted in the outer shaft, and furnished 
with an arm which projects through a hole in the latter. 
This arm carries the input ends of the first-stage bands, 
which are actually pieces of silk-braided fishline, the output 
ends of these bands being connected to the pivoted lever 
mentioned above. 
The second-stage bands are heavy cord, 
with their input ends connected to this same lever, and their 
output ends attached to a ring carried rigidly on the output 
shaft. 
One band in each stage is wound clockwise and the 
FIG. I I. 
A torque amplifier. 
other counterclockwise. 
Every band is given two and one- 
half turns wrap. 
There is a very slight initial tension in all 
the bands, and the effect of a movement of the input shaft is 
to loosen one pair and tighten the other. 
The relative angular 
motion between input and output shafts is only a very few 
degrees even when carrying full load. 
This angle has been 
made very small indeed in certain designs produced by 
Nieman, but in the design for use with the integrator, where 
the problem of extremely small input torque is paramount, 
Oct., I93I.] 
THE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
465 
it has been found advisable to allow it to be several degrees. 
The error which might be caused by this small play is avoided 
by an arrangement described below. 
The input shaft may, 
of course, revolve at any speed whatever, and exert complete 
control over the output, provided the fixed drum speed is not 
reached. 
Now such a torque amplifier is quite analogous to a two- 
stage thermionic-tube amplifier, and it has many of the 
properties of the latter, including the possibility of self- 
oscillation. 
It was soon found, in fact, that when the 
amplification of such a low-input unit was raised to around 
IO,OOO it was very prone to go into a condition of violent 
oscillation ending usually in disaster. 
This was presumably 
caused by a small part of the output being fed back in one 
way or another into the input. 
This problem caused quite a 
struggle. 
It was finally solved by the use of a vibration 
damper, which is analogous to the introduction of resistance 
by transformer coupling into the corresponding thermionic- 
tube circuit. 
In Fig. II it will be noted that there is a 
relatively massive flywheel on the output shaft. 
This is loose 
on the shaft and coupled thereto only through a slight friction 
introduced by pressure on a felt washer. 
During uniform 
rotation the flywheel simply rotates with the shaft. 
If there 
are oscillations it slips and introduces a damping force. 
As 
in the tube circuit, its presence does not simply limit the 
amplitude of oscillations; rather it prevents them from 
starting at all. 
This scheme, long used for limiting the 
torsional vibration of machinery, here performs a new function 
in preventing the initiation of self-oscillations. 
The per- 
formance of the torque amplifiers is now smooth and reliable, 
and their ratio is ample. 
It is still necessary to exercise some 
care in their use, for a spot of dirt on a first-stage friction 
drum, for example, can cause rough operation. 
With proper 
care they give no trouble, and the life of the friction bands 
is long. 
A series of forty test runs was made on a completed 
integrating unit with various loads of from zero to one pound- 
foot output torque, at various displacements, and for both 
directions of disc rotation. 
The calibration constant was 
evaluated by averaging all these runs, and the departure for 
466 
V. Busi~. 
[J. F. I. 
individual runs then computed. 
The mean departure was 
o.o32 per cent., and the maximum departure in any single 
run o.12 per cent. 
This is as good precision as is necessary 
at this point for all ordinary purposes, although it could now 
undoubtedly be improved, as the result of experience, if 
improvement should become advisable. 
7. A second major problem in the development has been 
backlash. 
A serious matter in any precision device, it 
becomes especially important in this, because the inter- 
connection of units often renders cumulative the error caused 
by its presence. 
The problem is acute when it is desired to 
produce complete flexibility, for the way in which shafts are 
geared together is then continually altered. 
The general scheme of attack has been as follows: Within 
the drives of integrating units themselves backlash has been 
substantially eliminated by the use of lashlocks. 
Elsewhere 
it has been held down to a small amount by careful construc- 
tion, although a certain amount of clearance is imperative 
for the free running of any extensive system of shafts and 
gearing. 
In any specific problem the effect of a given back- 
lash angle in a particular drive can then be reduced by 
specifying scales so that the shafts of that drive will make a 
large total number of revolutions in the course of a problem. 
In many situations this is sufficient. 
Finally, for important 
drives where the effect of backlash might be especially serious, 
there has been developed a unit which can be conveniently 
inserted in any such drive and which reduces the influence 
of backlash at that point to a second-order effect. 
This is, 
in reality, a unit having a negative backlash which can be 
adjusted to compensate for the positive backlash present in 
the drive into which it is inserted. 
It has been aptly termed 
a "frontlash" unit. 
The underlying idea is as follows: The unit, when con- 
nected into a line of shafting ordinarily furnishes simply a 
rigid driving connection from the in-going to the out-going 
shaft. 
When the direction of rotation changes, however, it 
immediately steps the outgoing shaft ahead in the new 
direction of rotation by an adjustable amount. 
This it does 
during part of the first revolution in the new direction. 
Hence for the balance of the revolutions up to the next 
Oct., I93I. ] 
THE 
DIFFERENTIAL 
ANALYZER. 
467 
reversal the net backlash in the total drive is brought to zero. 
This action is repeated at each reversal, so that there is always 
zero backlash in the shaft, except during the brief periods at 
each reversal of direction. 
The effect of backlash itself being 
small, the residual effect due to this transition period is 
negligible. 
The unit is shown in position in Fig. 12, and disassembled 
in Fig. I3. 
A drum is loosely mounted on the in-going shaft, 
FIG. I2. 
A frontlash unit. 
but limited in its rotation with respect thereto by two stops 
which are readily adjustable. 
A light friction band, engaging 
for convenience with an adjacent shaft, rests on the drum 
and holds it stationary with respect to the base, except when 
it is caused to rotate in spite of this friction by coming up 
against one of the stops. 
A planetary gear train is carried 
by a mounting fixed on the in-going shaft. 
One end of this 
train engages with an internal gear fixed on the out-going 
shaft. 
The other end terminates in the drum. 
468 
V. BusH. 
[J. F. I. 
When the drum is up against one of the stops, the whole 
mechanism rotates as a unit, slipping the friction band. 
The drive is then direct and none of the gears are rotating 
with respect to one another, all of course having a common 
rotation about the main axis. 
If the direction of rotation 
of the in-going shaft is now reversed, there is a period before 
the opposite stop is engaged during which the drum is held 
stationary by the friction band. 
During this period the 
out-going shaft is being driven through the planetary train in 
such manner that the out-going shaft revolves about ten per 
FIG. 13 . 
Disassembled view of frontlash unit. 
cent. faster than the in-going shaft. 
This continues until the 
opposite stop engages, when the drive is again one to one. 
Evidently the actual angular separation of the stops will be 
about ten times the angular backlash which it is desired to 
cancel, and hence can readily be set with precision. 
The 
friction torque on the drum need be but little more than ten 
per cent. of the transmitted torque. 
Hence the load imposed 
on the drive is not seriously increased by the presence of the 
frontlash unit. 
The usual manner of adjusting a frontlash unit is as 
follows: It is inserted in a drive, or singly-connected system 
Oct., I93I.] 
THE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
469 
of shafts and gearing, in which it is important that backlash 
should be removed, and usually near the output end of the 
drive. 
The drive is marked at each end so that angles may 
be accurately noted. 
The input end is then turned through 
several revolutions in one direction, brought to an accurate 
mark and the output position noted. 
This is repeated in 
the opposite directino. 
The stops are then adjusted until 
there is no detectable difference in the position of the output 
end when a definite position of the input end is thus ap- 
proached from the two directions of rotation. 
Gear ratios, 
if present in the drive, can readily be taken into account. 
Usually the input end of the drive will be at the roller of an 
integrating unit. 
The frontlash unit is then set to cancel the 
backlash of the torque amplifier as well as that of the balance 
of the drive. 
It is of course not always necessary to cancel 
backlash in this manner. 
Where it occurs in a drive con- 
nected to an input table, for example, it may if necessary be 
compensated for by adjustment of the plot. 
Six frontlash 
units are available, and this appears to be a sufficient number 
for the present. 
A brief study was made of the effect of backlash and its 
cancellation. 
For this purpose the machine was set up to 
solve the simple equation: 
d2z 
- 
z 
dx 2 
and the output table was connected to record dz/dx as a 
function of z, so that the plotted result should be a circle. 
Since the equation has constant coefficients there were no 
manual controls involved, and the test was hence unaffected 
by personal errors. 
The backlash in the important drive 
which interconnected the integrators was now measured; 
and, by what amounted to a perturbation method, its effect 
on the actual solution calculated. 
It was found that with 
this backlash present the machine could be expected to record, 
in place of a circle, a close spiral with an increment per cycle 
of about one per cent. in radius. 
On operating the machine 
this was indeed found to be the case. 
A frontlash unit was 
then inserted and set to cancel this amount of backlash. 
Again operating the machine it was found to draw accurate 
47o 
V. BusH. 
[J. V. I. 
circles, so that if allowed to repeat the record for several 
cycles the line drawn by a fine pencil point was not appreciably 
widened. 
A final test was as follows: The recording pencil 
was sharpened and allowed to draw one record circle about 
ten inches in diameter. 
It was then raised from the paper, 
but the machine was left running. 
At the end of an hour 
the pencil was again dropped on the paper and allowed to 
draw a second circle. 
The two circles were accurately con- 
centric, and differed in radius by about one per cent. 
Even 
this result could undoubtedly be bettered now, with the 
better technique in setting frontlash units which has since 
been developed. 
8. There are four input tables, one of which is shown in 
Fig. 4. 
They are built to carry plots I8 by 24 inches in size, 
which allows for considerable precision in plotting. 
It is 
possible to increase the precision at this point, as is sometimes 
necessary, by plotting a curve in several sections, each 
occupying substantially the whole extent of the table. 
Suc- 
cessive sections are then brought into play by stopping the 
machine during the course of the problem and transferring 
the pointer from one section of the curve to another. 
On each table there is a lead screw which is connected 
with one of the cross shafts and which moves a carriage in the 
direction of abscissas. 
This carriage extends perpendicularly 
across the table in the direction of ordinates, and on it moves 
a slider carrying an adjustable pointer. 
A second lead screw 
located on this carriage moves this slider, and is driven 
through a pair of spiral gears by another cross shaft of the 
device. 
This second drive is also controlled by a crank. 
Thus, if the first cross shaft is connected to the machine so 
as to revolve proportionately to a certain variable, and if the 
crank is turned so that the pointer always registers with a 
curve placed on the table, the second cross shaft may be 
connected to pass out into the machine a function represented 
by this curve and with the variable as argument. 
The output table, Fig. 5, is very similar except that there 
are on the carriage two sliders, each driven by its own cross 
shaft, and each carrying a recording pencil. 
The cross shaft 
which traverses the carriage is ordinarily connected to revolve 
proportionately to the independent variable, but may be 
Oct., I93L ] 
TIlE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
47I 
connected otherwise. 
Any two chosen quantities may be 
simultaneously recorded by properly connecting the cross 
shafts. 
The usual procedure is to record the dependent 
variable and its derivative. 
With simultaneous equations 
two dependent variables may conveniently be recorded. 
Sometimes, for example in problems with periodic coefficients, 
it is expedient to use only one slider and record the dependent 
variable against its derivative. 
For convenience the two pencils are so placed that they 
record in the same vertical line. 
This allows both records 
to have the same abscissas. 
It requires, however, that 
provision be made to allow one pencil to pass the other 
without interference. This is accomplished by mounting one 
pencil on a spring-controlled plunger attached to the slider, 
and providing this plunger with a projection which will 
engage with a similar projection on the opposite slider. 
Thus, when the pencils come close together, the plunger is 
caused to recede, and one pencil describes a small arc about 
the other. 
The presence of this small arc in the record gives 
little difficulty. 
The lead screws of these tables are interrupted near the 
ends so that overtravel can not cause a wreck. 
The con- 
nection between lead screws and carriages or sliders is made 
by a half nut, forced into place by a spring to reduce backlash, 
and supplied with an arrangement so that it can readily be 
thrown out of engagement to allow rapid adjustment to a 
desired position. 
Final close adjustment is made by moving 
the pointers in their mountings or by uncoupling and turning 
cross shafts. 
There are two forms of differential gears or adders, and 
little description of these is necessary. 
The one shown in 
Fig. 14 is arranged so that it can be placed in position engaging 
any three adjacent bus shafts. 
It is of the planetary type. 
Gear ratios are so chosen that the revolutions of one shaft 
are caused to be the sum of the revolutions of the other two 
without the introduction of multiplying factors. 
The binary system has been adhered to in nearly all gear 
ratios, so that the spur gears which may be introduced to 
connect adjacent shafts are supplied in ratios I :I, I :2, 
and ~ :4. 
By successive steps higher ratios can also be 
472 
. V. BusH. 
[J. F. I. 
obtained. 
Steps as close together as this are necessary for 
convenience in scales. 
In order to be consistent with this 
scheme the factor of the integrating units is made to be 
exactly 32, so that we then have 
32u = fvdw, 
where u, v, and w are the revolutions of the three cross shafts 
connected to the unit. 
FIG. 
14 . 
A differentialgear or adder. 
9. An important addition which greatly increases the 
convenience and flexibility of the machine is a combined polar 
input table and multiplier. 
The polar table consists essen- 
tially of a large circular plate which can be placed in position 
on the platen of an input table. 
This plate can be turned 
by means of an additional cross shaft by a worm and gear, 
so that its angular, movement is proportional to the revolutions 
of the cross shaft. 
The connection as a multiplier will be 
treated below. 
There is a handle which is geared to this 
third cross shaft so that it may, when desired, be turned 
manually. 
Oct., I93L ] 
THE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
473 
The polar input table has several uses. 
One use is in 
connection with periodic coefficients appearing in an equation. 
Often, in such cases, the operation of the machine will need 
to be carried on for many cycles of the coefficient; for example, 
when it is desired to find a stable steady-state solution and 
to determine a value of a parameter or a set of initial condi- 
tions which will produce such a result. 
The machine can 
then be left running continuously with the output table set 
to record a periodic result, such as a plot of dependent 
variable against its derivative. 
The parameter is then ad- 
justed until the output is found to exactly repeat cycles, 
whereupon it may be convenient to alter the connection and 
record against the independent variable. 
For a condition such as this the circular plate is driven 
from the machine, the input-table carriage is permanently 
placed accurately in mid-position so that the pointer moves 
in a vertical line through the center of the plate, and the 
vertical motion of the pointer is manually controlled so that 
it is caused to follow a polar plot of the coefficient carried by 
the plate. 
The corresponding cross shaft passes this coeffi- 
cient out into the machine. 
Gear changes in the plate drive 
are provided. 
By the use of these, by the use of plots which 
repeat several times during a plate revolution, and by proper 
choice of scales in the balance of the machine, a coefficient 
of any period may be treated. 
A very similar use appears when it is desired to plot a 
coefficient in much extended manner for purposes of precision. 
It is plotted in polar co6rdinates on the plate and winds 
many times about the center. 
An inverse procedure is to use 
a polar input table as an output table, replacing the pointer 
by a recording pencil, so that a result may be recorded 
directly in polar co6rdinates. 
This again is useful in problems 
with periodic solutions. 
The worm gear drive may be disconnected and the second 
form of drive mentioned above used in its stead. 
The 
circular plate is now replaced by a bar having on its face an 
accurately scribed line passing through the center. 
A dia- 
grammatic view of this arrangement is shown in Fig. 15, 
and a photograph in Fig. I6. 
In this arrangement there is a 
lead screw placed parallel to the axis of abscissas and driven 
474 
9 
I 
I 
i 
t 
' i 
Ib~i 
V. Busi-i. 
FIG. 15. 
~p 
[j. F. I. 
I r.--j ;-7 -[ -' , 
' [ 
i'~, 
i 
I 
i 
L* 
:i 
Diagrammatic 
view 
of multiplier. 
by the cross shaft previously connected to the worm and gear. 
On this lead screw travels a carriage with a swivelled bearing, 
and through this bearing passes a rod firmly attached to an 
extension to the shaft carrying the bar, and located perpen- 
dicular to the axis about which the bar revolves. 
Evidently 
Oct., I93I. ] 
THE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
475 
with this arrangement the revolutions of the third cross shaft 
will be proportional to the tangent of the angle turned 
through by the bar. 
Call the revolutions of the third cross 
shaft from the position in which the rod is perpendicular to 
the lead screw z, and the revolutions of the other cross shafts 
from the positions in which the pointer lies at the center of 
the plate x and y. 
If the manipulation is such that the 
pointer remains always on the diametrical straight line, we 
have then 
y =Xg 
FIG. I6. 
A multiplier. 
with proper proportionality factors not now considered. 
There is thus available a multiplier. 
If x and z are driven 
from the machine, and y is controlled manually, a product of 
two variables is obtained and passed out to the machine. 
Either x or z can go through zero and take on negative values. 
If we control x and y by drive from the machine, and control 
z manually, a quotient can be obtained. 
Of course in this 
case x can not go through zero unless y does simultaneously. 
The choice of scales, and scale changes during a solution 
when necessary, will maintain the pointer normally at a 
considerable distance from the center of the plate. 
This 
VOL. 212, NO. ~27o--33 
476 
V. BUSH. 
[J. F. I. 
matter of scales always needs to be considered in connection 
with the question of precision in the use of an input table or 
multiplier. 
The maximum angle with the axis of abscissas 
through which the bar can turn when the multiplier arrange- 
ment is in use is a little over 45 degrees. 
When this is 
inconvenient the bar may be unclamped from the rest of the 
mechanism, rotated through 90 degrees and then clamped 
again so that the straight line occupies a position perpen- 
dicular to the lead screw when z = o. 
We have then an 
interchange of variables, so that 
X = yZ. 
It is always possible to evaluate the integral of the product 
of two functions by a proper interconnection of two integrating 
units. 
The arrangement for accomplishing this is indicated 
diagrammatically in Fig. 17. 
In this diagram it is assumed 
FIG. 17. 
) 
Connections for obtaining the integral of a product, 
x 
~
L
(
x
)
 
,, 
f f,(x)dx 
, 
f.~(x) 
('f,(x)f~(x)dx 
that fl(x) and f~(x) have been introduced into the machine 
by means of input tables, and integration against x is indi- 
cated. 
The essential point is the connection whereby the 
output of one integrator drives the disc of the other integrator. 
Of course any functions appearing in the machine, represented 
by the revolutions of bus shafts, may be thus multiplied and 
integrated, instead of these functions of the independent 
variable used here for illustration. 
Integration may also be 
accomplished with any desired variable as the variable of 
Oct., I93x.1 
THE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
477 
integration. 
This scheme for obtaining the integral of a 
product is very convenient, and can readily be extended to 
the case where there are more than two factors. 
Of course, 
when employed, it cuts down the number of integrators 
available for other purposes. 
In some cases it is desirable to 
multiply functions without immediately integrating 
the 
product, as for example when we meet an expression such as 
fU,(x)f2(x) ~- f3(x)-]dx. 
In such cases the multiplier is necessary, for there is no 
accurate automatic differentiator available to undo an inte- 
gration when once it has been performed. 
The multiplier, 
moreover, serves a more vital need than this, as will appear 
in an illustrative example below. 
The drive motor is driven by a push-button-controlled 
Ward-Leonard system. 
Automatic stops prevent overtravel 
of integrators and multipliers. 
IO. The detailed procedure to be followed in placing a 
problem on the machine belongs in an operating manual 
rather than in the present paper, but a general discussion of 
scales and limits is in order, for it is rather essential to a 
complete understanding of the uses to which the device may 
be put. 
There is an art and a technique in its application, 
just as in the formal treatment of equations, and the technique 
must be mastered by any one who would become proficient 
in the art. 
The first step is always the preparation of a connection 
diagram similar to that of Fig. 7 or 8, and some to follow, 
which shows the essential interrelations only and disregards 
all scales, limits, and backlash. 
This is more than a diagram 
--it is a process of reasoning, and as such it is recommended 
to those who seek to impart to youth the meaning, as con- 
trasted with the formalism, of the differential equation. 
An 
example to illustrate how alternatives arise will be given 
below. 
From this is prepared a second diagram, exactly similar 
except that undetermined constant factors and gear ratios 
are introduced. 
Thus the independent-variable shaft may 
be labelled Ax, the shaft for the first derivative B(dy/dx), 
and so on. 
When these two shafts are plugged to an inte- 
478 
V. BusH. 
[j. F. I. 
grator, the factor of the integrator is immediately introduced, 
and the shaft to which the integrator output is connected is 
labelled (AB/32)y. 
Sufficient gear changes are introduced to 
provide complete flexibility, with the expectation that many of 
them will later come out I 
" I and be eliminated. 
Thus we 
would now gear a new bus shaft to the shaft above and label it 
nl(AB/32)y, where nl is some power of 2, thus available by the 
usual gear changes, and to be determined. 
On connecting to 
input or output tables we introduce the factors given by the 
lead screws and label scales accordingly. 
When a final connec- 
tion which expresses the equality is made, there will be intro- 
duced a relationship between shafts already labelled, and we 
shall obtain an equality between undetermined factors which 
must be satisfied. 
There can also be then written down a set 
of inequalities expressing limits. 
These involve the maximum 
values of variables, which must needs be estimated, and are 
introduced in order that nothing can go out of range when 
carrying out the problem. 
For example, the maximum 
number of turns which can be given to the cross shaft which 
displaces an integrator carriage is 40. 
We should hence have, 
following out the above example, 
B(~-~Yx) max --< 4° 
as one of the inequalities. 
We are now at liberty to assign 
all our factors arbitrarily, provided we keep within these 
inequalities. 
We can usually do so in such a way as to make 
most of the scales of plots come out to be exact. 
The assign- 
ment of A above determines the length of time for a solution, 
for the maximum speed at which the independent-variable 
shaft can be driven is known. 
Usually A will be picked to 
be as small as possible, to cut down the solution time, noting, 
however, that there should be a substantial number of 
revolutions of every bus shaft of the machine in order to 
preserve precision. 
Suppose the output table is connected 
to this independent-variable shaft through a gear reduction 
of I : 4, so that the label on the axis of abscissas is Ax/4.2o, 
where the 20 appears from the lead-screw factor. 
This 
means that one inch of abscissa corresponds to Ax/8o, just 
as one revolution of the bus shaft corresponds to Ax. 
If 
Oct., I93I. ] 
THE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
479 
now we choose A to be 48o, the scale of abscissas will be 
such that 6 inches represents unit value of x. 
The entire 24- 
inch range will then allow x to range from zero to four during 
the course of the problem. 
Moreover, since 480 revolutions 
per minute is approximately the maximum speed of drive, 
a single run through the problem will take about four minutes. 
The various factors are thus chosen, satisfying the equation 
between them, and keeping in mind the inequalities. 
Of 
course in this process, on a new problem, we do not know at 
the outset the maximum range of the variables involved, 
sometimes not even approximately. 
It is best then to choose 
factors conservatively so that there is a good probability that 
the inequalities will be satisfied with plenty to spare, run a 
first rough solution with the poor precision thus imposed in 
order merely to determine approximate excursions, and then 
on the basis of these reassign new factors which will allow 
good open scales for plots, provide for large numbers of 
revolutions of bus shafts, utilize integrators and multipliers 
over a large part of their range, and generally produce 
precision. 
When the factors have been thus chosen a final diagram 
is prepared showing the actual location of units in the machine. 
On this are indicated the positions of frontlash units in every 
critical drive where the presence of backlash might be serious. 
The direction of rotation of each shaft is indicated, and made 
correct where necessary by the use of left-hand gear boxes. 
Plots of coefficients to the proper scales are prepared, and the 
problem is ready for the machine. 
The procedure probably sounds complicated. 
With prac- 
tice it can be carried out on problems of moderate complexity 
in an hour or two, exclusive of the time necessary for plotting. 
With the final diagram available a few hours more will 
suffice to connect up the machine, whereupon it is usually 
employed to obtain a considerable family of solutions before 
again altering the connections. 
I I. In this section, and the following, there will be 
discussed several interesting points which arise in the process 
of machine solution. 
Problems will not be treated from the 
standpoint of the interest in the solutions themselves, for 
this hardly comes within the scope of the present paper; 
480 
V. BvsI~. 
[J. F. I. 
but rather it will be the object to illustrate the flexibility of 
arrangement which is available, and special schemes of 
avoiding difficulties and securing simplicity and precision. 
In order to illustrate most readily the Legendre equation, 
d2y 
(x ~- I)~X~x =+2x 
-- Xy = o 
will be treated, for it brings out excellently several points of 
interest. 
We know, of course, that there are solutions of this 
equation which are finite in the interval -I-< 
x-< + I 
provided k has a value 
k = n(n + I) 
where n is zero or a positive integer. 
Let us discuss the 
manner of handling the equation, however, as though nothing 
were known concerning it, and we were interested in dis- 
covering critical values of X for which solutions would remain 
finite over this range, and the corresponding solutions. 
The straightforward way of treating the equation proves 
to be cumbersome, but this method will be treated first for 
purposes of later comparison. 
This involves solving for the 
highest-order derivative and writing 
dZy 
2x 
dy 
), 
dx 2 - x 2- I dx 
x 2- I y 
or, what is the same thing, 
dy = j" ( dy ) 
2x 
f 
o~Y 
dx, 
dx 
~ 
~ 
dx 
- 
x o - 
I 
and using this as a guide in placing the equation on the 
machine. 
This results in the diagram of Fig. 18. 
In pre- 
paring this layout no multiplying units were utilized, in order 
further to illustrate the use of integrators for multiplying 
purposes. 
Scale factors are omitted for simplicity, and no 
attention is paid to signs, limits of travel, or directions of 
rotation. 
The arrangement is thought to be clear without 
discussion except for one matter. 
The value of X is placed 
on an input table, using a scale on this table simply as an 
index, and multiplication by ), is then obtained by use of an 
Oct., i931.] 
THE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
48I 
integrator, the carriage of which thus remains fixed at a 
certain displacement throughout a single solution. 
This 
allows X to be readily adjustable without altering plotted 
curves. 
Now this arrangement allows us to obtain solutions of the 
equation for any value of ), and for any given set of initial 
conditions, provided only that we do not need to examine 
matters exactly at x = ~ I. 
We can approach as closely as 
we please by changing gear ratios and plots every time we 
FIG, I8. 
j 
A 
-- 
2X/X 2- I 
I / x  2 - -  I 
-- 
f k dx/x 2- r 
f kydx/x 2- i 
f 2x dx/x ~- I 
-- 
dy/dx 
k 
Connect, ions for Legendre equation in form: 
d~y 
2x 
dy 
k 
dx 2 
I -- x 2 dx 
I ~ x 2 y" 
get close enough so that the curves we are using go off scale, 
but this is likely to be laborious. 
It will be well to digress a moment to consider initial 
conditions. 
Consider that we are examining solutions in the 
region from zero to nearly unity, and are starting at x = o. 
At this point 
d2y 
dx---~-t- ky = o, 
so that we see there is one set of odd, and one set of even 
solutions. 
Let us, to be explicit, consider the second set. 
These start with zero first derivative, and the solution 
obtained will be proportional throughout to the initial value 
482 
V. BUSH. 
[J. F. I. 
of y chosen, so that we may consider y to start at any con- 
venient value. 
The initial displacement of integrators I, IV, 
and V will be zero, that of III and VI will be ~, and that of 
II will be the initial assigned value of y. 
We can now start the x shaft, and run the solution close 
to x = I. 
In the immediate neighborhood of this point we 
have the approximate relation 
dy 
X 
dx 
2x y" 
Having carried a solution close to x = I, and recorded dy/dx 
and y, we now stop and compare the ratio of our final recorded 
values with X/2x. 
If the ratio checks we know that the 
solution, if continued, would remain finite up to x = I. 
Otherwise-it would not. 
If, upon running curves for various 
values of X we find two such values which differ by a small 
amount, one of which makes the final ratio too large, and 
the other too small, then evidently the critical value of X 
which is sought lies between them. 
This scheme, of working by the use of approximate 
solutions valid in the immediate vicinity of points of dis- 
continuity of coefficients, is of general applicability in handling 
equations having such discontinuities, and is useful when 
critical values of parameters are sought. 
An alternative 
procedure is, however, possible and will now be discussed. 
Let the equation be written in the form 
(I -- X 2) dxx 
+ 
~ky = 0 
or 
dy 
(x 2 -- I) -~x = f ~,ydx. 
With this as a guide we have an arrangement of connections 
such as is shown in Fig. 19. 
A multiplier is now used, and a 
very considerable simplification has been produced. 
More- 
over we have largely removed the difficulty with coefficients, 
for a zero point is involved rather than a pole. 
If we start a solution at x = o, and examine as before the 
set of even solutions, the initial displacement of integrator I 
will be zero, that of integrator II will be X, and that of 
TIIE 
DIFFERENTIAL 
ANALYZER. 
483 
I 
integrator III will be the assigned initial value of Xy. 
As x 
approaches unity there is now no difficulty provided we have 
started with a value of X for which the solution remains finite. 
As x -- I is approached the pointer on the multiplier will 
approach the center of the plate, and will finally move in 
toward the center in a uniform manner so that the operator 
will have no difficulty in maintaining the line on the plate in 
register with the pointer even up to the end of the travel. 
On the other hand if X is too large or too small the angle will 
Oct., ~93I.] 
FIG. 19 . 
1T 
Connections for Legendre equation in form: 
dy ~ fkydx. 
(x~ -- ~) ~x 
change rapidly as the final point is approached. 
Thus there 
is no difficulty in identifying critical values of X within close 
limits. 
In Fig. 2o is reproduced a set of solutions obtained 
in this manner for values of X in the vicinity of 6, and in 
Fig. 21 for values near 20. 
The solutions for the critical 
value of the parameter are given, and then solutions in which 
the parameter was altered by 2 per cent. 
The reproduced 
curves cannot give, of course, the detail of the original. 
In the figure no attempt has been made to reproduce the 
484 
V. BusH. 
[J. F. I. 
separate curves except near to x = I, and even in that region 
the correct details cannot be made apparent at small scale. 
It was evident, however, from the behavior of the curves for 
dy/dx that a departure of X from its critical value to this 
extent shows up unmistakably, and that critical values can 
be obtained directly in important cases within rather close 
FIG. 
20. 
d 
! 
o x 
Solutions of Legendre's equation for X near 6. 
limits. 
This set of solutions was carried out primarily to test 
the multiplier, 
and the procedure for avoiding poles of 
coefficients, and showed that no difficulty is to be expected in 
approaching a point at which a coefficient goes through zero. 
On the other hand we may, if we wish, actually start our 
solution at the end point. 
To do this we start at x = I, 
and run the independent-variable shaft backward. 
Inte- 
Oct., i931.1 
TIIE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
485 
grator II starts with a displacement of k, integrator III with 
a value Xy corresponding to an arbitrarily chosen initial value 
of y, and integrator I with a displacement corresponding to 
an initial value of dy/dx equal to ky/2 in which y has this 
same value. 
The pointer of the multiplier starts at the center 
of the plate, and the manually-controlled shaft of the multi- 
plier is initially set so as to produce an initial angle for the 
FIG, 2 I. 
io- 
9- 
,~o 
A=zo.4 
:20 
Solutions of Legendre'~ equation for ~ near 20. 
line on the plate corresponding to this same initial Xy/2. 
Before starting, in other words, the handle on the multiplier 
is turned to the position in which the initial displacement of 
integrator I is brought to the correct computed initial value. 
Now the instant the machine starts the pointer of the multi- 
plier will move out from the center along the line on the 
plate, and as soon as it departs from this line visibly correction 
486 
V. BUSH. 
IJ. F. I. 
is made by the operator, who manually controls the slope of 
the line in such a way as to maintain it registered with the 
pointer. 
There is nothing any more critical in adjustment 
involved here than at any other part of the solution. 
In this 
case, when x reaches zero, we note the recorded value of dy/dx. 
If it is zero we have so chosen X as to produce a solution 
which is finite from x = - 
I to x = q- I. 
If X deviates 
from such a value in one direction the recorded value of dy/dx 
will be positive, and if in the other direction it will be negative. 
In searching for a critical value of X we may use interpolation 
as a guide. 
Of course the above is written as though we 
were handling an equation the critical values of the parameter 
of which were not known, although in this example they are 
of course well known. 
Thus when coefficients appearing in an equation have 
singularities in the range under investigation it is often best 
to multiply the equation through in such a way as to produce 
zeros rather than singularities, whereupon the use of multi- 
pliers will ordinarily allow the equation to be treated with 
little difficulty. 
12. As a final topic there will be treated a method of 
successive approximations 
which 
is applicable when 
an 
accuracy is necessary which is beyond the direct precision of 
the machine. 
It is expected that this will be especially 
expedient when using the machine to tabulate functions 
which 
can 
be defined 
by means 
of linear 
differential 
equations. 
The efficacy of the procedure depends upon the 
fact that complication of the formal expressions which appear 
as coefficients in an equation does not then render the machine 
solution appreciably more laborious or less precise. 
The tactics employed are as follows: A first set of solutions 
is made as accurately as the precision of the machine will 
allow. 
Each of these graphical solutions is closely fitted by 
use of a formal expression which can be easily computed, 
and with a sufficient number of readily computed derivatives. 
Then a new equation is set up and solved to give the difference 
between the functions sought and the formal expressions 
which were adopted. 
Finally a numerical combination is 
made of the exact values obtainable from the formal expres- 
sions and the graphically-determined differences from the 
Oct., 1931.1 
"I'ItE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER. 
487 
second machine solution. 
The percentage accuracy in evalu- 
ating the differences in the second solution will be limited 
by machine precision in the usual way, but a small error in 
these small differences will make only a second-order error in 
the final result. 
Thus suppose we have made a first solution which is 
accurate within a few tenths of a per cent., and that we have 
fitted formally so that the maximum departure between these 
solutions and the formal expressions is about one per cent. 
The values attained by the dependent variable in the second 
solution will be only about one per cent. of those appearing 
in the first solution; but by proper choice of scales approxi- 
mately the full range of plots and units will be utilized in 
this second equation as well as in the first. 
We can then 
expect to evaluate the differences from the second solution to 
within a few tenths of a per cent. 
While the situation will 
be altered in accordance with the nature of the problem it 
may be then expected that about four-figure accuracy can be 
obtained from the double solution. 
Of course the process 
may be continued another step if necessary. 
The second equation is not ordinarily difficult to put on 
the machine. 
As an illustration suppose we wished to obtain 
a very accurate solution of the Legendre equation for a non- 
integral value of X over some range within which the solution 
remains finite. 
A first solution would be made as described 
in the preceding section. 
Suppose this were approximated by 
a formal and readily computed function F(x), say a poly- 
nomial. 
We then write 
Yl 
---- y -- F(x) 
and substitute in the equation. 
The resulting equation to 
be solved for differences is 
(X 2 -- I) d2yl + 2x ax 
- 
Xyl = 
¢(x), 
in which 
¢(X) = 
~,F(x) 
-- 2xF'(x) 
-- (x 2 -- I)F"(x). 
This is but little more difficult to place on the machine than 
the original equation. 
All that is necessary is the addition 
of an input table for introducing ¢(x) at the proper point. 
488 
V. BUSH. 
[J. F. I. 
It is not necessary that F(x) be a single formal expression; 
the first solution may be split up into sections and each 
represented by a simple formal expression. 
It is necessary, 
however, that in each section F(x)have continuous derivatives 
up to the derivative of an order one less than .the order of the 
equation treated. 
Otherwise the procedure is not significantly 
altered from that described above. 
This method of successive 
approximations is of course somewhat long, and it will 
presumably be employed only where the extra precision is 
vital, but nevertheless it is a very potent method. 
13. The machine is not yet completed; in fact it is ques- 
tionable whether it will ever be complete, for it can always 
be extended by the addition of units to cover greater order 
or complexity of equations. 
It is capable at the present time, 
however, of handling a wide range of problems of extreme 
interest. 
It has been thoroughly tested for precision. 
Its speed has 
been investigated in connection with a problem in which 
about IOO solutions of a moderately complex second-order 
equation were evaluated in five days' work. 
The procedure 
in locating critical values of a parameter has been somewhat 
explored. 
No great experience has as yet been had in work 
involving successive approximations. 
This machine forms part of a departmental program of 
development. 
It is a pleasure to recall the effective and 
enthusiastic support of many of the staff. 
Prof. H. L. 
Hazen, who has been associated with me practically through- 
out the entire development, has consistently contributed in 
this latest work. 
Professor M. F. Gardner, and later Mr. 
S. H. Caldwell have been in direct charge of the laboratory 
where the work has been in progress, and have greatly 
helped. 
I also appreciate the able work of Mr. L. E. Frost, 
designing draftsman, and Mr. Maurice Forbes, expert ma- 
chinist. 
