Interaction at Lincoln Laboratory in the 1960’s: 
Looking Forward – Looking Back 
 
Organizer/Moderator: William Buxton, Microsoft Research, Cambridge. bill@billbuxton.com 
 
Panelists: 
Ron Baecker, Dept. of Computer Science, University of Toronto 
Wesley Clark, Clark, Rockoff and Associates, Brooklyn, NY 
Fontaine Richardson, Private Investor, Carlisle, MA 
Ivan Sutherland, Sun Fellow & VP Sun Microsystems 
W.R. “Bert” Sutherland, Past Director Sun Microsystems Laboratories 
 
 
Discussant: Austin Henderson, Director, Research Strategy, Advanced Concepts & Technology 
Group, Pitney Bowes 
 
ABSTRACT 
The activity centered around the TX-2 computer at Lincoln 
Laboratory in the 1960’s laid the foundation for much of 
HCI. Through the use of archival film footage, and live 
presentations by some of the key protagonists, this panel is 
intended to contribute to a more general awareness of this 
work, its historical importance to HCI, and its relevance to 
research today. 
 
Keywords 
Human-Computer Interaction, Interaction History; Lincoln 
Laboratory, TX-2, Computer Graphics History. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
One of the most important and influential birthplaces of HCI 
was the work on interaction and graphics centered around 
the TX-2 computer at MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory in the 
1960’s [25]. For example, it is hard to imagine the 
innovation that happened at Xerox PARC in the ‘70s having 
been possible without the foundation that Lincoln Labs 
provided. At a personal level, as a graduate student of Ron 
Baecker in the 1970’s, I was the direct beneficiary of this 
legacy. It is no exaggeration to state that the work at Lincoln 
Labs was fundamental in shaping my own career. 
Nevertheless, much, if not most, of the work there has 
slipped from our collective consciousness, with Ivan 
Sutherland’s “Sketchpad” [22][23] system being the notable 
exception 
The reputation that Sketchpad has garnered in the HCI and 
Computer Graphics community is well deserved; however, it 
was one among many projects – almost all of which are 
worthy of our attention, even (and perhaps especially) today.  
 
Figure 1: The TX-2 Computer at Lincoln Laboratory, 
designed by Wesley Clark 
But it is not just the projects or the individuals that made 
Lincoln Labs special. It may be that its most important 
innovation was the culture that it developed – a culture that 
not only permitted these projects to happen, but provided a 
strong catalyst to their doing so. 
Lincoln Labs was formed in 1951. It was funded by the US 
Department of Defense, and administered by MIT. While 
much of the research undertaken at the lab had to do with air 
defense, there was also a place for exploring new and 
emerging technologies of interest.  
The technological foundation for the work in the 60’s was 
the 
Whirlwind 
computer, 
developed 
at 
MIT, 
and 
commissioned in 1951. Whirlwind set the direction of the 
lab in that, unlike most computing at the time, it was 
interactive, rather than batch, and it was the first digital 
computer that could display real-time text and graphics.  
 
 
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
CHI 2005, April 2–7, 2005, Portland, Oregon, USA. 
ACM 1-59593-002-7/05/0004. 
CHI 2005  |  Panels
April 2-7  |  Portland, Oregon, USA
1162
Wes Clark, the architect of the TX-0 and TX-2 that followed 
Whirlwind as the research platforms in the lab, was 
passionate about computation being rich, intimate and 
interactive. His designs were driven by this sentiment, which 
he expresses quite clearly in the following: 
… both of the Cambridge machines, Whirlwind and MTC, 
had been completely committed to the air defence effort 
and were no longer available for general use. The only 
surviving computing system paradigm seen by M.I.T. 
students and faculty was that of a very large International 
Business Machine in a tightly sealed Computation Center: 
the computer not as tool, but as demigod. Although we 
were not happy about giving up the TX-O, it was clear 
that making this small part of Lincoln’s advanced 
technology available to a larger M.I.T. community would 
be an important corrective step [6]. 
That one brief passage captures, as well as anything that I 
have read, the concern with, and dedication to, the 
environment in which students and researchers worked. 
Having built the TX-0 as an interim learning step, Clark, 
along with 8 other colleagues, did the engineering that 
resulted in the TX-2 in one year! [5][10][11][17]. (It was 
commissioned in June 1958.) Their being able to do so is 
another indication of the nature of the teamwork that 
pervaded the lab. It is also a measure of their ability to 
capitalize on what they had learned from earlier work 
undertaken there. Things like the TX-2 or Sketchpad do not 
come out of a vacuum. 
As is wonderfully illustrated by [14] and [15], many of the 
foundations for graphical interaction had been established 
through experience with Whirlwind and the TX-0, and Clark 
was very clear about exploiting everything that he could 
learn from it. The hardware that resulted not only provided 
the platform for the research discussed in this panel, it was 
also the basis for the first computers from Digital Equipment 
Corporation. 
Lincoln built the TX-0 computer to test the use of 
transistor circuitry and a large core memory and then the 
TX-2 for large-scale computing experiments. Both had a 
point-plotting display with I0” x I0” area and IK point 
resolution, light pen, camera, switch input, and abilities to 
interconnect arbitrary i/o devices. Hardware innovations 
of the TX-2 Include: addressable magnetic tape for a 
filing system; The Lincoln Writer, a typewriter for 
engineering/scientific use; and the TX-2 multiple sequence 
operation for rapid context switching. While the TX-2 was 
initially a personal computer, it operated under control of 
a timesharing operating system by the mid 60’s. The TX 
computer circuitry was virtually identical to the logic and 
laboratory modules that DEC sold in its first four years, 
prior to the introduction of the PDP-1 in 1961 
[3].xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx        
 
As Ivan Sutherland said in a 1989 interview, “…it would 
have been difficult to do the kind of things that I did with 
graphics at that time without the very strong facilities that 
were available at Lincoln Laboratory” [12]. Likewise, Ron 
Baecker has described to me how “the LEAP high-level 
ALGOL-like 
associative 
processing 
and 
graphics 
programming language of Feldman and Rovner [9], … made 
work like Genesys … incomparably easier.” In short, the lab 
had been carefully crafted to provide the intellectual, cultural 
and technological heritage and culture within which great 
ideas could be cultivated and thrive, internally and 
externally.  
 
Figure 2: Ivan Sutherland using a lightpen to interact with 
CAD drawings using Sketchpad 
A prime purpose of this panel is to bring together some of 
the key pioneers from the 60’s to show their work and tell 
their stories, both personally, and through the archive of 
16mm films that we have that document their work in 
action. 
Obviously, in the context of this panel, we can’t bring 
together all of the contributors from that time. Missing, for 
example, are people like Larry Roberts. 
Around 1966 he and Tom Marill, of System Development 
Corporation (SDC) in Santa Monica, linked together 
Lincoln’s TX-2 computer with SDC’s Q-32/PDP- 1. This 
demonstrated that (an albeit low bandwidth) packet-
switching network could work across the country, linking 
two different computers running two different operating 
systems, thereby making a key step in the evolution of what 
became the Internet [16]. As well, in 1972 he wrote the first 
email management program, “RD”. What is less well known 
is that he is a major contributor to the birth of 3D graphics as 
we know it. He introduced the use of homogenous 
coordinate systems to represent 3D transformations, which is 
still the mathematical foundation of the graphics in today’s 
video games, visual effects, visualization and animation 
[19]. He evolved the first effective hidden line removal 
algorithm [18], and he did some of the first work in 
computer reconstruction of 3D geometry from photographs 
[18]. In addition, he was the inventor of perhaps the first 
interactive device for 3D input, the Lincoln Wand [20]. 
CHI 2005  |  Panels
April 2-7  |  Portland, Oregon, USA
1163
The point here is not to single out Larry, who is one of 
many, or even the members of the panel. Rather, it is to 
highlight the depth and richness of the team and the 
environment as a whole. 
 
Figure 3: Part of an animation of a bouncing ball taken 
from Ron Baecker’s Genesys program. In this example, 
the balls are drawn freehand using a tablet, and each 
ball represents a different “frame” in the animation. 
This overlaying of frames is called “ghosting” today. 
Furthermore, my purpose goes beyond just helping create a 
better understanding of the origins of our discipline. My 
personal view is that much of this work is not just unknown, 
its potential is still largely underdeveloped. I firmly believe 
that some of this work is as relevant today, and perhaps 
more, than it was when it was first done.  
Finally, and perhaps most important, I believe that there are 
aspects of the research environment at the lab that are worth 
taking note of in terms of how we design our own group 
cultures. Ivan Sutherland has said: 
It seems to me the secret to success in research activities 
is to pick something easy enough to do. It’s very nice if 
you can find something that you think is easy and 
everybody else thinks is hard. That’s wonderful.[12] 
The other side of this coin is what is “easy enough to do” 
depends a lot on the environment where you work. What 
tools are available? Do you have the financial support? Who 
else is there that can “fill in the gaps”? Are they open to 
doing so? Sketchpad was only “easy enough to do” because 
of the prior work of Wes Clark and John Gilmore [13][15], 
among others, and furthermore, the fact that that work took 
place at that particular place where Sutherland was, Lincoln 
Labs. Likewise, that that work had taken place there was 
part of the reason that the Sutherland brothers were attracted 
to Lincoln Labs in the first place. Research environments 
function as magnets to talent as well as catalysts to ideas. 
This lab was doing something right, and did so over a 
sustained period of time. The work in the 50’s paved the 
way for that in the 60’s. There is something to learn from 
this culture. From my reading of the literature, and 
conversations with some of the protagonists, much of the 
productivity of Lincoln labs stemmed from a combination of 
cultural factors, including: 
• 
Freedom and encouragement to pursue ideas 
• 
An ethic of supporting the full “food chain” of an idea: 
concept to refinement to building to using, and then 
iterating. 
• 
Absence of constraints from a narrow predetermined 
agenda 
• 
No constraints regarding the creation of short-term pay-
offs. Sketchpad, for example, did not emerge, for 
example, until 12 years after the lab was founded. 
• 
The building “of”, as well as “on”, a tradition of work 
over a sustained period. 
• 
Attention to creating a physical, technical, social, 
cultural, and intellectual 
environment to foster 
innovation as well as attract the best talent. 
• 
A strong concern and ethic around mentoring people 
and helping maximize the development of their 
potential. 
• 
Making a priority of providing (by buying or building) 
the right tools for the job. 
Perhaps the greatest potential take-away from this panel are 
the insights that the panelists can provide about these types 
of things. Their collective work certainly lends credibility to 
anything that they say around this topic. 
In summary, my personal hope is that this panel will bring a 
renewed interest in the important but unsung contributions 
of the work, people, and culture of Lincoln Labs. As well, I 
hope that it will give us some cause to recalibrate how and 
where we set the bar for our own research. We have a lot to 
learn from what went on around the TX-2. I hope that this 
panel makes some meaningful contribution to our doing so. 
 
PARTICIPANTS: 
Ron Baecker built one of the world’s first interactive 
systems for real-time animation, Genesys [1]. The system 
had features that are still not available on the most 
“advanced” animation systems, despite being implemented 
in 1969 on a computer (the TX-2), which had less memory 
and processing power than a modern cell phone or iPod. 
More to the point, features of Genesys, such as “p-curves,” 
are of great relevance in the support of things like “chalk-
talk” dialogues. This is something that will be of increasing 
importance with the emergence of large format wall-
mounted displays. Yet, this aspect of Baecker’s work has 
essentially been ignored since he first demonstrated its 
power.  
But it was in technique and not technology alone, that 
Baecker helped pave the way for modern HCI. One of his 
other innovations was to involve trained animators in the 
CHI 2005  |  Panels
April 2-7  |  Portland, Oregon, USA
1164
development and testing process – well before the term “user 
centered design” and “participatory design” had ever been 
coined. 
 
Figure 4: In Genesys you didn’t have to do frame-by-
frame, or “stop” animation. You could draw the ball, 
and then draw the path. The path is what is shown in this 
image. Most important, the tablet captured the dynamics 
with which you drew the path, and that defined therefore 
determined the path and dynamics of the ball along that 
path. 
Wesley Clark is one of the fathers of the personal computer. 
As has already been described, he was the architect of both 
the TX-0 and TX-2 at Lincoln labs. He believed that “a 
computer should be just another piece of lab equipment.” At 
a time when most computers were huge remote machined 
operated in batch mode, he advocated far more interactive 
access. He practiced what he preached, even though it often 
meant bucking current “wisdom” and authority (in a 1981 
lecture, he mentioned that he had the distinction of being, 
“the only person to have been fired three times from MIT for 
insubordination.”)  
In 1958 the TX-0 was moved to MIT because, according to 
Clark, “… what MIT needed at that time was a computer 
that you could get your hands on. That was one thing that 
they did not have.” That same year he helped establish 
biomedical computing through his collaboration on the 
Average Response Computer (ARC-1), which was used in 
experiments to average evoked responses of the brain to 
sensory stimuli. His next foray into biomedical computation 
took place in 1961 when, along with Charles Molnar, he 
developed 
the 
Laboratory 
Instrument 
Computer 
(LINC)[6][7]. What was interesting about this machine was 
that it was designed to be on a scale where a lab could have 
control and ownership, without the presence of the machine, 
by its size, expense, or complexity overwhelming the lab 
that it was intended to serve. What is especially telling in 
this regard are some of the design criteria for the machine, 
such as: 
1. 
easy to program 
2. 
easy to communicate with while in operation 
3. 
easy to maintain 
4. 
able to process biotechnical signals directly. 
5. 
need be able to see over it 
6. 
maximum cost of $25,000, the amount a lab director 
could spend without higher-level approval 
Perhaps the best measure of their success was that the last 
LINC that was in regular use did not get retired until 1992. 
That was after 28 years of service in the Eaton-Peabody 
Laboratory 
of 
Auditory 
Physiology 
(EPL) 
of 
the 
Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary.  
To conclude, look again at the LINC criteria. Notice that 
each reflects a human-centric concern. Even today, how 
many systems can make that claim? Of course, the real 
question is, “Why not?”  
Austin Henderson was for many years a senior researcher at 
Xerox PARC. He brings two things to this panel. First, as a 
researcher at Lincoln Labs, he did important work in 
interaction in his work on the implementation of the 
AMBIT/G graphical programming language [21]. Second, 
he brings to the panel a personal account of what it was like 
to work in this environment as a young MIT graduate 
student. For him the TX-2 and Lincoln Lab experience 
(1968-1975) was formative. It set the bar “way high” for fast 
prototyping of interactive applications. It was extremely 
important in influencing his approach to his later work in 
user interface management systems, like Trillium, as well as 
his work in participatory design. When one reads the 
literature, one repeatedly comes across the impact that 
people like Bert Sutherland had on them, in terms of 
nurturing their talent, making them feel like they belonged, 
and in terms of making sure that they had the support that 
they needed. Austin can speak to this from personal 
experience. 
Fontaine Richardson led the development of an integrated 
circuit layout system while at the labs. The success of this 
work prompted him to leave the labs in 1969 and co-found a 
company called Applicon, which was one of the first CAD 
companies. Perhaps of most significance to the SIGCHI 
community was that the user interface of Richardson’s 
system made significant use of mark, or gesture recognition, 
based on technology initially developed by Jim Curry at 
Lincoln Labs [8]. This use of gestures was carried across to 
the Applicon products, which meant that they were among 
the first commercial products to make use of marking-style 
interaction. Today’s growth in pen-based computing, with 
the emergence of Tablet-PC’s and electronic whiteboards, 
just emphasize the importance and relevance of this work to 
today’s computational environment. 
CHI 2005  |  Panels
April 2-7  |  Portland, Oregon, USA
1165
 
Figure 5: A simple program defined using Bert 
Sutherland’s graphical programming system. Each node 
represents a functional module, and the graphical 
“wires” show the flow of date from module to module. 
Programs were “written” using interactive graphics 
techniques similar to those used to make CAD drawings 
in Sketchpad. What was most innovative is that these 
drawings could execute! 
Ivan Sutherland is the recipient of the 1988 ACM A.M. 
Turing Award. In many ways Sutherland gave birth to the 
graphical user interface and what has become known as 
“direct manipulation” through his Sketchpad system [22]. 
This system was so influential that even today, one of the 
standard responses to a new graduate student looking for a 
thesis topic, is, “Go read the Sketchpad thesis [23] and pick 
up on one of the concepts.” Sketchpad’s contributions were 
summarized in [2] as including the following ideas and 
concepts: 
• Hierarchic internal structure of computer-represented 
pictures, defined in terms of sub-pictures 
• A master picture with instances that are transformed 
versions of the master; this concept helped lay the 
foundation for modern object-oriented programming 
• Constraints as a method of specifying details of the 
geometry of a picture; for example, a horizontal constraint 
applied to a line, or an equal distance constraint applied to 
pairs of points 
• The 
ability 
to 
display 
and 
manipulate 
iconic 
representations of constraints 
• The ability to copy and instance both pictures and 
constraints 
• Elegant techniques for picture construction using a light 
pen as an input device 
• Separation of the coordinate system in which a picture is 
defined from that in which it is displayed 
• Recursive operations such as “move” and “delete” applied 
to hierarchically defined pictures. 
Some of these concepts we now just take for granted, and 
they are part of our everyday computational environment. 
Others, such as the use of constraints, are still more the 
exception than the rule. But taken as a whole, Sketchpad 
demonstrates how a holistic approach to research, oriented 
around a specific application domain, undertaken in the 
appropriate type of environment, can have a major impact. 
In the long run, Ivan Sutherland’s approach may well exceed 
his technical results, in terms of importance. 
 
Figure 6: An example of defining a square-root function 
using Bert Sutherland’s graphical programing system. 
This is an executable program. The top left icon 
represents the SQRT function that is defined in the 
graph in the lower 2/3rds of the figure. The top right is 
the full program which employs the function.  
W.R. “Bert” Sutherland is another of the real pioneers at 
Lincoln Labs. His PhD thesis work [24] literally defined the 
notion of graphical programming. His work from the mid-
60’s let you interactively define a program by graphically 
laying out a data-flow diagram of its structure. It also then 
let you execute the diagram, since each graphical object 
represented a module, and the interconnecting “wires” 
defined the paths of the data flow. The system supported 
hierarchy, such that diagrams could be collapsed and 
represented by a user-defined icon. It supported iteration, 
conditionals, and the user could interactively change input 
data, or edit the program. They could even graphically 
define their own icons to represent modules of the program. 
These are techniques that even today, the vast majority of 
computer users, and programmers, have never experienced! 
Bert then took the experience that he gained at Lincoln Labs 
and used it to influence three decades of research, as a 
research manager at BBN, Xerox PARC’s Systems Science 
Laboratory (SSL), and finally SunLabs, (of which he was a 
co-founder and director). 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: 
I would like to thank, Ron Baecker, Austin Henderson, Joy 
Mountford, William Newman, Larry Roberts, and Bert 
Sutherland for their suggestions and help in the organization 
of this panel. I mainly undertook the organization of this 
panel while working as a visiting researcher at Microsoft 
CHI 2005  |  Panels
April 2-7  |  Portland, Oregon, USA
1166
Research, Cambridge, UK. I would especially like to thank 
them for their support in this endeavour. 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
1. 
Baecker, R.M. (1969). Picture-Driven Animation. 
Proceedings of the AFIPS Spring Joint Computer 
Conference, 273-288. 
2. 
Baecker, R., Grudin, J., Buxton, W. & Greenberg, S. 
(1995). Readings in Human-Computer Interaction: 
Toward the Year 2000. San Francisco: Morgan 
Kaufmann. 
3. 
Bell, G. (1986). Toward a History of (Personal) 
Workstations. Proceedings of the ACM Conference on 
the History of Personal Workstations, 1 – 17. 
4. 
Best, Richard L. (1957). Memory Units in the Lincoln 
TX-2. Proceedings of the Western Joint Computer 
Conference (WJCC), 160-167. 
5. 
Clark, W.A. (1957). The Lincoln TX-2 Computer 
Development. Proceedings of the Western Joint 
Computer Conference (WJCC), 143-145. 
6. 
Clark, W.A. (1957). The LINC Was Early and Small. 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on the History of 
Personal Workstations, 133 - 155. 
7. 
Clark, W.A., & Molnar, C.E. (1964). The LINC: A 
Description of the Laboratory Instrument Computer. 
Ann. N. Y. A cad. Sci. 115:653-668. 
8. 
Curry, James E. (1969). A Tablet Input Facility for an 
Interactive Graphics System. . Proceedings of the 
AFIPS/ ACM International Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, 33-39. 
9. 
Feldman, Jerome A. & Rovner, Paul D. (1969). An 
ALGOL-Based Associative Language. 
Communications of the ACM, 12(8), 439-449. 
10. Forgie, James w. (1957). The Lincoln TX-2 Input -
Output System. Proceedings of the Western Joint 
Computer Conference (WJCC), 156-150. 
11. Frankovich, J.M. & Peterson, H.P. (1957). A Functional 
Description of the TX-2 Computer. Proceedings of the 
Western Joint Computer Conference (WJCC), 146-155. 
12. Frenkel, Karen A. (1989). An Interview With Ivan 
Sutherland. Communications of the ACM. 32(6), 711-
718. 
13. Gilmore, John T. (1958). MIT Lincoln Laboratory 
Milestones. Communications of the ACM, 1(8), 39-40. 
14. Hurst, J., Mahoney, M.S., Taylor, N.H., Ross, D.T. & 
Fano, R.M. (1989). Retrospectives I: The Early Years in 
Computer Graphics at MIT, Lincoln Lab, and Harvard. 
ACM SIGGRAPH’89 Panel Proceedings, 19-38. 
15. Hurst, J., Mahoney, M.S., Gilmore, J.T., Roberts, L.G. 
& Forrest, R. (1989). Retrospectives II: The Early Years 
in Computer Graphics at MIT, Lincoln Lab, and 
Harvard. ACM SIGGRAPH’89 Panel Proceedings, 39-
73. 
16. Marill, T. & Roberts, L.G. (1966). Toward a 
Cooperative Network of Time-Shared Computers. 
Proceeding of the AFIPS Fall Joint Computer 
Conference, 425-431. 
17. Olsen, Kenneth H. (1957). Transistor Circuitry in the 
Lincoln TX-2, Proceedings of the Western Joint 
Computer Conference (WJCC), 167-171. 
18. Roberts, L. G. (1963). Machine Perception of Three- 
Dimensional Solids, Technical Report No. 315. MIT 
Lincoln Laboratory. 
19. Roberts, L. G. (1965). Homogenous Matrix 
Representation and Manipulation of N-Dimensional 
Constructs, MS-1505. MIT Lincoln Laboratory, 
Lexington, Mass. 
20. Roberts, L. G. (1966). The Lincoln Wand. Proceedings 
of the AFIPS Fall Joint Computer Conference, 223-227. 
21.  Rovner, Paul D. and Henderson, D. Austin (1969). On 
the implementation of AMBIT/G: a Graphical 
Programming Language. Proceedings of the AFIPS/ 
ACM International Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, 9-20. 
22. Sutherland, I. (1963). SKETCHPAD: A Man Machine 
Graphical Communication System, Proceedings of the 
AFIPS Spring Joint Computer Conference, 329-346. 
23. Sutherland, I. (1963). Sketchpad: A Man-Machined 
Graphical Communication System. PhD Thesis, MIT. 
24. Sutherland, William Robert (1966). The On-Line 
Graphical Specification of Computer Procedures, Ph.D. 
Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
25. Sutherland, William Robert, Forgie, James W., and 
Morello, Marie V. (1969). Graphics in Time-Sharing: A 
Summary of the TX-2 Experience, Proceedings of the 
AFIPS Spring Joint Computer Conference, 629-636. 
 
CHI 2005  |  Panels
April 2-7  |  Portland, Oregon, USA
1167
