GROUNDING IN 
COMMUNICATION 
HERBERT H. CLARK AND SUSAN E. BRENNAN 
GROUNDING 
It takes two people working together to play a duet, shake hands, play chess, 
waltz, teach, or make love. To succeed, the two of them have to coordinate 
both the content and process of what they are doing. Alan and Barbara, on the 
piano, must come to play the same Mozart duet. This is coordination of content. 
They must also synchronize their entrances and exits, coordinate how loudly 
to play forte and pianissimo, and otherwise adjust to each other's tempo and 
dynamics. This is coordination of process. They cannot even begin to coordinate 
on content without assuming a vast amount of shared information or common 
ground-that 
is, mutual knowledge, mutual beliefs, and mutual assumptions 
(Clark & Carlson, 1982; Clark & Marshall, 1981; Lewis, 1969; Schelling, 
1960). And to coordinate on process, they need to update their common ground 
moment by moment. All collective actions are built on common ground and 
its accumulation. 
We thank many colleagues for discussion of the issues we take up here. The research was 
supported in part by National Science Foundation Grant BNS 83-20284 and a National Science 
Foundation Graduate Fellowship. 
Correspondence concerning this chapter should be addressed to Herbert H. Clark, Department 
of Psychology, Jordan Hall, Building 420, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-2130, or Susan 
E. Brennan, Department of Psychology, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook 
NY 1 1794-2500. 
CLARKANDBRENNAN 
Communication, of course, is a collective activity of the first order. When 
Alan speaks to Barbara, he must do more than merely plan and issue utterances, 
and she must do more than just listen and understand. They have to coordinate 
on content (Grice, 1975, 1978). When Alan refers to "my dogs," the two of 
them must reach the mutual belief that he is referring to his feet. They must 
also coordinate on process. Speech is evanescent, and so Alan must try to 
speak only when he thinks Barbara is attending to, hearing, and trying to 
understand what he is saying, and she must guide him by giving him evidence 
that she is doing just this. Accomplishing this, once again, requires the two 
of them to keep track of their common ground and its moment-by-moment 
changes. 
In communication, common ground cannot be properly updated without a 
process we shall call grounding (see Clark & Schaefer, 1987, 1989; Clark & 
Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Isaacs & Clark, 1987). In conversation, for example, the 
participants try to establish that what has been said has been understood. In our 
terminology, they try to ground what has been said-that 
is, make it pan of their 
common ground. But how they do this changes a great deal from one situation 
to the next. Grounding takes one shape in face-to-face conversation but another 
in personal letters. It takes one shape in casual gossip but another in calls to 
directory assistance. 
Grounding is so basic to communication-indeed, 
to all collective actions- 
that it is important to understand how it works. In this chapter we take up two 
main factors that shape it. One is purpose-what 
the two people are trying to 
accomplish in their communication. The other is the medium of communication- 
the techniques available in the medium for accomplishing that purpose, and what 
it costs to use them. We begin by briefly describing grounding as it appears in 
casual face-to-face conversation. We then consider how it gets shaped by other 
purposes and in other media. 
Grounding in Conversation 
What does it take to contribute to conversation? Suppose Alan utters to Barbara, 
"Do you and your husband have a car?" In the standard view of speech acts 
(e.g., Bach & Harnish, 1979; Searle, 1969), what Alan has done is ask Barbara 
whether she and her husband have a car, and, in this way, he has camed the 
conversation forward. But this isn't quite right. Consider this actual exchange:' 
'All examples, except those marked otherwise, come from the so-called London-Lund corpus 
(Svartvik & Quirk, 1980). We retain the following symbols from the London-Lund notation: "." for 
a brief pause (of one light syllable); "-" for a unit pause (of one stress unit or foot); "," for the end 
of a tone unit. which we mark only if it comes mid-turn; "(laughs)" or single parenthesis for contextual 
comments; "((words))" or double parentheses for incomprehensible words; and "'yes*" or asterisks 
for paired instances of simultaneous talk. 
Grounding in Communication 
Alan: 
Now, - urn, do yoh and your husband have a j- car 
Barbara: 
- have a car? , 
Alan: 
Yeah 
Barbara: 
No - 
Even though Alan has uttered "Do you and your husband have a car?", he 
hasn't managed to ask Barbara whether she and her husband have a car. We know 
this because Barbara indicates, with "- have a car?", that she hasn't understood 
him.2 Only after Alan has answered her query (with "yeah") and she is willing 
to answer the original question ("no -") do the two of them apparently believe 
he has succeeded. So asking a question requires more than uttering an interrogative 
sentence. It must also be established that the respondent has understood what the 
questioner meant. 
Of course, understanding can never be perfect. We assume that the criterion 
people try to reach in conversation is as follows (Clark & Schaefer, 1989; Clark 
& Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986): The contributor and his or her partners mutually believe 
that the partners have understood what the contributor meant to a criterion sufficient 
for current purposes. This is called the grounding criterion. Technically, then, 
grounding is the collective process by which the participants try to reach this 
mutual belief. To see some of the forms grounding takes in conversation, let us 
consider the process of contributing to conversation. Here we will follow a model 
proposed by Clark and Schaefer (1989) that was founded on a long tradition of 
work on turns and repairs by Sacks, Schegloff, Jefferson, and others (e.g., Sacks, 
Schegloff, & Jefferson, 1974; Schegloff, Jefferson, & Sacks, 1977; Schegloff, 
1982). 
Contributing to Conversation 
Most contributions to conversation begin with the potential contributor presenting 
an utterance to his or her partner. In our example, Alan presents Barbara with 
the utterance, "Now, - um do you and your husband have a j- car." Why does 
he present it? Because he wants Barbara to hear it, register it, and understand 
what he means by it. But he cannot know whether he has succeeded unless she 
provides evidence of her understanding. In our example, indeed, she provides 
evidence that she has not understood him yet. It is only after the exchange, "- 
have a car?" and "yeah," that she gives positive evidence of understanding by 
initiating the answer "no." So contributing to conversation generally divides into 
two phases: 
ZActually, the word ask is ambiguous between "utter an interrogative sentence" and "succeed 
in getting the addressee to recognize that you want certain information." Note that you can say, "Ken 
asked Julia 'Are you coming' but failed to ask her whether she was coming because she couldn't hear 
him." We will use ask in the second sense. 
CLARKANDBRENNAN 
Presentarion phase: A presents utterance u for B to consider. He does so 
on the assumption that, if B gives evidence e or stronger, he can believe 
that she understands what he means by u .  
Acceptance phase: B accepts utterance u by giving evidence e that she be- 
lieves she understands what A means by u. She does so on the assumption 
that, once A registers that evidence, he will also believe that she under- 
stands. 
It takes both phases for a contribution to be complete. 
The presentation phase can become very complicated. One way is by self- 
repairs. In our example, Alan doesn't present the pristine utterance, "Do you and 
your husband have a car," but rather the messier, "now, - um do you and your 
husband have a j- car." He expects Barbara to see, for example, that "j-" isn't 
part of the sentence he is ultimately committed to. Establishing what he is and is 
not ultimately committed to is no easy task. Another complication is embedding. 
The presentation itself can contain distinct contributions each with its own pre- 
sentation and acceptance phases (we will see examples of embedding later in this 
chapter). 
Grounding becomes most evident in the acceptance phase. By the end of 
A's presentation of some utterance u, the partner B may believe she is in one of 
these states for all or part of u: 
State 0: 
B didn't notice that A uttered any u. 
State I :  
B noticed that A uttered some u (but wasn't in state 2) 
State 2: B correctly heard u (but wasn't in state 3). 
State 3: B understood what A meant by u. 
In our example, Barbara apparently thinks she is in state 3 for the first 
part of Alan's presentation but in state 2 for the final phrase. Because she 
wants to be in state 3 for the entire presentation, she needs to clear up her 
understanding of the final phrase. This is what leads her to initiate the side 
sequence (Jefferson, 1972) or insertion sequence (Schegloff, 1972) with "- 
have a car?" All of this is part of the acceptance phase, and so Alan's con- 
tribution divides up this way: 
Presentation phase: 
Alan: 
Now, - um do you and your husband have a j-car 
Acceptance phase: 
Barbara: 
- have a car? 
Alan: 
Yeah 
Actually, the acceptance phase only gets completed when Barbara initiates the 
answer "no" and Alan accepts it as the evidence he needs. 
The acceptance phase may also contain embedded contributions. Barbara's 
"- have a car?" is the presentation phase of a contribution that is wholly contained 
within the acceptance phase of the main contribution. It is accepted when Alan 
Grounding in Communication 
says "yeah," which is itself a presentation with its own acceptance (see Clark & 
Schaefer, 1987). So contributions often emerge in hierarchies. They may contain 
contributions embedded within both their presentation and their acceptance phases. 
There is an essential difference, therefore, between merely uttering some 
words-a 
presentation-and 
doing what one intends to do by uttering them-a 
contribution. When you say to a friend, "1 want you to meet Mr. Jones," it isn't 
guaranteed that you have succeeded in introducing him to Mr. Jones. His hearing 
aid may have been off. He may have misheard you. Or he may have misunderstood 
you, as Chico did Groucho in this exchange: 
Groucho: 
Ravelli, I want you to meet Mr. Jones 
Chico: 
Awright, where should I meet him? 
Even without Chico around, grounding is essential. 
Evidence in Grounding 
Once we utter something in a conversation, one might suppose, all we need to 
look for is negative evidence-evidence 
that we have been misheard or misun- 
derstood. If we find some, we repair the problem, but if we don't, we assume, 
by default, that we have been understood. This is, indeed, what is explicitly or 
tacitly assumed in many accounts of language use (e.g., Grosz & Sidner, 1986; 
Litman & Allen, 1987; Stalnaker, 1978). When Barbara says "- have a car?" 
she is giving Alan negative evidence and a clue to what she has misunderstood. 
But if negative evidence is all we looked for, we would often accept information 
we had little justification for accepting. In fact, people ordinarily reach for a higher 
criterion. As the contribution model says, people ultimately seek positive evidence 
of understanding. Let us look at the three most common forms of positive evidence 
and see how they work. 
First, acknowledgments are the most obvious form of positive evidence. By 
acknowledgments we mean much of what has been called back-channel responses. 
These include continuers such as uh huh, yeah, and the British m (Schegloff, 
1982), as in the following example: 
Um well 1 ha((dn't)) done any English at *all,* 
*((I syll))* 
You know, since 0-level. 
Yea . 
And 1 went to some second year seminars, where there are 
only about half a dozen people. 
*m* 
*and* they discussed what ((a)) word was, 
**m** 
**and -** what's a sentence, that's *ev4en more difficult. 
A: 
*yeah* yeah - 
(and so on) 
CLARKANDBRENNAN 
Continuers are used by partners, according to Schegloff, to signal that they are 
passing up the opportunity to initiate a repair on the turn so far and, by implication, 
that they think they have understood the turn so far. Acknowledgments also include 
assessments, such as gosh, really, and good God (see Goodwin, 1986), and 
gestures such as head nods that have much the same force as continuers (see 
Goodwin, 1981). Acknowledgments are generally produced without the speaker 
taking a turn at talk. 
A second, common form of positive evidence is the initiation of the relevant 
next turn. Consider this exchange: 
A: 
Did you know mother had been drinking - 
B: 
I don't think, mother had been drinking at all 
Suppose A is trying to ask B a question. If B understands it, she can be expected 
to answer it in her next turn. Questions and answers form what are called adjacency 
pairs, and once the first part of an adjacency pair is on the floor, the second part 
is conditionally relevant as the next turn (Schegloff & Sacks, 1973). So A looks 
for B to provide not just any utterance, but an answer to his question. If B's 
utterance is appropriate as an answer, as in our example, it is also evidence that 
she has understood A's question. If it is not appropriate, it is evidence that she 
has not understood A's question, as caricatured here: 
Miss Dimple: 
Where can I get a hold of you? 
Chico: 
I don't know, lady. You see, I'm very ticklish. 
Miss Dimple: 
I mean, where do you live? 
Chico: 
I live with my brother. 
Chico's answer gives Miss Dimple evidence that he has misunderstood her ques- 
tion, and that leads to the correction in her following turn (for an authentic, 
spontaneous example, see Clark & Schaefer, 1989). So B may initiate the next 
turn as positive evidence of her understanding, but A will not take it that way 
unless it shows her understanding to be correct. 
What makes a next turn appropriate or relevant? That isn't difficult to decide 
for the second part of an adjacency pair-the 
answer to a question, the response 
to a request, or the acceptance of an invitation. It also isn't difficult to decide for 
most other next turns. Conversation generally divides into coherent sections that 
have identifiable entries, bodies, and exits (see, e.g., Schegloff & Sacks, 1973). 
These sections are devoted to one or another social process, such as making plans 
or exchanging information. Most turns are designed to carry that process forward 
and give evidence about the speaker's understanding of the previous step in the 
process. As Sacks et al. (1974, p. 728) noted. "Regularly, then, a turn's talk 
will display its speaker's understanding of a prior turn's talk, or whatever other 
Grounding in Communication 
talk it marks itself as directed to." lniiiating the relevant next turn is ordinarily 
an excellent piece of positive evidence. 
Requiring positive evidence of understanding seems to lead to an infinite 
regress. The problem is this: When B says "uh huh" or "you're there all day" 
in response to A's presentation, she herself is making a presentation. Now her 
presentation, being more words, requires positive evidence of understanding from 
A, which requires him to give more words. But his words constitute another 
presentation that she must accept with more words, and so on ad infinitum. If 
every presentation were accepted with positive evidence in the form of words, 
the process would spin out to infinity. Empirically, it is easy to show that people 
do not take an infinite number of words to contribute to a conversation. How, 
then, do they do it? 
There is no infinite regress in the contribution model because some forms 
of evidence, such as the relevant next turn and continued attention (our next form 
of evidence), do not have separate presentations. A relevant next turn provides 
positive evidence of understanding of the presentation phase it follows, but it does 
so by initiating the next contribution without a break. So although the acceptance 
process can spin out for many turns, it usually ends with the partner initiating a 
relevant next turn. Take the following example, in which A is presenting a book 
identification number: 
A: 
F .six two 
B: 
F six two 
A: 
Yes 
B: 
Thanks very much 
The first presentation is accepted with a repetition, the repetition with an ac- 
knowledgment, and the acknowledgment with a thanks, which is the next con- 
tribution at the level of original contribution. 
The third and most basic form of positive evidence is continued attention. 
In conversation people monitor what their partners are doing moment by moment- 
in particular, what they are attending to. If Alan presented an utterance while 
Barbara wasn't paying attention, he could hardly assume that she was understand- 
ing him. She must show that she is paying attention, and one way is through eye 
gaze. Suppose she is looking away from Alan. As Goodwin (1981) has shown, 
Alan can try to capture her gaze-and 
also, presumably, her attention-by 
starting 
an utterance. Just as she begins turning to him, he will start the utterance over 
again. Or he can start an utterance, pause until she starts turning, and then go on 
with the utterance. Speakers have many ways of getting a partner's attention. 
Positive evidence of understanding comes with attention that is unbroken 
or undisturbed. Alan has reason to believe Barbara is following him as long as 
she continues to attend in the expected way. Whenever she turns to listen to 
someone else, looks puzzled, or hangs up the telephone, Alan has reason to believe 
1 34 
CLARK AND BRENNAN 
that he has lost her. She is no longer hearing or understanding to criterion. 
Ordinarily, that will push him into taking corrective action. 
Least Collaborative Effort 
People apparently don't like to work any harder than they have to, and in language 
use this truism has been embodied in several principles of least effort. The tra- 
ditional version exhorts the speaker: Don't expend any more effort than you need 
to get your addressees to understand you with as little effort. Grice (1975) ex- 
pressed this idea in terms of two maxims: Quantity-Make 
your contribution as 
informative as is required for the current purpose of the exchange, but do not 
make your contribution more informative than is required-and 
Manner-Be 
brief (avoid unnecessary prolixity). According to both versions, speakers are 
supposed to create what we will call proper utterances, ones they believe will be 
readily and fully understood by their addressees. 
The principle of least effort, however, assumes flawless presentations and 
trouble-free acceptances. It does not allow for grounding and, therefore, cannot 
do justice to what really happens in conversations. Here are just three problems 
with this principle (Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). 
I .  Time pressure. Speakers appear to limit the time and effort they allow 
for planning and issuing each utterance, and that often leads them to issue improper 
utterances. They may utter a sentence or phrase, discover it to be inadequate, and 
then amend it, as in "Number 7's the goofy guy that's falling over-with 
his leg 
kicked up." They may start a phrase, think better of it, and start a different phrase, 
as in "We must ha- we're big enough to stand on our own feet now." They may 
create patently improper parts of utterances, such as what's his name in "If he 
puts it into the diplomatic bag, as um - what's his name, Micky Cohn did, . then 
it's not so bad." They may invite their interlocutors to complete their utterances, 
as in this exchange (Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986): 
A: 
That tree has, uh, uh 
B: 
Tentworms. 
A: 
Yeah. 
B: 
Yeah. 
If all these speakers had taken the time and effort needed, they could have produced 
proper utterances-flawless 
performances. They didn't. The prindip~e of least 
effort says that they should have. 
2. Errors. Speakers often issue improper utterances because they make errors 
and have to repair them, as in Alan's "now, - um do you and your husband have 
a j- car'?" If Alan had taken more time and effort, he could have avoided errors 
and dysfluencies. Why didn't he? 
Grounding in Communication 
135 
3. Ignorance. Speakers sometimes iealize they just don't know enough about 
their interlocutor to design a proper utterance, so they are forced to issue an 
improper utterance instead. Take the person who was trying to identify an abstract 
figure that resembled an ice skater (Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986), who said, 
"Um, the next one's the person ice skating that has two arms?" Why the question 
intonation, or what Sacks and Schegloff (1979) have called a try marker? With 
it the speaker was indicating that he was not sure that his definite description "the 
person ice skating that has two arms" was adequate to pick out the right figure. 
He was asking his partner whether it was adequate and, if it was not, inviting an 
alternative description. Here, no matter how hard the speaker tried, he might not 
have managed a proper utterance. So why did he do what he did? 
The principle of least effort, it has been argued, must therefore be replaced 
with the following principle (Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986): 
The principle of least collaborative effort: In conversation, the participants 
try to minimize their collaborative effort-the 
work that both do from the 
initiation of each contribution to its mutual acceptance. 
Such a principle helps account for many phenomena. Consider repairs. As Scheg- 
loff et al. (1977) noted, speakers have two strong preferences about repairs: (a) 
They prefer to repair their own utterances rather than let their interlocutors do it, 
and (b) they prefer to initiate their own repairs rather than let their interlocutors 
prompt them to do it. Although these two preferences have many causes, the 
upshot is that they minimize collaborative effort. As for preference I, it generally 
takes less effort for the speaker than for an interlocutor to make a repair. An 
interlocutor will usually need extra turns, and he or she has to get the speaker to 
accept the repair anyway. As for preference 2, it usually takes less effort for the 
speaker than for an interlocutor to initiate a repair. The interlocutor will generally 
create extra turns in doing so, whereas the speaker will not. Every extra turn adds 
to collaborative effort. 
Also, speakers often realize that it will take more collaborative effort to 
design a proper utterance than to design an improper utterance and enlist their 
addressees' help. Speakers, for example, can present a provisional utterance and 
add try markers to ask for confirmation. They can present a difficult utterance in 
installments and check for understanding after each installment (as we will describe 
later). They can invite addressees to complete an utterance they are having trouble 
with. And they have many other collaborative techniques at their disposal. The 
principle of least collaborative effort is essential for a full account of face-to-face 
conversation. 
GROUNDING CHANGES WITH PURPOSE 
People in conversation generally try to establish collective purposes (Grice, 1975). 
If they are planning a party, that may be their overall collective purpose. In each 
136 
CLARK AND BRENNAN 
section of the conversation, their purpose might be to complete pieces of that 
plan, and in each subsection it would be even more specific. Other times their 
overall purpose might be to get acquainted, swap gossip, or instruct and learn. 
Grounding should change with these purposes. If addressees are to understand 
what the speaker meant "to a criterion sufficient for current purposes," then the 
criterion should change as their collective purposes change. So, too, should the 
techniques they exploit. Techniques should change, for example, with the content 
of the conversation-with 
what needs to be understood. Indeed, specialized tech- 
niques have evolved for grounding different types of content. We will illustrate 
with two types of content-references 
and verbatim content. 
Grounding References 
Many conversations focus on objects and their identities; when they do, it becomes 
crucial to identify the objects quickly and securely. Conversations like these arise, 
for example, when an expert is teaching a novice how to build things, and the 
two of them refer again and again to pieces of the construction. They arise in 
court when lawyers and witnesses try to establish the identities of persons, places, 
and things. They also arise in tasks in which people have to arrange figures, post 
cards. blocks, color chips, or other such objects. In psychology, an entire industry 
has been built on this type of task patterned after Krauss and Weinheimer's (1964, 
1966, 1967) original referential communication task. Yet conversations like these 
are common enough in real life. 
The purpose of interest here is to establish referential identity-that 
is, the 
mutual belief that the addressees have correctly identified a referent. There are 
several common techniques for establishing this. 
I. Alternative descriptions. When speakers refer to objects, they typically 
use one or more referring expressions-a 
definite or indefinite description, proper 
noun, demonstrative, or pronoun. One way their partners can demonstrate that 
they have identified the referent or can check on its identity is by presenting an 
alternative description, as in this interchange: 
A: 
Well, that young gentleman from - ((the park)) . 
B: Joe Joe Wright you mean? - - *( - - laughs)* 
A: 
*yes, (laughs) yes* 
B: 
((God)), I thought it was old Joe Wright who(('d)) walked 
in at first 
A describes a referent as "that young gentleman from the park"; B gives evidence 
of having identified the man by offering an alternative description; he adds the 
question intonation to get confirmation of that description; and A accepts that 
description. This technique is common whenever referential identity is at stake 
(e.g., Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; lsaacs & Clark, 1987). 
Grounding in Communication 
137 
2. Indicative gestures. When a speaker refers to a nearby object, the partners 
can give positive evidence that they-have identified it by pointing, looking, or 
touching. In this example, S had k e n  handed a photograph of a flower patch 
(Clark, Schreuder, & Bunrick, 1983): 
B: 
How would you describe the color of this flower? 
S: 
You mean this one [pointing]? 
B: 
Yes. 
S: 
It's off yellow. 
S confirmed the referent of B's "this flower" by pointing. 
3. Referential installments. It is often important to establish the identity 
of a referent before saying something about it. The reason is simple. Until the 
referent has been properly identified, the rest of the utterance will be difficult, 
if not impossible, to understand. The speaker can secure the reference by 
treating it as an installment of the utterance to be confirmed separately. Take 
this exchange between an expert and a novice assembling a pump (Cohen, 
1984): 
S: 
Take the spout-the 
little one that looks like the end of an 
oil can- 
J: 
Okay. 
S: 
and put that on the opening in the other large tube. With 
the round top. 
In the first line, S presents "the spout-the 
little one that looks like the end of 
an oil can" and then pauses for evidence that J has identified the referent. He 
goes on only when that installment has been grounded. 
In English, there is a specialized construction for just this purpose called 
left-dislocation. It is traditionally illustrated with invented examples such as Your 
dog he just bit me. This example begins with a "left dislocated" noun phrase, 
your dog, followed by a full sentence with a pronoun, he, referring to the same 
object. In genuine conversation, left-dislocation rarely looks like this. A more 
typical example is this second exchange from S and J: 
S :  
Okay now, the small blue cap we talked about before? 
J: 
Yeah. 
S: 
Put that over the hole on the side of that tube- 
J: 
Yeah. 
S: 
-that 
is nearest to the top, or nearest to the red handle. 
As Geluykens (1988) has shown, 29% of the left dislocated noun phrases in 
the London-Lund corpus (Svartvik & Quirk, 1980) are followed by an inter- 
vening move from the interlocutor (either a continuer or something more ex- 
tensive), as in our example. Another 52% are followed by a pause during which 
138 
CLARKANDBRENNAN 
the partner could have nodded acceptance. Left-dislocation may have evolved 
for just this specialized purpose-grounding 
references separately. 
4. Trial references. Speakers can also initiate the grounding process for a 
reference in mid-utterance. When speakers find themselves about to present a 
name or description that they are not sure is entirely correct or comprehensible, 
they can present it with a try marker followed by a slight pause, and get their 
partners to confirm or correct it before completing the presentation. Consider this 
example: 
A: 
So I wrote off to . Bill, . uh who ((had)) presumably dis- 
appeared by this time. certainly, a man called Annegra? 
B: 
Yeah, Allegra. 
A: 
Allegra, uh replied. . uh and I . put . two other people 
[continues]. 
A apparently wants to assert, "A man called Annegra replied, and 1 . . .". 
But being uncertain about the name Annegra, he presents it with a try marker. 
B confirms, with "yeah," that she knows who he is referring to, but then 
corrects the name to Allegra. A accepts the correction by re-presenting Allegra 
and continuing. The entire correction is made swiftly and efficiently. 
There are other techniques adapted for this purpose, but the four we have 
mentioned give an idea of their range and specialization. 
Grounding Verbatim Content 
Sometimes it is important to register the verbatim content of what is said. When 
a friend tells you a telephone number, you do more than listen for the gist of it. 
You try to get it verbatim so that you can copy it down or rehearse it until you 
dial the number. The same goes for names, addresses, book titles, credit card 
numbers, bank accounts, dollar amounts, and library call numbers. These are 
specialized situations, and specialized grounding techniques have evolved for 
them. Here are a few: 
I. Verbatim displays. When customers call directory enquiries for a tele- 
phone number, they often confirm the number they are given with a verbatim 
display, as in this British example (Clark & Schaefer, 1987): 
0 :  
It's Cambridge 12345 
C: 
12345 
0: That's right. 
C: 
Thank you very much. 
C confirms the number that 0 has presented him by repeating it verbatim, 
" 12345." In the British calls studied by Clark and Schaefer (1987), customers 
responded to the operators' number presentations with verbatim displays over 
Grounding in Communication 
139 
70% of the time. Operators, in turn,'often responded to the customers' pre- 
sentations of names, towns, and street addresses with verbatim displays. 
2. Installments. When speakers present a lot of information to be reg- 
istered verbatim, they generally cut It up into bite-sized chunks, or installments, 
and receive verbatim displays on each installment, as in this example: 
Ah. what ((are you)) now, *where* 
*yes* forty-nine Skipton Place 
Forty-one 
Nine . nine 
Forty-nine, Skipton Place, 
W one . 
Skipton Place, . W one, ((so)) Mr D Challam 
Yes 
Forty-nine Skipton Place, W one. 
Yes 
Right oh. 
C divides his address into repeatable chunks, and A gives a verbatim display for 
each. Speakers seem able to divide most types of information into such chunks. 
They do it spontaneously, for example, for recipes presented over the telephone 
(Goldberg, 1975). 
Dividing a presentation into repeatable installments is based on the tacit 
recognition that people have limited immediate memory spans. Even the telephone 
company recognizes this and divides telephone numbers into conventional in- 
stallments of three or four digits in size. In the calls to directory enquiries studied 
by Clark and Schaefer (1987), British operators always divided numbers of seven 
or more digits into their conventional groupings. 
3. Spelling. For many words, getting the verbatim content right means getting 
the spelling right. So contributors often spell out critical words, as in the follow- 
ing: 
A: 
The name is lain, . I A I N . 
C: 
m 
A: 
Lathom-Meadows, that's L A T, . H 0 M, . hyphen, - 
Meadows, 
C: 
Yes . 
Or they have other tricks for getting the spelling right, as illustrated here: 
B: 
And my name, is James Persian-Omo, that's Persian like 
the carpet 
C: 
Yes 
B: 
Hyphen, . Omo like the detergent, 0 M 0 
C: 
Yeah. 
Other times, it is the partners who do the spelling as they confirm a name. 
140 
CLARK AND BRENNAN 
On occasion, two partners in conversation will set different criteria, one 
stricter than the other. Imagine a father instructing a 5-year-old son on how to 
play a game or work a machine. The son may think he understands an instruction 
while the father still has serious doubts. The father may go on testing for under- 
standing long after the son thinks he needs to. 
To summarize, specialized techniques have evolved for grounding special 
pieces of conversation. When it is critical that a reference be well established, 
people will use techniques that are custom designed for that purpose. When it is 
the verbatim content that is crucial, they will use other techniques. In this way, 
grounding changes with the current purpose. 
GROUNDING CHANGES WITH THE MEDIUM 
By the principle of least collaborative effort, people should try to ground with as 
little combined effort as needed. But what takes effort changes dramatically with 
the communication medium. The techniques available in one medium may not be 
available in another, and even when a technique is available, it may cost more 
in one medium than in the other. Our prediction is straightforward: People should 
ground with those techniques available in a medium that lead to the least collab- 
orative effort. 
Consider the acknowledgment okay. In face-to-face or telephone conver- 
sations, it can be timed precisely so that it constitutes evidence of understanding 
and not an intenuption. In keyboard teleconferencing-when people communicate 
over keyboards and screens-it 
is difficult to time an acknowledgment precisely, 
and trying to do so may interrupt the other typist. So the cost of an acknowledgment 
is higher in this medium. 
Media come in a great variety, and new ones are being introduced every 
year. Think of the telegraph, videotape, picturephone, express mail, fax machines, 
electronic bulletin boards, and little yellow post-it notes. Here we will consider 
a sample of two-way personal media: face-to-face conversation, the telephone, 
video teleconferencing, keyboard teleconferencing, answering machines, elec- 
tronic mail (email), and personal letters. For now we will put aside such one- 
way, broadcastable media as books, newspapers, television, and radio. Some 
personal media have been compared experimentally (see, for example, Ochsman 
& Chapanis, 1974). but most of these studies identify and describe differences 
without a theoretical framework for explaining them. We propose to set them in 
a framework that will account for many of their differences. 
Constraints on Grounding 
Personal media vary on many dimensions that affect grounding. Here are eight 
constraints that a medium may impose on communication between two people, 
A and B. 
Grounding in Communication 
141 
1. Copresence: A and B share th'e same physical environment. In face-to- 
face conversation, the participants are usually in the same surroundings and can 
readily see and hear what each other is doing and looking at. In other media there 
is no such possibility. 
2. Visibility: A and B are visible to each other. In face-to-face conversation, 
the participants can see each other, and in other media they cannot. They may 
also be able to see each other, as in video teleconferencing, without being able 
to see what each other is doing or looking at. 
3. Audibility: A and B communicate by speaking. Face to face, on the 
telephone, and with some kinds of teleconferencing, participants can hear each 
other and take note of timing and intonation. In other media they cannot. An 
answering machine preserves intonation, but only some aspects of utterance tim- 
ing. 
4. Cotemporality: B receives at roughly the same time as A produces. In 
most conversations, an utterance is produced just about when it is received and 
understood, without delay. In media such as letters and electronic mail, this is 
not the case. 
5. Simultaneity: A and B can send and receive at once and simultaneously. 
Sometimes messages can be conveyed and received by both parties at once, as 
when a hearer smiles during a speaker's utterance. Simultaneous utterances are 
also allowed, for example, in the keyboard teleconferencing program called talk, 
where what both parties type appears letter by letter in two distinct halves of the 
screen. Other media are cotemporal but not simultaneous, such as the kind of 
keyboard teleconferencing that transmits characters only after the typist hits a 
carriage return. 
6. Sequentiality: A's and B's turns cannot get out of sequence. In face- 
to-face conversation, turns ordinarily form a sequence that does not include 
intervening turns from different conversations with other people. With email, 
answering machines, and letters, a message and its reply may be separated by 
any number of irrelevant messages or activities; interruptions do not have the 
same force. 
7. Reviewability: B can review A's messages. Speech fades quickly, but in 
media such as email, letters, and recorded messages, an utterance stays behind 
as an artifact that can be reviewed later by either of the partners-or 
even by a 
third party. In keyboard teleconferencing, the last few utterances stay visible on 
the screen for awhile. 
8. Revisability: A can revise messages for B .  Some media, such as letters 
and email, allow a participant to revise an utterance privately before sending it 
to a partner. In face-to-face and telephone conversations, most self-repairs must 
be done publicly. Some kinds of keyboard teleconferencing fall in between; what 
a person types appears on the partner's screen only after every camage return, 
rather than letter by letter. 
142 
CLARKANDBRENNAN 
Table 1 
SEVEN MEDIA AND THEIR ASSOCIATED CONSTRAINTS 
Medlum 
Constraints 
Face-to-face 
Telephone 
Video teleconference 
Terminal teleconference 
Copresence, visibility, audibility, 
cotemporality, simultaneity, 
sequentiality 
Audibility, cotemporality, 
simultaneity, sequentiality 
Visibility, audibility, cotemporality, 
simultaneity, sequentiality 
Cotemporality, sequentiality, 
reviewability 
Answering machines 
Audibility, reviewability 
Electronic mail 
Reviewability, revisability 
Letters 
Reviewability, revisability 
There are other differences across media, but these are among the most 
important for grounding. Table 1 characterizes seven personal media by these 
constraints. 
Costs of Grounding 
When a medium lacks one of these characteristics, it generally forces people to 
use alternative grounding techniques. It does so because the costs of the various 
techniques of grounding change. We will describe eleven costs that change. The 
first two, formulation and production costs, are paid by the speaker. The next 
two, reception and understanding costs, are paid by the addressee. The rest are 
paid by both. We emphasize that these costs are not independent of each other. 
Formulation costs 
It costs time and effort to formulate and reformulate utterances. It costs more to 
plan complicated than simple utterances, more to retrieve uncommon than common 
words, and more to create descriptions for unfamiliar than familiar objects. It 
costs more to formulate perfect than imperfect utterances. As we will see, these 
costs are often traded off for others, depending on the medium. 
Production costs 
The act of producing an utterance itself has a cost that varies from medium to 
medium. It takes little effort (for most of us) to speak or gesture, more effort to 
type on a computer keyboard or typewriter, and the most effort (for many of us, 
Grounding in Communication 
143 
anyway) to write by hand. Speaking <s swift, typing is slower, and handwriting 
is slowest. These costs are traded off for other costs as well. People are willing 
to use more words talking than in typewriting to accomplish a goal, and the faster 
people are at typing, the more words they are willing to use. 
Reception costs 
Listening is generally easy, and reading harder, although it may be easier to read 
than to listen to complicated instructions or abstract arguments. It also costs to 
have to wait while the speaker produces a turn. This wait takes its toll in keyboard 
conversations when addressees must suffer as they watch an utterance appear letter 
by letter with painstaking backspacing to repair misspellings. 
Understanding costs 
It is also more costly for people to understand certain words, constructions, and 
concepts than others, regardless of the medium. The costs can be compounded 
when contextual clues are missing. Email, for example, is neither cotemporal nor 
sequential. That makes understanding harder because the addressee has to imagine 
appropriate contexts for both the sender and the message, and to remember what 
the message is in response to, even when the "subject" field of the message is 
filled in. 
Start-up costs 
This is the cost of starting up a new discourse. It is the cost of getting B initially 
to notice that A has uttered something and to accept that he or she has been 
addressed. Start-up costs are minimal face to face, where A need only get B's 
attention and speak. They are a bit higher when A must get to a telephone, look 
up a number, dial it, and determine that the answerer is B. They are often higher 
yet in email. First, A has to get access to the right software and hardware, find 
the right email address, and start the message. Second, the message may not reach 
the addressee if the channel is unreliable or the address has typos in it. Third, 
depending on the system, the sender may or may not be notified of its delivery. 
And finally, once the message is delivered, there is no guarantee that the addressee 
will read it right away. There are similar start-up costs in writing letters. 
Delay costs 
These are the costs of delaying an utterance in order to plan, revise, and execute 
it more carefully. In face-to-face conversation, as in all cotemporal and simul- 
taneous media, these costs are high because of the way delays, even brief delays, 
are interpreted. When speakers leave too long a gap before starting a turn, they 
may be misheard as dropping out of the conversation or as implying other more 
damaging things. And when they leave too long a pause in the middle of a turn, 
they may be misheard as having finished their turn. With the pressure to minimize 
CLARK AND BRENNAN 
both midturn pauses and preturn gaps, speakers are often forced to utter words 
they may have to revise or to let their addressees help them out. Even when it is 
clear that a delay is due to the speaker's production difficulty, it costs the addressees 
to wait. In media without cotemporality-such 
as email and personal letters- 
delays that would be crippling in conversation are not even noticeable, and so 
their costs are nil. But in cotemporal media, the cost of a delay can be high: When 
the drugged Juliet failed to respond, Romeo did himself in. 
Delay costs often trade off with formulation costs. In writing letters, we 
can take our time planning and revising each sentence. Computerized text editing 
has made this even easier. But in face-to-face and telephone conversations, where 
delay costs are high, we have to formulate utterances quickly. That forces us to 
use simpler constructions and to be satisfied with less than perfect utterances. The 
other media lie between these two extremes. 
Asynchrony costs 
In conversation, people time their utterances with great precision (Jefferson, 1973). 
They can begin an utterance precisely at the completion of the prior speaker's 
turn. They can time acknowledgments to mark what it is they are acknowledging. 
They can interrupt a particular word to show agreement or disagreement on some 
aspect of it. In media without copresence, visibility, audibility, or simultaneity, 
timing is much less precise, and without cotemporality, it is altogether impossible. 
So grounding techniques that rely on precision of timing should go up in cost 
when production and reception are asynchronous. 
Speaker change costs 
In conversation the general rule is, "Two people can speak at the same time only 
for short periods or about limited content." The rule is usually simplified to "One 
speaker at a time" (see Sacks et al., 1974), and it tends to hold for other media 
as well. But the cost of changing speakers varies with the medium. In face-to- 
face conversation it is low. The participants find it easy to arrange for one speaker 
to stop and another to start. There are regular rules for turn taking in which the 
points of possible change in speakers are frequent, easily marked, and readily 
recognized, and the changes can be instantaneous. Also, the costs of simultaneous 
speech, at least for short intervals and limited content, are minor. The participants 
usually continue to understand without disruption. 
The cost of changing speakers is higher in media with fewer cues for changes 
in turns. Costs are quite high, for example, in keyboard teleconferencing, where 
the points of speaker change are not as easily marked or readily recognized. These 
points may need to be marked by a convention such as the use of "0" (for 
"over"), a device that is also used by airplane pilots and citizens' band radio 
operators, when only one party can be heard at a time. Speaker change costs are 
greater still in letters, answering machines, and email, where it may take much 
Grounding in Communication 
work for one participant to stop and an'other to start up. Changing the speaker in 
these media is a little like starting up a communication from scratch. One effect 
of high speaker change costs is that people try to do more within a turn. 
Display costs 
In face-to-face conversation, it is easy to point to, nod at, or present an object 
for our interlocutors. It is also easy to gaze at our interlocutors to show them we 
are attending, to monitor their facial expressions, or to pick them out as addressees. 
In media without copresence, gestures cost a lot, are severely limited, or are out 
of the question. In video teleconferencing, we can use only a limited range of 
gestures, and we cannot always look at someone as a way of designating "you." 
Showing pictures is possible with media such as video, fax machines, and letters. 
Fault costs 
There are costs associated with producing an utterance fault, that is, any mistake 
or missaying. Some faults lead to failures in understanding, and failures in one 
utterance are likely to undermine the next one. The costs of these faults increase 
with the gravity of the failures. Other faults make the speaker look foolish, 
illiterate, or impolite, so they also have their costs. The cost of most faults trades 
off with what it costs to repair them (our next category) or to prevent them in the 
first place. To avoid paying fault costs, speakers may elect to pay more in for- 
mulation costs. But it depends on the medium. In conversation, a hearer may 
expect faults from a speaker because the production of speech is so spontaneous. 
In email, faults are not as easily justified, because the sender has already had a 
chance to revise them, and because the damage done is not as easily repaired. 
Repair costs 
Some repairs take little time or effort; others take a lot, and still others are 
impossible to make. Because faults tend to snowball, speakers should want to 
repair them as quickly as possible. In audible conversation, as we noted earlier, 
speakers prefer to initiate and make their own repairs, and there is evidence that 
they interrupt themselves and make these repairs just as soon as they detect a fault 
(Levelt, 1983). These preferences tend to minimize the cost of a repair. Self- 
corrections take fewer words and turns than do repairs by others, and so do repairs 
initiated by oneself rather than by others. These preferences also help minimize 
the cost of faults: They tend to remove a fault from the floor as quickly as possible. 
In media that are not cotemporal, repairs initiated or made by others become very 
costly indeed, so speakers will try hard to avoid relying on others to repair 
misunderstandings. It is less costly for them to revise what they say before sending 
it. Another way to minimize repair costs may be to change to a different medium 
to make the repair. 
146 
CLARK AND BRENNAN 
Cost Tradeoffs 
People manage to communicate effectively by all the media we have mentioned, 
but that does not mean that they do so in the same way in each medium. The way 
people proceed reflects the costs they incur. Recall the intermediate states 0 to 3 
mentioned earlier for face-to-face conversation: (0) A and B failing to establish 
any connection yet, ( I )  A getting B's attention, (2) B perceiving A's utterance 
correctly, and (3) B understanding what A meant. There are costs to getting to 
each state. and in some media the states are quite distinct. In media that are not 
cotemporal, there is the additional problem that A does not have immediate 
evidence as to which of these states B is in with respect to A's utterance. In a 
medium such as email, B's lack of response can be highly ambiguous. Did she 
not get the message, did she get it and not read it, did she read it and choose not 
to respond, did she not understand it, or what? A does not know whether B is in 
state 0, 1 ,  2, or 3. 
Once we assume that people need to ground what they say and that they 
trade off on the costs of grounding, we can account for some of the differences 
in language use across media. Consider a study reported by Cohen (1984) in which 
tutors instructed students on assembling a pump. Their communication was either 
by telephone or by keyboard. Over the telephone, tutors would first get students 
to identify an object, and only when they had confirmed its identification did they 
ask students to do something with it. 
S: 
Uh, now there's a little plastic blue cap. 
J :  
Yep. 
S: 
Put that on the top hole in the cylinder you just worked 
with. 
In contrast, in keyboard conversations, tutors would identify an object and instruct 
students what to do with it all in a single turn. 
K: Next, take the blue cap that has the pink thing on it and 
screw it to the blue piece you just screwed on. 
That is, there were many more separate requests for identification over the tele- 
phone than in keyboard conversations. According to Cohen, "Speakers attempt 
to achieve more detailed goals in giving instructions than do users of keyboards" 
(Cohen, 1984, p. 97). 
But why? The principle of least effort suggests a reason: The two media 
have different profiles of grounding costs. Over the telephone, it doesn't cost 
much to produce an utterance or change speakers. On a keyboard, it costs much 
more. So to minimize these costs, tutors and students on a keyboard might seek 
and provide evidence after larger constituents; that is, they should try to do more 
within each turn than they would over the telephone. This prediction would account 
Grounding in Communication 
147 
for the difference Cohen describes between the two media. In addition, repairs 
are more costly over the keyboard; if 4utors and students are aware of this, they 
might formulate their utterances more carefully. But because delay costs can be 
just as high over the keyboard as on the telephone, and speaker change costs are 
higher, there are likely to be more misunderstandings over a keyboard, and repairs 
will take more collaborative effort. The differences among these and other media 
can be explained by the techniques participants choose for grounding. They balance 
the perceived costs for formulation, production, reception, understanding, start- 
up, delay, timing, speaker change, display, faults, and repair. 
Medium and Purpose Interact 
Grounding techniques depend on both purpose and medium, and these sometimes 
interact. Face-to-face conversations appear to be preferred for reprimanding, whereas 
telephone conversations or letters may be preferred for refusing an unreasonable 
request (Furnham, 1982). In a study of working groups, face-to-face conversation 
was preferred for negotiating and reaching consensus, whereas email was preferred 
for coordinating schedules, assigning tasks, and making progress reports (Finholt, 
Sproull, & Kiesler, 1990). 
These preferences can be explained in terms of the costs associated with 
each medium relative to the participants' purposes. Sometimes the participants 
want a reviewable record of a conversation-as 
for schedules, task assignments, 
and progress reports; and other times they do not. Sometimes speakers want to 
get a hearer's full attention, and sometimes they want to avoid interrupting. 
Sometimes people want their reactions to be seen, as in negotiating and reaching 
consensus, and sometimes they do not. Which medium is best for which purpose, 
then, depends on the form grounding takes in a medium and whether that serves 
the participants' purposes. 
Finally, as more participants join the conversation and the medium must 
support the work of a whole group, costs and tradeoffs shift. Start-up costs may 
be greater. Reception costs will increase if a hearer must put effort into identifying 
who is speaking or writing. Fault costs and repair costs will be higher when a 
group is involved. Any medium that supports cooperative work can be evaluated 
in terms of the techniques it allows for grounding. 
CONCLUSION 
Grounding is essential to communication. Once we have formulated a message, 
we must do more than just send it off. We need to assure ourselves that it has 
been understood as we intended it to be. Otherwise, we have little assurance that 
the discourse we are taking part in will proceed in an orderly way. For whatever 
CLARK AND BRENNAN 
Grounding in Communication 
we say. our goal is to reach the grounding criterion: that we and our addressees 
mutually believe that they have understood what we meant well enough for current 
purposes. This is the process we have called grounding. 
The techniques we use for grounding change both with purpose and with 
medium. Special techniques have evolved, for example, for grounding references 
to objects and for grounding the verbatim content of what is said. Grounding 
techniques also change with the medium. In the framework we have offered, 
media differ in the costs they impose on such actions as delaying speech, starting 
up a turn. changing speakers, making errors, and repairing errors. In grounding 
what we say. we try to minimize effort for us and our partners. Ordinarily, this 
means paying as few of these costs as possible. 
The lesson is that communication is a collective activity. It requires the 
coordinated action of all the participants. Grounding is crucial for keeping that 
coordination on track. 
References 
Bach. K.. & Harnish. R. M. ( 1979). Linguistic c~)mmunicationand 
speech acts. Cambridge. 
MA: MIT Press. 
Clark. H. H.. & Carlson, T. ( 1982). Hearers and speech acts. Language, 58(2), 332-373. 
Clark. H. H.. & Marshall, C. R. ( 198 1 ). Definite reference and mutual knowledge. In A. 
K .  Joshi, B. L. Webber, & I .  A. Sag (Eds.), Elements of discourse understanding 
( pp. 10-63). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
C l d .  H. H., & Schaefer. E. F. (1987). Collaborating on contributions to conversations. 
Lon,yuag~ and Cognitive Proc,esse.s, 2( 1 ), 19-41 . 
Clark. H. H.. & Schaefer. E. F. ( 1989). Contributing to discourse. Cognitive Science, 13, 
259 --294. 
Clark. H. H.. Schreuder, R.. & Buttrick. S. (1983). Common ground and the understanding 
of demonstrative reference. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 22, 1 - 
39. 
Clark. H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. ( 1986). Referring as a collaborative process. Cognition, 
22. 1-39. 
Cohen, P. K .  (1984). The pragmatics of referring and the modality of communication. 
Compurcitional Linguirrics, IO(2). 97- 146. 
Finholt, T., Sproull. L., & Kiesler, S. ( 1990). Communication and performance in ad hoc 
task groups. In J .  Galegher, R. Kraut, & C. Egido (Eds.), Intellectual teamwork: 
Soc,ial and tec.hnologica1 foundarions of cooperative work (pp. 29 1-326). Hillsdale, 
NJ: Erlbaum. 
Furnham. A. (1982). The message, the context, and the medium. Language and Com- 
rnur~ic.crtion, 2 .  33-47. 
(ieluykens, R .  (1988). The interactional nature of referent-introduction. Papers from the 
24th Regional Meeting. Chicago Linguistic Sociery, 14 1 - 154. 
Goldbcrg. C. (1975). A system for the transfer of instructions in natural settings. Semiotica, 
14. 269-296. 
Goodwin. C. ( 198 I ). Conversational organization: 1nterac.tion behveen speakers and hear- 
ers. New York: Academic Press. 
Goodwin. C. (1986). Between and within: Alternative sequential treatments of continuers 
and assessments. Human Studies, 9 ,  205-2 17. 
Grice. H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J .  L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax 
and semantics. Volume 3 :  Speech acts (pp. 225-242). New York: Seminar Press. 
Grice. H. P. (1 978). Some further notes on logic and conversation. In P. Cole (Ed.), Synlar and 
semantics, volwne 9: Pragmatics (pp. 1 13- 128). New Yo*: Academic Press. 
Grosz, B. J., & Sidner, C. L. (1986). Attention. intentions, and the structure of discourse. 
Computational Linguistics. 12. 175-204. 
Isaacs. E. A.. & Clark, H. H. (1987). References in conversation between experts and 
novices. Journal of Experimental Psychology. 116, 26-37. 
Jefferson. G. (1972). Side sequences. In D. Sudnow (Ed.), Studies in social interaction 
(pp. 294-338). New York: Free Press. 
Jefferson, G. (1973). A case of precision timing in ordinary conversation: Overlapped tag- 
positioned address terms in closing sequences. Semiotica. 9 ,  47-96. 
Krauss, R. M.. & Weinheimer, S. (1964). Changes in reference phases as a function of 
frequency of usage in social interaction: A preliminary study. Psychonomic Study, I ,  
113-114. 
Krauss, R. M., & Weinheimer, S. (1966). Concurrent feedback, confirmation. and the 
encoding of referents in verbal communication. Journal of Personali~ and Social 
Psychology, 4 .  343-346. 
b u s s ,  R. M., & Weinheirner, S. (1%7). Effect of referent similarity and communication mode 
on verbal encoding. Journal of Verbal Learning und Verbal Behavior, 6. 359-363. 
Levelt, W. J .  M. ( 1983). Monitoring and self-repair in speech. Cognition. 14. 41-104. 
Lewis, D. K. (1969). Convenrion: A philosophical study. Cambridge. MA: Harvard Uni- 
versity Press. 
Litman. D. J.. & Allen. J. F. (1987). A plan recognition model for subdialogues in 
conversation. Cognitive Science, 11, 163-200. 
Ochsman, R. B., & Chapanis. A. (1974). The effects of 10 communication modes on the 
behavior of teams during cooperative problem-solving. International Journal ofMan- 
Machine Studies, 6 .  579-6 19. 
Sacks, H., & Schegloff, E. A. (1979). Two preferences in the organization of reference 
to persons in conversation and their interaction. In G. Psathas (Ed.). Everyday lan- 
guage: Studies in ethnomethodology (pp. 15-2 1). New York: Irvington. 
Sacks. H.. Schegloff. E. A,, & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the 
organization of turn-taking in conversation. Language, 50, 696-735. 
Schegloff, E. A. (1972). Notes on a conversational practice: Formulating place. In D. 
Sudnow (Ed.), Studies in social interaction (pp. 75-1 19). New York: Free Press. 
Schegloff, E. A. (1982). Discourse as an interactional achievement: Some uses of "uh 
huh" and other things that come between sentences. In D. Tannen (Ed.), Analyzing 
discourse: Text and talk. Georgetown Universiry Roundrable on Languages and Lin- 
guistics 1981 (pp. 71-93). Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
Schegloff, E. A,, Jefferson, G., & Sacks, H. (1977). The preference for self-correction 
in the organization of repair in conversation. Language. 53, 361-382. 
Schegloff, E. A,, & Sacks, H. (1973). Opening up closings. Semiotica, 8, 289-327. 
Schelling, T. C. ( 1960). The strategy of conflict. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Searle, J .  R. (1969). Speech acts. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
Stalnaker, R. C. (1978). Assertion. In P. Cole (Ed.), Syntax and semantics. Volume 9: 
Pragmarics (pp. 315-332). New York: Academic Press. 
Svartvik, J.. & Quirk, R. (Eds.). (1980). A corpus of English conversation. Lund, Sweden: 
Gleerup. 
Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1 986). Collaborative processes of language use in conversation. Un- 
published doctoral dissertation, Stanford University, Stanford. CA. 
