A Review of Overview+Detail, Zooming, and 
Focus+Context Interfaces 
ANDY COCKBURN*, AMY KARLSON†, BENJAMIN B. BEDERSON† 
________________________________________________________________________ 
There are many interface schemes that allow users to work at, and move between, focused and contextual views 
of a data set. We review and categorise these schemes according to the interface mechanisms used to separate 
and blend views. The four approaches are overview+detail, which uses a spatial separation between focused and 
contextual views; zooming, which uses a temporal separation; focus+context, which minimizes the seam 
between views by displaying the focus within the context; and cue-based techniques which selectively highlight 
or suppress items within the information space. Critical features of these categories, and empirical evidence of 
their success, are discussed. The aim is to provide a succinct summary of the state-of-the-art, to illuminate 
successful and unsuccessful interface strategies, and to identify potentially fruitful areas for further work.  
 
Categories and Subject Descriptors: D.2.2 Design Tools and Techniques–User Interfaces; H.5.2 User 
Interfaces–Graphical User Interfaces (GUI) 
General Terms: Human Factors 
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Information display, information visualization, focus+context, 
overview+detail, zoomable user interfaces, fisheye views, review paper. 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
In most computer applications, users need to interact with more information and with 
more interface components than can be conveniently displayed at one time on a single 
screen. This need is dictated by pragmatic, technological, and human factors. The 
pragmatic issues concern form-factors such as the size, weight, and fashion of displays 
that are used for varied tasks in diverse locations, as well as the cost of construction. 
Technological limitations constrain the ability of displays to match the breadth and acuity 
of human vision. Humans, for instance, can see through a visual angle of approximately 
200°×120° (without turning the eyes or head), while typical computer displays extend 
approximately 50° horizontally and vertically when viewed from normal distances 
(Woodson and Conover 1964). Similarly, the ‘resolution’ of the human eye, with 
                                                 
* Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, University of Canterbury, 
Christchurch, New Zealand, andy@cosc.canterbury.ac.nz 
† Human-Computer Interaction Lab, Computer Science Department, Institute for 
Advanced Computer Studies, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, {akk; 
bederson}@cs.umd.edu 
 
Permission to make digital/hard copy of part of this work for personal or classroom use is 
granted without fee provided that the copies are not made or distributed for profit or 
commercial advantage, the copyright notice, the title of the publication, and its date of 
appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the ACM, Inc. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee. 
© 2007 ACM 1073-0516/01/0300-0034 $5.00 
 
 
2
approximately 180 cones-receptors per degree in the fovea (Ware 2004), can perceive 
around 200 dots per cm (510 dots per inch) at a viewing distance of 50cm (20 inches) —
far more than the typical display resolution of 40 dots per cm (100 dots per inch). Finally, 
even if a ‘perfect’ display could be constructed, displaying all information simultaneously 
is likely to hinder the user’s ability to distinguish between important and irrelevant 
information.  
The traditional interface mechanisms for dealing with these display trade-offs involve 
allowing information to be moved (typically through paging, scrolling and panning) or 
spatially partitioned (through windowing, menus, and so on). Although scrolling and 
windowing are standard in almost all user interfaces, they introduce a discontinuity 
between the information displayed at different times and places. This discontinuity can 
cause cognitive and mechanical burdens for the user who must mentally assimilate the 
overall structure of the information space and their location within it, and manipulate 
controls in order to navigate through it. For example, Grudin (2001) reports that reducing 
the discontinuity between views “reduces the cognitive load by allowing rapid glances to 
check on information; for example between a bird’s-eye view of an entire graphical 
object and a close-up of a detail.” 
An alternative to moving or spatially partitioning the data space is to vary the scale at 
which the data is displayed, enabling multiple views at varying levels of detail. Other 
approaches involve broadening the user’s field of view to allow the natural processes of 
human vision to determine focal and peripheral views, or systems can supplement the 
information space with cues that highlight salient items within their context. All of these 
schemes offer potential advantages derived from their ability to allow users to rapidly and 
fluidly move between detailed views and broad overviews.  
1.1 Road Map 
The objective of this paper is to summarise the state of research on interfaces that allow 
users to work at multiple levels of detail, and to identify effective and ineffective uses of 
them. This review is motivated by two factors. First, advanced interaction techniques are 
increasingly being deployed in desktop interfaces, yet research sometimes exists that can 
advise developers about the techniques’ potential efficiency impacts. For example, Apple 
released their Mac OS X Dock which allows items to dynamically enlarge as the cursor 
approaches them, but research has now shown that the visual distortion of this fisheye 
effect (described later) harms targeting performance. Second, although there have been 
previous reviews of related work (Section 2), they are now dated and cover a subset of 
research. In particular, they were published when the research focus was on developing 
 
3
new interaction techniques rather than on empirical analysis of their effectiveness. 
Recently, however, many researchers have turned their attention to empirically assessing 
the efficiency and effectiveness of their techniques. Through this review we aim to 
provide a succinct summary of the state of the art in interfaces for working with focused 
and contextual views, and in the understanding of their performance issues, as derived 
from empirical studies.  
Our review is organized into four categories which distinguish systems according to 
their varying uses of space, time or visual effect. First, we describe work on 
overview+detail interfaces, which use a spatial separation to partition contextual and 
detailed information (see Figure 1a for an example). We then describe zooming 
interfaces, which use a temporal separation between the views (Figure 1b). The third 
category, called ‘focus+context’, eliminates the spatial and temporal separation by 
displaying the focus within the context in a single continuous view (‘fisheye views’ are 
one example, shown in Figure 1c). The final ‘cue’ category modifies the way in which 
items are depicted in order to highlight, suppress, or contextualise them. For example, 
search results can be highlighted, or non-results could be visually deemphasized, to draw 
the user’s attention to elements of interest. The cue category depends on the availability 
of semantic information about elements in the data set, and can be used to enhance any of 
the other three techniques.  
Within each category we review their features, foundations, and objectives, and we 
identify commercial exemplars where they exist. We also review research systems that 
demonstrate novel variations on the theme. After the description of the categories, we 
summarise the empirical work that identifies the strengths and weaknesses of the 
techniques, presented in two broad categories of user task: low-level mechanical tasks 
such as target acquisition; and higher level cognitive tasks such as the user’s ability to 
search or comprehend the information space. We finish the paper by presenting summary 
guidelines and agendas for further research.  
 
4
 
(a) Google Maps – an example overview+detail display. The overview inset in the 
bottom right hand corner of the display allows users to see the context of the detailed 
region.  
 
 
(b) Two views in a zooming interface. Detailed and contextual views are temporally 
segregated within a single display. 
 
(c) A fisheye view is one example of a focus+context interface. The focal region is 
magnified and displayed within its surrounding context. 
Figure 1: Example overview+detail, zooming, and focus+context interfaces. 
2. PREVIOUS REVIEWS  
There have been several previous reviews of interfaces supporting focused and contextual 
views. Leung and Apperley (1994) provided the first comprehensive review of the set of 
visualizations that visually distort the information space (called ‘distortion-oriented’ 
techniques). They used a metaphor of a rubber sheet to unify the theoretical properties of 
different methods that display the focal area within the surrounding context. The rubber-
 
5
sheet analogy had previously been used to describe visualisations by Tobler (1973), 
Mackinlay, Robertson and Card (1991), and Sarkar, Snibbe and Reiss (1993). Keahey 
(1998) further described the tools and techniques that can be used to achieve focus and 
context through non-linear magnification. Subsequently, Carpendale and Montagnese 
(2001) presented a mathematical framework, called the ‘Elastic Presentation Framework’ 
that formalises the relationship between diverse visualisation schemes that present 
regions at different scales within, or on top of, one another.  
Reviews have also addressed different application domains. Plaisant, Carr and 
Shneiderman (1995) describe user tasks for image browsing, considering alternative 
interfaces for overview+detail, zooming, and focus+context approaches. Herman, 
Melancon and Marshall (2000) review graph visualization and navigation schemes, 
including focus+context views, with an emphasis on graph layout algorithms. In a side-
bar to their paper, Kosara, Miksch and Hauser (2002) provide a three part taxonomy of 
interface methods for focused and contextual views: spatial methods, dimensional 
methods, and cue methods. Unfortunately, the side-bar presents only a few sentences on 
each technique 
Following the research emphasis of the time, the focus of these reviews has been on 
describing the properties of the visualisations, rather than on empirically comparing their 
effectiveness at supporting the users’ tasks. 
In his enlightening recent paper, Furnas (2006) also unifies disparate interface 
strategies for achieving focused and contextual views by revisiting the ‘fisheye’ degree of 
interest function (FE-DOI, Section 5.1) that he originally proposed twenty years earlier 
(Furnas 1986). A major theme of his new theoretical analysis is that many research 
visualizations primarily address the representational issues of how information is 
displayed, when the user’s primary concern is with what data is selected for display: he 
contends that representation should be a secondary consideration to content. In earlier 
work, Furnas (1997) also presented a theoretical analysis of the problem of effectively 
navigating within information visualizations.  
Several books on information visualization also cover overview+detail, zooming and 
focus+context interfaces, notably the following: Ware (2004), which excels in the 
psychological foundations of visualisation; Spence (2007), which provides a well 
structured introduction to information visualization in a manner accessible to 
undergraduates; Chen (2004), which provides a rich coverage and distillation of research 
across the entire field; and Card, Mackinlay and Shneiderman (1999), which provides a 
collation of the seminal research papers in information visualization. The goal of 
 
6
information visualization is to help users gain insight into the content of their data spaces, 
and consequently all of these books cover a much broader range of topics than those 
discussed in this paper. Due to their breadth, the books can only give limited direct 
coverage of interfaces for, and empirical research on, strategies for helping users work 
with focused and contextual views.  
3. OVERVIEW+DETAIL — SPATIAL SEPARATION 
An overview+detail interface design is characterized by the simultaneous display of both 
an overview and detailed view of an information space, each in a distinct presentation 
space. Google Maps, shown in Figure 1a, is a canonical example of an overview+detail 
interface. Due to the physical separation of the two views, users interact with the views 
separately, although actions in one are often immediately reflected in the other.  
Many forms of overview+detail interfaces exist, both in the standard desktop 
environment and in research systems, with important features including the ratio of scales 
in the detail and overview regions, the relative size and positioning of the views, 
mechanisms for navigation control, and the coupling between overview and detail 
displays.    
In the remainder of this section we describe exemplar overview+detail interfaces and 
discuss the design issues involved in mapping their user-support to their discriminating 
features.  
3.1 Scrollbars, Embellished Scrollbars and Thumbnail Overviews 
Scrollbars are a familiar component of graphical user interfaces, and each one can be 
considered to provide a one dimensional overview of the document – the position of the 
scroll thumb (also called the ‘knob’) within the scroll trough (also called the ‘gutter’) 
portrays location in the document, and the length of the scroll thumb shows the 
proportion of the document that is visible.  
Although scrollbars typically encode only spatial information, several researchers 
have experimented with variants that additionally portray semantic information. Value 
bars (Chimera 1992) embellished the scroll trough with dashed lines, the thickness of 
which depended on numerical values extracted from columns in formatted data files, to 
depict the location of ‘interesting’ or outlier data. Hill and Hollan (1992) used similar 
techniques to convey the read and edit history of document regions. Scroll troughs have 
also been used to indicate document passages that best match search queries (1999) and 
to provide awareness of other people’s locations and actions in real-time collaborative 
tasks (Gutwin, Roseman and Greenberg 1996). 
 
7
As the level of detail presented in the scroll trough increases, the scrollbar becomes a 
first-class overview window. Many everyday applications, such as Microsoft PowerPoint 
and Adobe Reader, support ‘thumbnail’ document overviews that blur the boundary 
between scrollbar and overview for navigation (Figure 2).  
Designing thumbnail overview interfaces involves addressing a trade-off in scale 
ratios: low scale ratios allow thumbnails that clearly represent the underlying dataset, but 
at the cost of increased overview scrolling to access distant thumbnails, while high scale 
ratios allow rapid access to more distant pages, but at the cost of visual clarity. Many 
applications therefore allow users to directly control the size of the thumbnail region and 
its scale factor (Figure 2 shows Microsoft PowerPoint with two overview-region sizes).  
Although it seems natural that the thumbnails should allow shortcut navigation 
(clicking on a thumbnail should cause that region of the information space to appear in 
the detailed view), it is less clear whether the overview and detailed regions should be 
synchronised so that they continually display corresponding locations. Synchronisation is 
not likely to cause disorientation, but it is less powerful as it forbids independent 
exploration of document regions in the two views. Many variant implementations are 
possible: for example, Microsoft PowerPoint implements a one-way synchronisation in 
which the overview is synchronised with the detail view (scrolling the detail causes 
corresponding movement in the overview), while the detail is unsynchronised with the 
overview (scrolling the overview has no side-effect on the detail).  
3.2 Standard Overview+Detail Views 
The first examples of overview+detail views (that we are aware of) are in computer 
games of the early 1980s, such as Defender, which provided a broad overview of the 
  
 
 
 
(a) Five thumbnails in the overview. 
(b) Ten thumbnails in the overview. 
Figure 2: PowerPoint’s overview+detail interface. The scrollable thumbnail overview is 
on the left-hand side of each window, and the thumbnails can be scaled by configuring 
the width of the overview region. 
 
8
game’s information space at the bottom of the screen. They are now widely used in many 
application areas, particularly mapping and image editing tools. Google Maps (Figure 
1a), for example, has a small inset overview region which includes an interactive 
rectangular sub-region that corresponds to the area shown in the detailed view. Panning 
actions in the detail view are immediately reflected within the overview. However, 
panning actions in the overview are less tightly coupled with the detail area; the detail 
view is only updated to match actions in the overview when the user completes the 
panning activity by releasing the mouse. This slight de-coupling allows users to explore 
the overview without altering the information presented in the detail view, and at the 
same time reduces computational and network load. 
Given the wide variety of application areas for overview+detail interfaces, it is 
unlikely that generic guidelines for the ‘right type’ of view coupling can be provided, but 
we note that it is becoming standard practice to allow interactive exploration of the 
overview without influencing the detail view, while manipulation of the detail view is 
immediately reflected in the overview (e.g. Microsoft Word & PowerPoint, Adobe 
Reader, and Google Maps all operate in this manner). We further note that it is common 
to enable users to control whether the overview is visible, implying that designers believe 
that overviews may not be useful to all users or for all tasks. More generally, however, 
the visualization problem of coordinating multiple views is gaining increasing attention, 
but reviewing it is beyond the scope of this paper: see Roberts (2007) for a recent review 
of the state of the art.  
3.3 Lenses and Z-separation 
The systems and techniques described above all separate the overview and detail regions 
on the x and y coordinates. Several systems, however, separate the views on the z-
coordinate, with overviews overlaying or blended with the background detail.  
Lenses are moveable display regions that overlay the default window. Although 
lenses can be similar to ‘fisheye’ distortions (described later), we categorise them as 
‘overview+detail’ because they separate (on the z-plane) the detail and overview. 
Lenses have been used as a magnification metaphor in standard desktop environments 
since the early 1990s: Figure 3 shows a magnification lens in the document previewer 
‘Yap’: the magnified region follows the user’s cursor. Bier, Stone, Pier, Buxton, and 
DeRose (1993) introduced Toolglass widgets and Magic Lenses together under the same 
design philosophy. Toolglass widgets are resizable see-through windows, normally 
controlled by the user’s non-dominant hand, that allow users to perform specialized 
operations on the data space objects over which they are positioned. For example, to 
 
9
change the colour of an object in a drawing application the user would place the colour-
selector toolglass over the target using their non-dominant hand, and then click-through 
the toolglass using the dominant hand. Magic Lenses have the same form as Toolglass 
widgets, but they transform the visualisation of the underlying objects to allow focused 
viewing of specific attributes. 
Although lenses are normally much smaller than the underlying detailed area, the lens 
can be the same size as the detailed region, with transparency visually separating the 
overview and detail ‘layers’. Display hardware is also available to implement the layered 
separation. PureDepth† manufactures a dual-layer LCD screen, with a small (1-5cm) 
separation between front and rear LCD layers. Images displayed on the front layer can 
partially or entirely occlude those displayed on the rear layer. Claims that this technique 
aids cognitive separation of data on different layers have not yet been supported by 
experimental results (Aboelsaadat and Balakrishnan 2004).  
4. ZOOMING — TEMPORAL SEPARATION 
The second basic category of interfaces supporting both focused and contextual views is 
based on zooming, which involves a temporal separation between views; users magnify 
(zoom in to focus) or demagnify (zoom out for context) a data set in place rather than 
seeing both views simultaneously. Naturally, zooming and overview+detail features can 
be combined, but in this section we address the isolated issues of zooming. 
Some of the design issues for zoomable interfaces that are discussed in this section 
include the transition between zoom states (continuous or discrete zoom levels, and the 
                                                 
† www.puredepth.com 
 
Figure 3: Z-based overview+detail separation. In the “Yap” dvi file previewer a 
magnified detail region is shown in a lens that follows the user’s cursor. 
 
10
use of animation), the interaction controls for zooming in and out, the coupling between 
controls for movement (panning) and zoom, and the use of semantic zooming to alter the 
presentation of data items at different scale levels.  
4.1 Standard desktop applications of zooming 
Many standard desktop interfaces allow the user to zoom the data set. The controls for 
zooming are commonly presented as toolbar widgets for specifying magnification as a 
percentage of “normal”, or zoom selection dialog boxes. For applications that support a 
“zoom mode” (e.g. Adobe Reader) all mouse clicks and drags are interpreted as zoom 
actions while in that mode. Some interfaces, however, support zoom control through 
specific interaction sequences using the mouse or keyboard (e.g., double clicking, 
CTRL+‘+’, CTRL+scrollwheel), and thus have no visual representations. This approach 
raises two potential problems: first, the user may not discover how to activate the zoom 
functions; and second, they may be unable to reverse the action. For example, in an 
informal study for this paper, only one of six computer scientists who were also 
experienced Microsoft Word users had learned that holding the control key while using 
the mouse scroll wheel was a shortcut for zoom; similarly, none of them realized that 
double clicking with the left button is a zoom-in shortcut in Google Maps, and when 
shown this feature it took most of them many attempts to determine how to reverse the 
action without the widgets (double clicking the right button).  
The problem of reversing zooming actions is exacerbated by the fact that undo, the 
standard mechanism for action reversal, is normally reserved for actions that modify the 
 
Figure 4: A space-scale diagram (Furnas and Bederson 1995). The viewing window 
(a) is shifted rigidly around the 3D diagram to obtain all possible pan/zoom views of 
the original 2D surface, e.g., (b) a zoomed in view of the circle overlap, (c) a zoomed 
out view including the entire original picture, and (d) a shifted view of a part of the 
picture. 
 
11
data-state and not for those that modify the view. Region-select for zoom-in should be 
offered with caution (although powerful for appropriate uses) because there is no 
equivalent action for zooming out.  
4.2 Zooming toolkits and models 
Many zoom-based research systems have been developed to demonstrate interaction and 
visualization techniques (Card et al. 1999). The Pad system (Perlin and Fox 1993) was 
the first fully zoomable desktop environment, and it introduced two important concepts:  
semantic zooming, which allows objects to be represented differently at different scales; 
and portals, which allow links between data objects and filters on their representations. 
Pad prompted extensive further research on these and related topics, and toolkits were 
developed to ease the implementation of zoomable interfaces, including Pad++ 
(Bederson, Hollan, Perlin, Meyer, Bacon and Furnas 1996), Jazz (Bederson, Meyer and 
Good 2000), Piccolo (Bederson, Grosjean and Meyer 2004), and ZVTM (Pietriga 2005). 
Several application domains have been explored using these tookits, including drawing 
tools for children (Druin, Stewart, Proft, Bederson and Hollan 1997), authoring tools 
(Furnas and Zhang 1998), image browsers (Bederson 2001), and software visualization 
(Summers, Goldsmith, Kubica and Caudell 2003).  
The experience of building many zoomable applications across multiple domains 
revealed domain independent design challenges, which Furnas and Bederson (1995) 
addressed with Space-Scale diagrams, a framework for conceptualizing navigation using 
zoom and pan. Figure 4 shows a space-scale diagram, with scale on the y-axis and space 
on the x/z axes. The user’s viewport (Figure 4a), shown by the superimposed region, 
remains a constant size during manipulation of scale and space. Clearly, as scale 
increases (zooming in goes up the y-axis) the amount of panning required to traverse the 
region also increases. Van Wijk and Nuij (2004) formalised the mathematics involved in 
generating smooth and efficient animation trajectories in pan-zoom space (further 
discussed below). Another general usability issue associated with zooming is ‘Desert 
Fog’ (Jul and Furnas 1998), which captures navigation problems caused by an absence of 
orienting features due to their increased separation at high zoom levels. To combat Desert 
Fog, Jul and Furnas introduce ‘critical zones’ (a cue-based technique) to provide a visual 
demarcation of regions that are guaranteed to yield further information when zoomed.  
Alternatively, Bederson (2001) suggests designing the interaction to be closely linked to 
the content so it is impossible to navigate to empty regions. 
 
12
4.3 Animation 
Some methods for changing zoom scale, such as updating a magnification widget in a 
toolbar, jump the user immediately to the new view. However, animation is frequently 
used to help users assimilate the relationship between pre- and post-zoom states 
(Bederson and Boltman 1999; Tversky, Morrison and Betrancourt 2002). Animation 
causes a brief period of automatic zooming: rather than controlling the animation, the 
user simply observes it.  
Designing zoom-animations requires finding a suitable transition speed that reveals 
the relationship between zoom states without slowing the user’s overall interaction: 
research suggests values between 0.3 and 1.0 second are appropriate (Card, Robertson 
and Mackinlay 1991; Bederson and Boltman 1999; Klein and Bederson 2005), depending 
on the application domain and distance travelled. Sometimes, however, users need rich 
cues to maintain comprehension and orientation throughout the animation, demanding 
longer animated periods and more detailed representations throughout the transition. To 
this end, van Wijk and Nuij (2004) developed a set of equations for reducing optical flow 
during pan/zoom trajectories between two known points in a space-scale diagram (from 
one point in space at one level of zoom to another point at a different level of zoom).  
4.4 Automatic zooming and parallel zoom/pan control 
Van Wijk and Nuij’s formulae calculate smooth and efficient trajectories for motion 
between known points. Most information browsing, however, involves dynamic 
modification of paths through space and scale in response to user feedback. Traditional 
interfaces impose a temporal separation between users’ panning and zooming actions, but 
two research threads are investigating concurrent control for motion and zoom.  
First, several systems offer users explicit parallel control of movement and zoom. 
Examples include bi-manual systems (Guiard 1987) that assign panning and zooming to 
devices controlled in different hands (Bourgeois and Guiard 2002). OrthoZoom Scroller 
(Appert and Fekete 2006) is a one-handed variant of this approach for one-dimensional 
(vertical) scrolling. It maps vertical mouse actions to vertical panning and horizontal 
mouse actions to zooming.  
Second, some systems use an automatic connection between zooming and panning, 
calculating one from the user’s manipulation of the other. Mackinlay, Card and 
Robertson (1990) introduced the first related technique with their 3D Point of Interest 
movement functions, which moved the view towards a specified point by a constant 
percentage of the remaining distance in each animation cycle, thus producing slower 
velocities and easier control in the latter stages of object approach (similar to zooming 
 
13
in). Addressing a similar problem in 3D worlds, Ware and Fleet (1997) introduced 
“Depth Modulated Flying”, which automatically adapted the viewer’s velocity in ‘fly-by’ 
visualizations in response to the user’s control of altitude (similar to zoom-level). Tan, 
Robertson, and Czerwinski (2001) then inverted the speed/zoom binding with “speed-
coupled flying with orbiting” in which the viewpoint altitude is automatically adjusted in 
response to velocity. In more standard desktop applications Igarashi and Hinckley (2000) 
implemented several ‘speed dependent automatic zooming’ (SDAZ) systems to reduce 
disorientation when users scroll rapidly. By automatically zooming away from the 
document as the scroll-rate increases, the pixel-rate of movement is kept within human 
perceptual limits.  
One potential limitation of combined zooming and panning is that it may impede 
users in forming and exploiting a spatial understanding of the information space: the data 
moves to different locations in the screen, dependent on space and scale settings. To 
investigate whether stable spatial representations aided users’ ability to navigate in 
documents Cockburn, Gutwin and Alexander (2006) designed a simple ‘Space-Filling 
Thumbnails’ interface, which constrained the user to two temporally separated views: a 
detailed view for reading the document, and a fully-zoomed out view in which all pages 
are represented as tiled thumbnails within a single screen. Although highly constraining, 
the interface ensured spatial stability within the window as scrolling and panning were 
disabled.  
Evaluations of these systems are described in Section 7. 
5. FOCUS+CONTEXT — SEAMLESS FOCUS IN CONTEXT 
The previous methods discussed for managing focused and contextual information have 
separated the two views in either space (overview+detail) or time (zooming), leaving the 
user to assimilate their global relationship. The third approach, called focus+context, 
integrates focus and context into a single display where all parts are concurrently visible: 
the focus is displayed seamlessly within its surrounding context. Research into “fisheye 
view” interfaces, which diminish or suppress information that lies away from the focal 
area, is particularly well represented in this category. Many focus+context interfaces, 
including some fisheye views, use differential scale functions across the information 
surface, leading to intentional distortion such as that shown in Figure 1c. Consequently, 
the term ‘distortion-oriented view’ is also commonly applied in this category. By 
presenting all regions in a single coherent display, focus+context systems aim to decrease 
the short term memory load associated with assimilating distinct views of a system, and 
thus potentially improve user ability to comprehend and manipulate the information. 
 
14
 
This section provides a brief review and introduction to the wide range of systems, 
techniques and theories encapsulated within focus+context research. Recurring themes 
include the following: selective presentation versus distortion of data items – several 
systems calculate the user’s degree of interest in data items to determine which are 
displayed, while others use the degree of interest value to change the position and scale of 
their presentation; system- versus human-controlled focus+context – some systems 
attempt to infer the user’s degree of interest through interaction behavior such as the 
location of their cursor, while others defer to user manipulations of the focal region, or 
simply exploit users’ natural capabilities for focused attention and peripheral awareness 
(as with wide-screen displays); single versus multiple foci – while most systems only 
support a single focal-point, some support an arbitrary number of concurrent focal points.  
5.1 Visions and theoretical foundations 
Spence and Apperley (1982) described the first focus+context visualisation, which they 
named the “Bifocal Display”. It used a metaphor of paper stretched across four rollers, 
with two foreground rollers giving a rectangular focal region, and two distant rollers on 
either side giving receding side-plate displays. The user changed their focus by sliding 
the paper in either direction across the frame. Nearly a decade later Mackinlay, Robertson 
and Card (1991) implemented the concept in their Perspective Wall, shown in Figure 5. 
The theoretical foundations for focus+context interfaces were established by Furnas 
(1986), who described a “generalised fisheye view” formula for calculating the user’s 
‘degree of interest’ (DOI) in objects in the data-space: DOI(x | y) = API(x) – D(x,y), 
where x is a data element, y is the current focus, API(x) is the a priori interest in object x, 
and D(x,y) is the spatial or semantic distance between x and y. Furnas described how his 
formula could be applied to a variety of information domains, with data objects being 
removed from the display when they fell below a threshold DOI value. While Furnas’s 
DOI formula determines what information should be included in the display, much of the 
 
 
 
(a) Birds-eye view 
(b) Head-on view. 
(c) The running system. 
Figure 5. The Perspective Wall (Mackinlay, Robertson and Card 1991).  
 
15
subsequent research has primarily addressed the issue of how information is presented 
(Furnas 2006).  
Extending fisheye views, Sarkar and Brown (1992) presented geometric 
transformations that produce visual distortions of graphs and maps, based on the 
Euclidean distance between vertices or coordinates, and the user’s focal point. The 
transformations determine each point’s size, position, and level of detail in the display 
(see Figure 6). The Sarkar and Brown algorithm has been heavily used in fisheye 
visualisations. Lamping, Rao and Pirolli (1995) present an alternative focus+context 
transformation for hierarchical data structures based on hyperbolic geometry (Figure 7). 
Several other systems also demonstrate focus+context techniques for tree visualization 
including SpaceTree (Plaisant, Grosjean and Bederson 2002), which uses extensive 
zooming animation to help users stay oriented within its focus+context tree presentation, 
and the TreeJuxtaposer (Munzner, Guimbretiere, Tasiran, Zhang and Zhou 2003), which 
uses focus+context methods to support comparisons across hierarchical datasets. 
 
 
Figure 7: The Hyperbolic Tree Browser (Lamping et al. 1995). 
 
(a) A Cartesian transformation of a graph  
(b) A polar transformation of a map  
 
of major US cities. 
 
 
 
of the US. 
 
Figure 6: Sarkar and Brown (1992) fisheye transformations. 
 
16
 
Two potential problems with fisheye views are first, misinterpretation of the 
underlying data, and second, challenges in target acquisition, both of which are caused by 
distortion of the information space. As Figure 1c shows, North/South and East/West 
gridlines distort around the centre of a fisheye, leading to ambiguity regarding location 
and direction within the lens. Zanella, Carpendale and Rounding (2002) propose using 
grids and shading to alleviate misinterpretation. The fisheye target acquisition problem is 
caused by the lens displacing items away from the actual screen location used to activate 
them, as shown in Figure 8.  
5.2 Sample applications 
Many systems demonstrating focus+context have been developed. Empirical evidence of 
focus+context success is presented in Section 7.  
5.2.1 Fisheye Views for targeting in desktop applications 
The Mac OS X Dock icon-panel (Figure 8a) incorporates the first large-scale deployment 
of fisheye-style effects. Items in the icon-panel expand as the user’s cursor moves 
towards them, providing a dynamic and rich visual effect that users may appreciate.  
 
(a) The Mac Os X Dock icon-panel. 
 
 
 
(b) Target movement caused by distortion. Items can be displayed at different 
locations (middle rows) from the actual locations needed to select them (top and 
bottom rows). 
Figure 8: Fisheye distortion effects with icon-panels.
 
17
Theoretically similar to the icon-panel, Bederson (2000) developed fisheye menus to 
help selecting items in long menus, for example, selecting a country-name from a combo-
box. Each line of text in the fisheye menu is displayed in an extremely small font, with 
the item- and font-size increasing as the cursor moves closer. To partially resolve the 
problem of items moving as the cursor approaches users can ‘lock’ the lens dragging  into 
a region to the right of the normal menu. 
5.2.2 Fisheye documents 
Furnas’s original description of the fisheye technique used computer programs as an 
example: when the fisheye DOI formula calculated a low value for a program region, it 
was removed from the display. Although manual controls for removing program block 
statements and methods are now standard features of Integrated Development 
Environments such as Microsoft Visual Studio 2005 and Netbeans (see Figure 9), 
automatic expansion and contraction using the DOI algorithm remains largely confined to 
research labs (the Mylar/Mylyn program visualization extension to the Eclipse IDE is one 
example of wide-spread use of DOI (Kersten and Murphy 2005)). Everyday word-
processors also include manual structure-based data-hiding capabilities such as the 
“Outline View” of Microsoft Word, which allows successive folding and unfolding of 
document sections. While systems such as these provide discrete visualization control, 
where regions are either included or excluded, other systems such as the Document Lens 
 
Figure 9. Netbeans IDE allows code detail to be removed from the display, allowing a 
broader contextual view of the program code.  
 
18
(Robertson and Mackinlay 1993) use continuous functions to diminish document regions 
with distance from the focus (Figure 10).  
 
5.2.3 Fisheye tables 
Furnas’s original paper also described how fisheye views could be applied to tabular data 
such as calendar entries, with TableLens (Rao and Card 1994) providing the first 
interactive demonstration (Figure 11). TableLens presents a compact overview of large 
data sets, displaying all rows and columns simultaneously by encoding values as small 
bars. Fisheye effects are available to selectively expand rows and columns to reveal the 
attribute values of the associated data. Expansion can be applied independently to rows 
and columns, allowing multiple focal points, but preserving the familiar rectangular 
format of cells.  
Bederson, Clamage, Czerwinski and Robertson (2004) applied concepts from 
TableLens within the DateLens fisheye calendar tool (Figure 12). Designed with the 
constrained display space of PDAs in mind, DateLens supports visualisation of different 
 
Figure 10. The Document Lens (Robertson and Mackinlay 1993). 
 
Figure 11. TableLens (Rao and Card 1994). 
 
19
time-spans (days, weeks, months) as well as a variety of search and presentation tools to 
illuminate patterns and outliers.  
5.2.4 Wide field-of-view systems 
Another approach to providing concurrent focus+context is to increase the size and 
resolution of the display, allowing natural human methods such as eye gaze direction, 
peripheral vision, and control of proximity to the work surface.  
Several display technologies can be used to produce a wide field of view: large low 
resolution displays, multi-monitor environments, large high resolution displays, large 
mixed resolution displays, and heads-up displays. Large low resolution displays simply 
enlarge each pixel, which is useful for distant viewing, but offers little advantage for 
close work due to low detail. Large high resolution displays are created either by placing 
multiple monitors alongside one another (Grudin 2001), or by tiled projection to 
minimize seams between the outputs from multiple graphics card heads (Robertson, 
Czerwinski, Baudisch, Meyers, Robbins, Smith and Tan 2005).  
Mixed resolution displays offer an inexpensive method for producing both a large 
display surface area and a detailed focal region. Baudisch, Good, Bellotti and Schraedley 
(2002) demonstrated the technique, using a small high-resolution display region 
(1024x768 pixels, ~15inch flat-panel display) within a large 4x3ft, 1024x768 pixels 
projected display (Figure 13). The images presented in the two displays were stitched 
together in software to ensure that panning actions in one caused corresponding updates 
to the other. This technology, however, is a stop-gap measure until high-resolution large 
displays, such as the tiled wall displays by Guimbretiere, Stone and Winograd (2001), are 
available at low cost.  
 
 
 
 (a) Overview. 
(b) One-day zoom. 
(c) One-day focus. (d) Appointment focus. 
Figure 12. The DateLens interface with the view configured to show 12 weeks at 
consecutive levels of detail. All transitions between views are animated. 
 
20
 
Figure 13. A mixed resolution large display using a 1024x768 LCD panel focal area inset 
within a 1024x768 projected contextual display (Baudisch et al. 2002). 
Finally, heads-up displays can also emulate a wide field of view (Patrick, Cosgrove, 
Slavkovic, Rode, Veratti and Chiselko 2000), but current devices are limited to relatively 
low resolution, reducing their ability to support detailed views.  
Lessons from empirical studies of large displays are presented in Section 7.   
6. CUE-BASED TECHNIQUES 
Almost all of the overview+detail, zooming and focus+context approaches described 
above modify the size of objects in order to support both focused and contextual views. 
These scale modifications can be applied purely to the graphical portrayal of objects or 
semantically so that only objects with certain properties are scaled.  
Cue-based techniques, on the other hand, modify how objects are rendered and can 
introduce proxies for objects that might not be expected to appear in the display at all. 
They can be used in conjunction with any of the schemes above, and are typically applied 
in response to some search criteria. Data items satisfying the criteria are then displayed in 
a modified form to alert the user to their presence. Strong consideration and support of 
information scent – “the strength of local cues, such as text labels, in providing an 
indication of the utility or relevance of a navigational path leading to some distal 
information” (Pirolli, Card and Van Der Wege 2001), page 507 – is particularly 
important in the design of cue-based techniques.  
 
21
Given this broad definition of cue-based techniques, much of the work on Information 
Visualization could be included within this category. We confine ourselves to a few 
examples that are particularly pertinent to the problems of focus and context. 
6.1 Cue techniques for highlighting focal objects 
Kosara et al. (2002) described a ‘semantic depth of field’ technique that provides a 
natural interface for drawing the user’s attention to focal items. With this technique items 
that satisfy search criteria are displayed in focus, while all others are slightly blurred (see 
Figure 14a).  
Several researchers have examined techniques for adding cues to the presence of 
search terms in web pages: normal displays and overviews with the ‘Popout Prism’ (Suh, 
Woodruff, Rosenholtz and Glass 2002); fisheye views with ‘Fishnet’ (Baudisch, Lee and 
Hanna 2004); and mobile devices with ‘Summary Thumbnails’ (Lam and Baudisch 
2005). Bederson et al. (2004) used visual demarcations in the scrollbar trough to convey 
the presence of search matches across several months of appointment data in the PDA 
calendar DateLens, and similar markings are used in the Netbeans IDE (right of Figure 9) 
to convey where recent edits have taken place in program code.  
6.2 Cue techniques for extending context beyond the window edge 
Contextual cues about information lying outside the main display region can be added 
with ‘decorations’. City Lights, developed by Zellwegger, Mackinlay, Good, Stefik, and 
Baudisch (2002), used window-edge decorations to indicate the existence, size and/or 
location of objects that lay beyond the window frame. In Halo (Figure 14b), a variation of 
City Lights, Baudisch and Rosenholtz (2003) explored the use of arcs as decorators, as 
     
 
 
(a) Depth of focus ‘blurring’ 
(b) Halo depicts items beyond the window 
  
(Kosara, Miksch and Hauser 2002) 
edge (Baudisch and Rosenholtz 2003). 
Figure 14: Two cue based techniques. 
 
22
though each off-screen object were a street lamp just tall enough to cast its circle of light 
into the screen view-port. Nearby objects cast short, highly curved arcs, while far objects 
cast long, subtly curved arcs. In this way, object direction and distance are encoded as arc 
placement and curvature.  
7. EMPIRICAL EVALUATIONS  
Many overview+detail, zooming, and focus+context interfaces have been developed 
since the 1980s, but until recently there was relatively little empirical evidence of their 
success. We briefly review this empirical research, grouping the evaluations based on 
whether they primarily address low-level aspects of interaction such as target acquisition, 
or high-level user aspects such as the ability to comprehend the information space. This 
summary of evaluative work largely excludes cue-based techniques: providing a cue to 
highlight objects that match some semantic criteria will aid users in finding them. 
7.1 Low-level evaluations 
Most of the low-level evaluations, summarised in Table 1, each investigate only one 
category of technique (overview+detail, zooming, or focus+context), either comparing 
performance with and without that method or analysing its interaction characteristics.  
The low level problem of target acquisition efficiency (the time taken to select items 
of different sizes at different distances) is particularly well represented in this set of 
studies. It is a well understood topic in HCI research, with an accurate and robust model 
of performance called Fitts’ Law (Fitts 1954). Although Fitts’ Law is traditionally 
applied to targets that are continuously visible, it also accurately models target 
acquisition across large distances with many different styles of zooming interface 
(Guiard, Bourgeois, Mottet and Beaudouin-Lafon 2001; Guiard, Beaudouin-Lafon, 
Bastin, Pasveer and Zhai 2004; Guiard, Du and Chapuis 2007).  
Target acquisition tasks are important in human-computer interaction research 
because they largely isolate the mechanics of interface control from the context of use. 
However, even in the constrained domain of target acquisition there are many 
experimental variants that can influence results. Two important considerations are how 
the targets are depicted at various scale levels, and whether each target is selected once or 
multiple times. The target revisitation issue is important because some interfaces will 
provide better support for the formation and exploitation of human spatial memory.  
Recent research is investigating how to best operationalise, control, and automate the 
methodology for evaluating multi-scale interfaces (Guiard et al. 2007; Mackay, Appert, 
Beaudouin-Lafon, Chapuis, Du and Fekete 2007; Pietriga, Appert and Beaudouin-Lafon 
2007).
 
23
Table 1. Low-level evaluations of mechanical manipulation and target acquisition. 
Author and Year 
O+D 
Zoom 
F+C 
Description 
Ramos et al. 2007 
‹› 
 
 
Target acquisition. Shows that pressure-activated lenses 
can aid acquisition of small targets. 
Cockburn et al. 2006 
 
‹› 
 
Document navigation. Thumbnail-enhanced scrollbars 
(O+D) and several zooming variants are outperformed 
by a zooming interface that presents all pages as a 
stamp-sheet of page-thumbnails. 
Gutwin and Skopik 
2003 
‹› 
Steering tasks (dragging through a constrained path). 
Results showed that O+D and pan+zoom were slow 
compared to several fisheye variants.. 
Pietriga 2007 
‹› 
Mechanical aspects of multi-scale searching. Compared 
O+D, pan and zoom, fisheye F+C, and DragMag 
interfaces for identifying abstract tasks. O+D performed 
best, followed by DragMag, F+C, then pan and zoom.. 
Shoemaker and 
Gutwin 2007 
 
‹› 
Multi-point target acquisition. Compared pan, zoom, and 
two fisheye techniques for selecting pairs of points. A 
fisheye allowed fastest task completion. Combined 
zooming and panning was not allowed.  
Gutwin 2002 
 
 
‹› 
Target acquisition. Describes the fisheye moving target 
problem, and proposes and evaluates ‘speed-coupled 
flattening’ which eases it. 
McGuffin and 
Balakrishnan 2002; 
Zhai et al. 2003  
 
 
‹› 
Target acquisition. Targets that maintain stationary 
centres, but which expand in motor-space as the cursor 
approaches are faster to acquire than static ones. 
Hornbaek and 
Hertzum 2007 
 
 
‹› 
Menu item acquisition. Analyses menu item selection 
with fisheye menus. Demonstrates they are slower than 
traditional hierarchical menus.  
Guiard et al. 2001; 
Guiard et al. 2004 
 
‹› 
 
Target acquisition. Careful analysis of zooming as a tool 
for high index of difficulty pointing tasks. 
Cockburn et al. 2005  
 
‹› 
 
Document navigation. Calibration of perceptual issues 
of the relationship between scroll-speed and zoom, and 
comparative evaluation of automatic zooming versus 
traditional scrolling.  
Ramos and 
Balakrishnan 2005 
 
‹› 
 
Target acquisition. Compares parallel input mechanisms 
for zooming and panning (aka zliding). Uni-manual 
stylus ‘zliding’ (pressure for zooming and dragging for 
sliding) beats bi-manual methods. 
Appert and Fekete 
2006; Mackay et al. 
2007 
 
‹› 
 
Document navigation. Compares several zooming 
variants, concluding that OrthoZoom’s concurrent uni-
manual control for pan and zoom outperforms bimanual 
controls and automatic zooming. 
 
7.1.1 Linking of controls for pan and zoom 
In investigating how best to manipulate the concurrent control of panning and zooming, 
Ramos and Balakrishnan (2005) found that unimanual ‘zliding’ with a stylus, which used 
pressure for zoom and dragging for pan, outperformed a variety of techniques that used 
bimanual separation. Evaluations of OrthoZoom Scroller (Appert and Fekete 2006; 
Mackay et al. 2007), Section 4.4, support this result that concurrent and unimanual 
control of pan and zoom outperforms serial or bimanual separation. Speed-dependent 
automatic zooming provides another mechanism for coupling movement and zoom level, 
but while results show that it can offer improvements over traditional scrolling techniques 
and over serial separation of pan and zoom (Tan et al. 2001; Cockburn, Savage and 
 
24
Wallace 2005), Appert et al.’s studies show it is inferior to OrthoZoom’s parallel and 
manual control.  
In certain contexts it is possible to remove panning altogether. The space filling 
thumbnails system for document navigation (Section 4.4) demonstrates this approach by 
constraining users to two views – a fully zoomed in view for reading, and a fully zoomed 
out view that shows all document pages as tiled thumbnails at stable locations within one 
window (Cockburn et al. 2006). Their evaluation demonstrated that it allowed users to 
quickly form and exploit their spatial memory in aid of rapid navigation, significantly 
outperforming other panning, zooming and overview+detail interfaces, particularly when 
tasks involved revisiting previously seen pages.  
7.1.2 Target acquisition with distortion-based views 
When a visualization dynamically responds to the location of the cursor, as is common 
with fisheye lens systems such as the Mac Os X dock (Figure 8a), then there can be a 
disparity between the visual location of the item and the cursor location needed to acquire 
it (see Figure 8b). Fisheye menus (Bederson 2000) exhibit this problem, and therefore 
support a fisheye ‘lock’ to allow users to stabilise the focal region. Hornbaek and 
Hertzum (2007) closely analysed interaction with fisheye menus, concluding that users 
make little use of the non-focal display region and that performance with fisheye menus 
is inferior to traditional hierarchical menus. Gutwin (2002) also studied the impact of 
item movement with fisheyes, demonstrating that the problem can be eased through 
“speed-coupled flattening”, which reduces the fisheye effect as the velocity of the cursor 
increases. To avoid the “moving target” problem, an alternative solution is to delay 
applying distortion until a focus object has been selected, as demonstrated by the 
Hyperbolic Tree Browser (Lamping et al. 1995).  
In related work on acquiring dynamic targets, McGuffin & Balakrishnan (2002) and 
Zhai, Conversy, Beaudouin-Lafon, and Guiard (2003) showed that acquisition times are 
reduced when discrete targets expand around their centre to fill an enlarged motor-space, 
even when the expansion starts after 90% of the movement toward the target is complete. 
Both sets of authors suggest modifications to the fisheye Mac Os X Dock that would 
allow it to maintain the appealing visual effect, but without the adverse effects of target 
movement.  
Two studies of low level interaction have suggested tasks where distortion-oriented 
fisheye views may provide an advantage over other techniques. First, in steering tasks, 
where the user has to move the cursor through a constrained path, Gutwin and Skopik 
(2003) demonstrated that three different fisheye distortion algorithms all outperformed 
 
25
panning, zooming, and an overview+detail view. Second, when the task involves 
selecting two points that can only be selected at a high scale-ratio then multiple fisheye 
views outperform interfaces that only permit panning at a constant high scale, or which 
only permit zooming (Shoemaker and Gutwin 2007). The study did not include the ability 
to use multiple overview+detail lenses. 
7.1.3 Interface mechanics of visual search 
Searching for a target is more demanding than mechanically acquiring one that is clearly 
demarcated, and consequently most evaluations involving searching are presented in the 
following section on high-level evaluations. However, in aiming to create objective 
criteria for assessing visual search support Pietriga et al. (2007) developed a simple, 
mechanical methodology for assessing the efficiency of interfaces for multi-scale search 
using a grid of nine candidate rectangular targets to find the unique target with rounded 
rather than square corners. The objects with round corners are only discriminable at a 
high scale. They tested their methodology by comparing performance across four 
interface types: pan and zoom, fisheye distortion lens, DragMag (Ware and Lewis 1995) 
overview+detail lens, and an overview+detail system that supported zooming and 
panning in both views in a manner that is similar to Google Maps. Results showed that 
the overview+detail with pan and zoom interface was fastest, followed by the DragMag 
overview+detail interface, then the fisheye lens, and the pan and zoom interface last.  
This work is particularly interesting because it explicitly aims to remove the cognitive 
skills that are normally involved in resolving search tasks, addressing instead motor and 
perceptual skills. The results are also interesting because they clearly show that, in this 
context, performance is best when overview+detail facilities are combined with zooming.  
7.2 High-level evaluations 
While the low-level evaluations focus on the mechanics of interface manipulation, the 
high-level evaluations are diverse, examining a wide range of task domains, as 
summarised in Table 2.  
 
26
Table 2. High-level evaluations including comprehension of information spaces. 
Author and Year 
O+D 
Zoom 
F+C 
Description 
North and 
Shneiderman 2000 ‹› 
 
 
Navigating textual census data. O+D interfaces work best 
when actions in the overview and detail views are coordinated. 
Coordinated views outperform detail alone. 
Beard and Walker 
1990 
‹› 
 
2D text-tree navigation. Overview allowed faster navigation 
than scrollbar+resizing. Primarily, a test of O+D versus 
traditional scrolling. 
Ghosh and 
Shneiderman 1999 
‹› 
 
Medical histories. The O+D interface to Lifelines (Plaisant, 
Milash, Rose, Widoff and Shneiderman 1996) allowed tasks to 
be completed more quickly than a zooming interface. 
Plumlee and Ware 
2002 
‹› 
 
Abstract graphical task. Evaluation confirms a theory that 
zooming out-performs multiple O+D views when demands on 
visual memory are low, but inverse when demands are high. 
Hornbaek et al. 
2002 
‹› 
 
Map navigation. Tests user performance using a zooming 
interface with and without an overview. Finds some tasks are 
faster without the overview due to cost of assimilating data.  
Hornbaek and 
Frokjaer 2003 
‹› 
 
‹› 
Reading comprehension. Compared linear text with O+D and 
fisheye text interfaces. Comprehension highest with O+D, 
lowest with fisheye. Fisheye had fastest reading, O+D slowest. 
Baudisch et al. 
2004  
‹› 
 
‹› 
Web browsers. Evaluates a cue-enhanced fisheye web browser 
with and without an overview. Overview and fisheye 
performed similarly. Overview was popular; fisheye less so. 
Schaffer et al. 
1996 
 
‹› 
Graph editing. Compared hierarchical zooming with a 
continuous fisheye. Fisheye supported faster task completion. 
Donskoy and 
Kaptelinin 1997 
 
‹› 
Iconic file identification and drag-and-drop manipulation. 
Zooming was faster and preferred to scrolling. Fisheye was 
slowest and least preferred. Failed to demonstrate the value of 
animation.  
Gutwin and Fedak 
2004 
 
‹› 
Various tasks on mobile devices. Panning vs two-level zoom 
vs fisheye. Fisheye fastest for one task, zooming fastest for 
one task. Panning slowest for all. 
Bűring et al. 2006 
 
‹› 
Searching scatterplots on a mobile device. Zooming vs fisheye 
distortion. No speed benefit was found for either technique, 
but fisheye was significantly preferred.. 
Baudisch et al. 
2002.  
‹›
Static graph navigation and dynamic driving simulation tasks. 
A mixed-resolution focus+context display outperforms 
overview+detail screens and zooming. 
Nekrasovski et al. 
2006.  
‹›
Hierarchical navigation. A pan and zoom was faster than a 
“rubber-sheet” fisheye technique. Overview provided no 
benefit, but had some strong subjective ratings. 
Pirolli et al. 2001; 
Plaisant et al. 
2002; Pirolli et al. 
2003 
 
 
‹› 
Hierarchical navigation. Search strategies and performance 
when using the Hyperbolic Tree Browser and SpaceTree 
compared to Windows Explorer. Results depend on task 
characteristics such as information scent and revisitation. 
Zanella et al. 2002   
 
‹› 
Map interpretation. Grids help users interpret the effect of 
fisheye distortion on spatial layout. Shading is less effective. 
Cockburn and 
Smith 2003; 
Jakobsen and 
Hornbaek 2006 
 
 
‹› 
Source code navigation. Investigates the value of manual 
elision and DOI fisheye techniques over a traditional linear 
representation of code. Fisheye techniques were generally no 
worse and often better than flat code listings.  
Bederson et al. 
2004 
 
 
‹› 
Mobile calendars. Fisheye calendar allows complex tasks to be 
completed more quickly. Fisheye was found easier to use than 
a traditional alternative for most tasks, but somewhat less 
preferred overall. 
Bederson and 
Boltman 1999 
 
‹› 
 
Spatial memory. Using animation in zooming helps users form 
a spatial model of the information space. 
 
7.2.1 Single versus multiple foci 
Schaffer, Zuo, Greenberg, Bartram, Dill, Dubs, and Roseman (1996) conducted the first 
high-level empirical study of focus+context techniques, comparing fisheye and full-zoom 
 
27
interfaces for navigation through 2D graphical networks. The participants’ tasks involved 
finding and fixing ‘broken network connections’ in hierarchically organised network 
diagrams. The fisheye view allowed multiple focal and contextual regions, while the 
zooming condition did not. Participants completed tasks more quickly and with fewer 
navigation actions when using the fisheye interface, but unfortunately, it remains unclear 
what caused the improved performance—the fisheye or the multiple foci. Similar 
concerns exist for Shoemaker and Gutwin’s (2007) positive results for multiple fisheye 
lenses: their control interfaces did not allow multiple lenses. An experiment by Plumlee 
and Ware (2002) highlights these concerns by showing that interfaces supporting 
multiple overview+detail views outperform zooming interfaces when demands on visual 
memory are high.  
7.2.2 Understanding overview+detail 
In directly comparing overview+detail and zooming interfaces, Ghosh and Shneiderman 
(1999) analysed task completion times for tasks that involved extracting medical 
information from two versions of the Lifelines system (Plaisant et al. 1996). The 
overview+detail interface allowed tasks to be completed more quickly. However, it is 
now common for desktop applications to include both overview+detail and zooming 
capabilities. To better understand the contribution of each of these components to 
interaction, Hornbaek, Bederson and Plaisant (2002) evaluated user performance in map 
navigation tasks when using a zooming interface that either had or did not have an 
additional overview+detail region. They also controlled whether the zooming functions 
did or did not support semantic zooming – when semantic zooming was on, the labels in 
the map were tailored to provide appropriate detail for that zoom level (similar to Google 
Maps), but when semantic zooming was off the labels were only legible when the map 
was zoomed in. Surprisingly, and contradicting Pietriga et al’s (2007) analysis of low 
level interaction, their results showed that overview+detail regions increased task 
completion times when semantic zooming was enabled, and they suggest that this cost is 
due to the overview being made redundant by the semantic detail. When semantic 
zooming was disabled there was no difference between performance with 
overview+detail and zooming interfaces. The participants preferred the interface with the 
overview despite their slower performance, stating that it helped them orient themselves 
within the information space.  
7.2.3 Impact on spatial memory 
The study by Hornbaek, Bederson and Plaisant (2002) also produced results on the 
impact that overview+detail interfaces have on spatial recollection, finding that recall was 
 
28
better after using the non-overview interface. With zooming interfaces, Bederson and 
Boltman (1999) showed that animated zoom effects helped users form a spatial model of 
their information space. This result supports those in non-zooming domains, which also 
show that animation helps users comprehend display transitions (Gonzalez 1996; Klein 
and Bederson 2005). While animation aids comprehension, there is no evidence that it 
also aids task performance time. Chui and Dillon (1997) found no significant main effect 
of animation in a hierarchical file-browsing task, although they suggest that users gain 
benefits once accustomed to it. Similarly, Donskoy and Kaptelinin (1997) failed to show 
task time benefits for animation when coupled with overview+detail, zooming, or fisheye 
views.  
Spatial comprehension remains a concern for fisheye lenses that distort the 
information space (Carpendale and Cowperthwaite 1997). Zanella, Carpendale and 
Rounding (2002) examined a variety of display enhancement schemes aimed at 
enhancing users’ spatial comprehension of distorted space, concluding that simple 
parallel grid lines best support comprehension. 
7.2.4 Reading, editing, and text documents 
Hornbaek and Frokjaer (2003) compared reading patterns and usability issues associated 
with three forms of electronic document presentation: traditional ‘flat’ text, an 
overview+detail interface that enhanced the flat-text view with thumbnails of each page 
on the left-hand edge of the window, and a fisheye text view that displayed text regions 
in different font sizes. In the fisheye view, headings and the first and last paragraphs of 
each section were continually displayed in a normal-sized font, while other paragraphs 
were diminished unless clicked on by the user. Their evaluation tasks involved reading 
scientific documents using the different forms of presentation and then either writing 
short summaries or answering questions about them. Their results showed that the fisheye 
view encouraged faster reading, but that this speed was at the cost of comprehension. The 
overview interface allowed participants to rapidly navigate through the document, and 
although they spent more time reading, they scored better in comprehension tests. As in 
other studies, the participants’ preference rankings favoured the overview+detail 
interface. These results are supported by the findings of Baudisch, Lee and Hanna (2004) 
who compared three forms of a cue-enhanced web browser (a traditional linear view, a 
fisheye view, and an overview). Their participants generally preferred the 
overview+detail interface, while the fisheye view polarised opinions. Their performance 
data suggested that the benefits of fisheye views are strongly task dependent. 
 
29
7.2.5 Computer program navigation 
Source code is a specialized class of structured text that has long been considered an 
appropriate domain for the application of focus+context techniques (Furnas 1986). Many 
commercial and open-source development environments now allow users to 
collapse/restore the display of methods (for example, Netbeans, as shown in Figure 9), 
yet until recently there was no empirical evidence of the effectiveness of this feature. 
Cockburn and Smith (2003) compared user performance in source code navigation tasks 
using traditional linear scrollable listings with two fisheye-based implementations that 
miniaturized method contents. For most tasks, the reduced scrolling required with the 
fisheye views resulted in faster task completion, but the study also raised questions about 
the generalizabilty of the results to more complex tasks in which users would have to 
continually manage the open/closed states of methods. Jakobsen and Hornbaek (2006) 
avoided this last issue by developing a fisheye source code viewer that used a DOI 
function to automatically display/suppress code blocks based on the user’s focal region. 
The authors compared their fisheye viewer to a standard linear list view in performing 
basic and advanced code navigation tasks. They not only found the fisheye viewer to 
support significantly faster task times overall, but that it was also preferred to the linear 
listing. While many studies have found fisheye implementations to be well-liked by 
participants, this work stands out as one of the few for which a fisheye technique offers 
users a performance benefit over the traditional alternative. 
7.2.6 Searching and tree navigation studies  
Section 7.1.3 described Pietriga et al’s (2007) recent work on operationalising the 
evaluation of multi-scale interfaces for search. Their work explicitly eliminates cognitive 
task components, yet it is reasonable to suspect that in real use cognitive aspects of tasks 
may cause interaction effects between task type and interface type (examples below).  
Beard and Walker (1990) conducted the first empirical comparison of 
overview+detail and zooming techniques for hierarchical navigation; they also included a 
scrolling interface as an experimental control. The overview+detail and zooming 
interfaces both outperformed scrolling alone.  
Interest in the efficiency of focus+context interfaces for search was stimulated by the 
success of the hyperbolic tree browser (Lamping et al. 1995) during a ‘browse-off’ panel 
session at ACM CHI’97 (Mullet, Fry and Schiano 1997) when a team using it 
outperformed five other teams using competing browsers. Previous studies, however, had 
failed to show significant advantages (Lamping et al. 1995; Czerwinski and Larson 
1997). Pirolli et al (2001; 2003) ran a series of studies to scrutinize interaction with the 
 
30
hyperbolic tree browser (Figure 7) in comparison to the standard file browser of 
Windows Explorer. Their studies demonstrated interaction effects between task and 
interface factors, with the hyperbolic tree performing well on tasks with strong scent (i.e., 
when nodes provided strong cues to the information content of further outlying nodes), 
but that it performed poorly when scent was weak. Through analysis of eye-tracking data, 
they demonstrate that the hyperbolic browser’s slower performance in low scent 
conditions is due to impaired support for visual search in the high-density peripheral 
views.  
Plaisant, Grosjean and Bederson (2002) used the CHI’97 browse-off dataset to 
compare performance in tree searching tasks using Windows Explorer, the hyperbolic 
tree browser, and their own focus+context SpaceTree system. Again, their results varied 
across tasks, with Windows Explorer outperforming the others for tasks that benefited 
from multiple open branches (e.g. revisiting previously opened branches), and the 
SpaceTree performing well for certain types of topological overview tasks (e.g. viewing 
ancestors). 
Nekrasovski et al. (2006) recently compared performance in hierarchical tree 
browsing tasks using zooming and distortion-oriented focus+context techniques, both 
with and without an overview. Contrary to their predictions, pan and zoom was 
significantly faster than the focus+context technique. Although the presence of an 
overview did not impact task times, subjective measures of physical demand and 
enjoyment favored an overview, which are in agreement with the findings of Hornbaek, 
Bederson and Plaisant (2002). Donskoy and Kaptelinin (1997) also showed that zooming 
outperformed a fisheye view for tasks involving identification and drag-and-drop 
manipulation of file icons.  
In contrast to the above, the results of Bűring, Gerken and Reiterer (2006) were more 
positive for fisheyes. They compared pan and zoom to a fisheye view for searching 
scatterplot graphs on a mobile device, finding no significant difference in task times, but 
subjective results strongly favored the fisheye view. The authors note that the preference 
for fisheyes contradicts previous studies (Donskoy and Kaptelinin 1997; Hornbaek and 
Frokjaer 2003; Baudisch et al. 2004; Gutwin and Fedak 2004), but they suggest it may be 
due to the nature of their tasks, which did not require relative spatial judgments.  
There have also been several evaluations of cue-based interfaces. Performance 
benefits have been demonstrated for cue-based techniques that visually emphasize items 
(Suh et al. 2002; Baudisch et al. 2004; Lam and Baudisch 2005) or group them (Dumais, 
Cutrell and Chen 2001) in response to search criteria.  
 
31
7.2.7 Other evidence of task effects in cross-interface evaluations 
The task-specific performance merits of fisheye views are also echoed in two studies on 
the use of fisheye techniques on mobile devices. First, Gutwin and Fedak (2004) 
compared a single-focus fisheye interface with two-level zoom and panning interfaces for 
three tasks: image editing, web browsing, and network monitoring. The fisheye best 
supported navigation; the zooming interface best supported monitoring; and the 
traditional panning was slowest for all tasks. The fisheye problems with moving targets 
may explain zooming’s success in the monitoring task. However, their limited support for 
zooming (two levels only) may explain why it was outperformed by the fisheye in the 
navigation task. Second, an evaluation of the fisheye calendar DateLens (Section 5.2.3) in 
comparison to a standard commercial calendar for PDAs (Microsoft Pocket PC 2002) 
showed that the fisheye allowed improved performance of complex tasks, but little 
difference for simple ones (Bederson et al. 2004). And like other studies, user support of 
the fisheye distortion was mixed; on a task-by-task basis, the fisheye approach was more 
often found easier to use than the traditional interface, yet the traditional interface was 
ultimately preferred by a slight majority of users. It remains unclear whether the modest 
subjective preference ratings for fisheye views are due to their novelty or due to an 
enduring distaste for their behaviour. 
7.2.8 Wide field of view systems 
There has been extensive design and evaluation research based on solving and easing 
low-level interaction problems, such as selection, that arise when using multi-monitor 
and wall-sized displays. Most of this work does not specifically address issues of working 
with both focused and contextual views. Importantly, however, Czerwinski, Tan and 
Robertson (2002) noted the potential benefits for women of working with wide field of 
view systems, and Robertson et al. (2005) provided a review of the user experience of 
working with large displays. 
Baudisch et al. (2002) provided the only quantitative study (to our knowledge) of 
focus and context issues with wide field of view systems. In the first of two experiments 
they compared user performance using three interfaces (zooming, overview+detail, and 
their mixed resolution focus+context display) in static graph navigation tasks using a map 
of London and a circuit diagram. Their overview+detail condition was produced by using 
two side-by-side monitors. The focus+context screen was faster (by up to 56%) in all 
tasks, and they attributed the difference to the costs of switching between views when 
using overview+detail or zooming. The second experiment involved a dynamic 
visualization (a driving simulator) using the focus+context screen or the overview+detail 
 
32
display. Again, the split attention costs of the overview+detail screens resulted in 
significantly worse performance.  
8. SUMMARY  
We have presented four interface approaches that allow users to attain both focused and 
contextual views of their information spaces. Overview+detail systems allow concurrent 
focus and context views that are spatially segregated in the x, y, or z dimensions. 
Zooming systems allow the entire display space to be dedicated to either focused or 
contextual views by temporally segregating their display. Focus+context systems present 
both focus and context within a single display. This is achieved through a variety of 
techniques, including selectively removing, diminishing or magnifying items, and various 
displays supporting a wide field of view. Finally, cue-based systems modify the display 
of items to highlight or suppress them, dependent on context or search criteria. Many 
systems support combinations of these techniques. 
None of these approaches is ideal. Spatial separation demands that users assimilate 
the relationship between the concurrent displays of focus and context. Evidence that this 
assimilation process hinders interaction is apparent in the experiments of Hornbaek et al 
(2002), who note that “switching between the detail and the overview window required 
mental effort and time”. Baudisch et al (2002) made similar observations of costs 
associated with split attention with overview+detail interfaces. The temporal separation 
of zooming also demands assimilation between pre- and post-zoom states. This difficulty 
was observed by Cockburn and Savage (2003) in their evaluations, who note that “the 
abrupt transitions between discrete zooming levels… meant that the participants had to 
reorient themselves with each zoom action”. Animation can ease this problem (Bederson 
and Boltman 1999), but it cannot be removed completely. Baudisch et al (2002) describe 
how some users rapidly completed tasks using a zooming interface by first zooming out 
and memorizing all target locations, but the burden of memorization is likely to be 
ineffective for many tasks. Finally, many focus+context systems distort the information 
space, which is likely to damage the user’s ability to correctly assess spatial properties 
such as directions, distances and scales. Even in non-spatial domains, evaluations of 
distortion-based techniques have largely failed to provide evidence of performance 
enhancements, and several studies have shown that fisheye views can damage 
fundamental components of interaction such as target acquisition. 
Regardless of the usability challenges raised by each of the techniques, 
overview+detail and zooming interfaces are now standard components of many desktop 
graphical user interfaces. The usability benefits they can provide often outweigh their 
 
33
costs, as demonstrated by several evaluations. For example Hornbaek and Frokjaer 
(2003) showed that when reading electronic documents, both overview+detail and 
fisheye interfaces offer performance advantages over traditional ‘flat’ text interfaces. 
Although rare, fisheye views are starting to appear in desktop components such as the 
Mac OS X Dock. In this case the usability benefits are purely cosmetic, yet many users 
are happy to trade off efficiency for fashion and design lustre, which is not surprising, 
since aesthetics and enjoyment are essential aspects of the computer experience (Norman 
2004). 
It therefore seems clear that supporting both focused and contextual views can 
improve interaction over constrained single view software. The question then becomes 
which style of interface, or which combination of styles, offers the greatest performance 
advantages, for what tasks, and under what conditions? The current state of research fails 
to provide clear guidelines, despite a recent surge in empirical analysis of the techniques’ 
effectiveness. Results to date have revealed that the efficiency of different techniques is 
dependent on many factors, particularly the nature of the users’ task. For example, 
Hornbaek et al. (2002) showed that fisheye text views allowed documents to be read 
faster than overview+detail, but that participants understood documents better with 
overview+detail; Schaffer et al. (1996) showed that hierarchical fisheye views 
outperformed full-zoom techniques, but it remains unclear whether an alternative 
implementation of zooming (continuous rather than full) would have defeated fisheye 
views; Bederson et al. (2004) showed that a table-based fisheye interface for calendars on 
PDAs outperformed a standard interface for complex tasks, but for simpler tasks, the 
normal interface was more efficient and preferred.  
We offer the following concluding comments and recommendations, with the 
cautionary note that it is important for designers to use their own judgment as to which 
approach to pursue. We also encourage researchers to continue to empirically analyze 
these techniques to solidify our understanding of the trade-offs inherent in the different 
approaches.  
Overview+Detail. Several studies have found that overview+detail interfaces are 
preferred to other techniques. For particular tasks, such as document comprehension, no 
alternative has been found to be more effective. Notable disadvantages of 
overview+detail are the additional use of screen real estate (which may be more 
effectively used for details) and the mental effort and time required to integrate the 
distinct views. The real estate issue can often be addressed by offering users control over 
whether or not to display the overview. Even so, the time costs of this technique may 
 
34
make it sub-optimal for dynamic activities, as shown by Baudisch et al’s (2002) driving 
simulation. For consistency with state of the art interfaces, users should be able to browse 
the overview without influencing the detail view, but changes in the detail view should be 
immediately reflected in the overview.  
Zooming. Temporal separation of views can easily create substantial cognitive load for 
users in assimilating the relationship between pre- and post-zoom states—zooming is 
easy to do badly, as indicated by many studies in which it has performed poorly. 
Animating the transition between zoom levels can dramatically reduce the cognitive load 
(but fine-tuning the duration of the animation is important). There is also evidence that 
users can optimize their performance with zooming interfaces when concurrent, 
unimanual controls for pan and zoom are supported.  
Focus+Context. There are several distinct strategies for displaying the focal region 
within its surrounding context: removal of non-focal items from the display, distortion to 
alter the scale of items according to a calculated interest value, and specialized wide field 
of view displays. Most of the empirical research on focus+context interfaces has 
investigated distortion-oriented visualizations. Results in favour of these techniques have 
been produced for tasks that involve gaining a rapid overview of the data-space or 
quickly following graph structures that have clear categories. However, distortion-
oriented displays are likely to impair the user’s ability to make relative spatial judgments, 
and they can cause target acquisition problems. Other empirical work on wide-screen 
displays suggests that large high resolution displays will help users employ their natural 
capabilities for focused visual attention and peripheral vision. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Many thanks to the anonymous reviewers for their extremely detailed and constructive 
comments. This work was partially funded by New Zealand Royal Society Marsden 
Grant 07-UOC-013. 
REFERENCES 
ABOELSAADAT, W. and BALAKRISHNAN, R. 2004. An Empirical Comparison of 
Transparency on One and Two Layer Displays. People and Computers XVIII: 
Proceedings of the British HCI Conference 2004, 53-67. 
APPERT, C. and FEKETE, J. 2006. OrthoZoom Scroller: 1D Mutli-scale navigation. 
Proceedings of CHI'06: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
Montreal, Canada, ACM Press, 21-30. 
BAUDISCH, P., GOOD, N., BELLOTTI, V. and SCHRAEDLEY, P. 2002. Keeping 
Things in Context: A Comparative Evaluation of Focus Plus Context Screens, 
 
35
Overviews, and Zooming. Proceedings of CHI'02: ACM Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 259-266. 
BAUDISCH, P., LEE, B. and HANNA, L. 2004. Fishnet, a fisheye web browser with 
search term popouts: a comparative evaluation with overview and linear view. 
Proceedings of Advanced Visual Interfaces, AVI04, Gallipoli, Italy, ACM Press, 133-140. 
BAUDISCH, P. and ROSENHOLTZ, R. 2003. Halo: A Technique for Visualizing Off-
Screen Locations. Proceedings of CHI'2003 Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, 481-488. 
BEARD, D. and WALKER, J. 1990. Navigational Techniques to Improve the Display of 
Large Two-Dimensional Spaces. Behavior and Information Technology 9(6): 451-466. 
BEDERSON, B. 2000. Fisheye Menus. Proceedings of UIST'00: ACM Symposium on 
User Interface Software and Technology, San Diego, California, ACM Press, 217-225. 
BEDERSON, B. 2001. PhotoMesa: A Zoomable Image Browser Using Quantum 
Treemaps and Bubblemaps. Proceedings of UIST01: ACM Symposium on User Interface 
Software and Technology, Orlando, Florida, ACM Press, 71-80. 
BEDERSON, B. and BOLTMAN, A. 1999. Does Animation Help Users Build Mental 
Maps of Spatial Information? Proceedings of InfoVis99: IEEE Symposium on 
Information Visualization, IEEE Computer Society, 28-35. 
BEDERSON, B., GROSJEAN, J. and MEYER, J. 2004. Toolkit Design for Interactive 
Structured Graphics. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 30(8): 535-546. 
BEDERSON, B., HOLLAN, J., PERLIN, K., MEYER, J., BACON, D. and FURNAS, G. 
1996. Pad++: A Zoomable Graphical Sketchpad for Exploring Alternate Interface 
Physics. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing 7(1): 3-31. 
BEDERSON, B. B., CLAMAGE, A., CZERWINSKI, M. P. and ROBERTSON, G. G. 
2004. DateLens: A fisheye calendar interface for PDAs. ACM Transactions on 
Computer-Human Interaction 11(1): 90-119. 
BEDERSON, B. B., MEYER, J. and GOOD, L. 2000. Jazz: an extensible zoomable user 
interface graphics toolkit in Java. Proceedings of UIST'00: ACM Symposium on User 
Interface Software and  Technology. San Diego, California, United States, ACM Press: 
171-180. 
BIER, E. A., STONE, M. C., PIER, K., BUXTON, W. and DEROSE, T. D. 1993. 
Toolglass and Magic Lenses: The See-Through Interface. Proceedings of ACM 
SIGGRAPH'93. Anaheim, CA, ACM Press: 73-80. 
BOURGEOIS, F. and GUIARD, Y. 2002. Multiscale Pointing: Facilitating Pan-Zoom 
Coordination. Extended Abstracts of CHI02: ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computer Systems, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, 758-759. 
BŰRING, T., GERKEN, J. and REITERER, H. 2006. User Interaction with Scatterplots 
on Small Screens – A Comparative Evaluation of Geometric-Semantic Zoom and Fisheye 
Distortion. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 12(5): 829-836. 
BYRD, D. 1999. A Scrollbar-based Visualization for Document Navigation. Proceedings 
of Digital Libraries '99, Berkeley CA, 122-129. 
CARD, S., MACKINLAY, J. and SHNEIDERMAN, B. 1999. Readings in Information 
Visualization: Using Vision to Think. Morgan-Kaufmann,  
 
36
CARD, S. K., ROBERTSON, G. G. and MACKINLAY, J. D. 1991. The information 
visualizer, an information workspace. Proceedings of CHI91: ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, New Orleans, Louisiana, ACM Press, 181-186. 
CARPENDALE, M. and COWPERTHWAITE, D. 1997. Making Distortions 
Comprehensible. Proceedings of VL'97: IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, IEEE, 
36-45. 
CARPENDALE, M. and MONTAGNESE, C. 2001. A Framework for Unifying 
Presentation Space. Proceedings of UIST'01: ACM Symposium on User Interface 
Software and Technology, Orlando, Florida, ACM Press, 61-70. 
CHEN, C. 2004. Information Visualization: Beyond the Horizon. Springer-Verlag, 
London. 
CHIMERA, R. 1992. ValueBars: An Information Visualization and Navigation Tool. 
Proceedings of CHI'92: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
Monterey, California, ACM Press, 293-294. 
CHUI, M. and DILLON, A. 1997. Who's Zooming Whom? Attunement to Animation in 
the Interface. Journal of the American Society for Information Sciences 48(11): 1067-
1072. 
COCKBURN, A., GUTWIN, C. and ALEXANDER, J. 2006. Faster Document 
Navigation with Space-Filling Thumbnails. Proceedings of CHI'06 ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Montreal, Canada, ACM Press, 1-10. 
COCKBURN, A. and SAVAGE, J. 2003. Comparing Speed-Dependent Automatic 
Zooming with Traditional Scroll, Pan and Zoom Methods. People and Computers XVII 
(Proceedings of the 2003 British Computer Society Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction.), Bath, England, 87-102. 
COCKBURN, A., SAVAGE, J. and WALLACE, A. 2005. Tuning and Testing Scrolling 
Interfaces that Automatically Zoom. Proceedings of CHI'05: ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Portland, Oregon, ACM Press, 71-80. 
CZERWINSKI, M. and LARSON, K. 1997. The New Web Browsers: They're Cool but 
are they Useful? People and Computers XII: Proceedings of the British HCI'97 
Conference, Bristol, UK, Springer Verlag 
CZERWINSKI, M., TAN, D. and ROBERTSON, G. 2002. Women Take a Wider View. 
Proceedings of CHI'02: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, 195-202. 
DONSKOY, M. and KAPTELININ, V. 1997. Window navigation with and without 
animation: a comparison of scroll bars, zoom, and fisheye view. Companion Proceedings 
of CHI'97: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Atlanta, GA, 
279-280. 
DRUIN, A., STEWART, J., PROFT, D., BEDERSON, B. and HOLLAN, J. 1997. 
KidPad: A Design Collaboration Between Children, Technologists, and  Educators. 
Proceedings of CHI'97: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
Atlanta, Georgia, 463-470. 
DUMAIS, S., CUTRELL, E. and CHEN, H. 2001. Optimizing Search by Showing 
Results in Context. Proceedings of CHI'01: ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, Seattle, Washington, 277-284. 
 
37
FITTS, P. 1954. The Information Capacity of the Human Motor System in Controlling 
the Amplitude of Movement. Journal of Experimental Psychology 47: 381-391. 
FURNAS, G. 1986. Generalized Fisheye Views. Proceedings of CHI'86: ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Boston, MA, ACM Press, 16-23. 
FURNAS, G. 1997. Effective View Navigation. Proceedings of CHI'97: ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Atlanta, GA, ACM Press, 367-
374. 
FURNAS, G. 2006. A Fisheye Follow-up: Further Reflections on Focus+Context. 
Proceedings of CHI'06 ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
Montreal, Canada, ACM Press, 999-1008. 
FURNAS, G. and ZHANG, X. 1998. MuSE: A Multiscale Editor. Proceedings of 
UIST'98: ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, San Francisco, 
California, 107-116. 
FURNAS, G. W. and BEDERSON, B. B. 1995. Space-Scale Diagrams: Understanding 
Multiscale Interfaces. Proceedings of CHI'95: ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, Denver, Colorado, ACM Press, 234-241. 
GHOSH, P. and SHNEIDERMAN, B. 1999. Zoom-Only Vs Overview-Detail Pair: A 
Study in Browsing Techniques as Applied to Patient Histories, Technical report 99-12. 
HCIL, University of Maryland, College Park. 99-12. 
GONZALEZ, C. 1996. Does Animation in User Interfaces Improve Decision Making? 
Proceedings of CHI'96: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
Vancouver, BC, ACM Press, 27-34. 
GRUDIN, J. 2001. Partitioning Digital Worlds: Focal and Peripheral Awareness in 
Multiple Monitor Use. Proceedings of CHI'01: ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, Seattle, Washington, 458-465. 
GUIARD, Y. 1987. Asymmetric Division of Labor in Human Skilled Bimanual Action: 
The Kinematic Chain as a Model. Journal of Motor Behavior 19(4): 486--517. 
GUIARD, Y., BEAUDOUIN-LAFON, M., BASTIN, J., PASVEER, D. and ZHAI, S. 
2004. View Size and Pointing Difficulty in Multi-Scale Navigation. Proceedings of 
AVI'04: ACM Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces, Gallipoli, Italy, ACM 
Press, 117-124. 
GUIARD, Y., BOURGEOIS, F., MOTTET, D. and BEAUDOUIN-LAFON, M. 2001. 
Beyond the 10-bit Barrier: Fitts' Law in Multi-Scale Electronic Worlds. People and 
Computers XV: Proceedings of IHM-HCI 2001, Lille, France, 573-587. 
GUIARD, Y., DU, Y. and CHAPUIS, O. 2007. Quantifying degree of goal directedness 
in document navigation: application to the evaluation of the perspective-drag technique. 
Proceedings of CHI'07: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, San 
Jose, CA, ACM Press, 327-336. 
GUIMBRETIERE, F., STONE, M. and WINOGRAD, T. 2001. Fluid interaction with 
high-resolution wall-size displays. Proceedings of UIST'01: ACM Symposium on User 
Interface Software and Technology, Orlando, Florida, ACM Press, 21-30. 
GUTWIN, C. 2002. Improving Focus Targeting in Interactive Fisheye Views. 
Proceedings of CHI'02: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, ACM Press, 267-274. 
 
38
GUTWIN, C. and FEDAK, C. 2004. Interacting with Big Interfaces on Small Screens: A 
Comparison of Fisheye, Zoom, and Panning Techniques. Proceedings of Graphics 
Interface 2006, Quebec City, Canada, Canadian Human-Computer Communications 
Society, 213-220. 
GUTWIN, C., ROSEMAN, M. and GREENBERG, S. 1996. A Usability Study of 
Awareness Widgets in a Shared Workspace Groupware System. Proceedings of 
CSCW'96: ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, Boston, 
Massachusetts, 258-267. 
GUTWIN, C. and SKOPIK, A. 2003. Fisheye Views are Good for Large Steering Tasks. 
Proceedings of CHI'03: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Fort 
Lauderdale, Florida, 201-208. 
HERMAN, I., MELANCON, G. and MARSHALL, M. 2000. Graph Visualization and 
Navigation in Information Visualization: A Survey. IEEE Transactions on Visualization 
and Computer Graphics 6(1): 24-43. 
HILL, W., HOLLAN, J., WROBLEWSKI, D. and MCCANDLESS, T. 1992. Edit Wear 
and Read Wear. Proceedings of CHI'92 ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, Monterey, California, 3-9. 
HORNBAEK, K., BEDERSON, B. and PLAISANT, C. 2002. Navigation Patterns and 
Usability of Zoomable User Interfaces with and without an Overview. ACM Transactions 
on Computer-Human Interaction 9(4): 362-389. 
HORNBAEK, K. and FROKJAER, E. 2003. Reading Patterns and Usability in 
Visualizations of Electronic Documents. ACM Transactions on Computer Human 
Interaction 10(2): 119-149. 
HORNBAEK, K. and HERTZUM, M. 2007. Untangling the Usability of Fisheye Menus. 
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 14(2): 6. 
IGARASHI, T. and HINCKLEY, K. 2000. Speed-dependent Automatic Zooming for 
Browsing Large Documents. Proceedings of UIST'00 ACM Symposium on User Interface 
Software and Technology, San Diego, California, 139-148. 
JAKOBSEN, M. and HORNBAEK, K. 2006. Evaluating a fisheye view of source code. 
Proceedings of CHI'06: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
Montreal, Quebec, ACM Press, 377-386. 
JUL, S. and FURNAS, G. 1998. Critical Zones in Desert Fog: Aids to Multiscale 
Navigation. Proceedings of UIST'98: ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and 
Technology, San Francisco, California, 97-106. 
KEAHEY, T. 1998. The Generalized Detail-In-Context Problem. Proceedings of the 
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, Research Triangle, CA, IEEE Press, 44-
51. 
KERSTEN, M. and MURPHY, G. 2005. Mylar: A degree-of-interest model for IDEs. 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Apect-Oriented Software 
Development, Chicago, Illinois, ACM Press, 159-168. 
KLEIN, C. and BEDERSON, B. 2005. Benefits of Animated Scrolling. Extended 
Abstracts of CHI'05: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
Portland, Oregon, ACM Press, 1965-1968. 
KOSARA, R., MIKSCH, S. and HAUSER, H. 2002. Focus+Context Taken Literally. 
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 22(1): 22-29. 
 
39
LAM, H. and BAUDISCH, P. 2005. Summary Thumbnails: Readable Overviews for 
Small Screen Web Browsers. Proceedings of CHI'05: Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, Portland, Oregon, 681-690. 
LAMPING, J., RAO, R. and PIROLLI, P. 1995. A Focus+Context Technique Based on 
Hyperbolic Geometry for Visualising Large Hierarchies. Proceedings of CHI'95: ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Denver, Colorado, 401-408. 
LEUNG, Y. and APPERLEY, M. 1994. A Review and Taxonomy of Distortion-Oriented 
Presentation Techniques. ACM Transactions on Computer Human Interaction 1(2): 126-
160. 
MACKAY, W., APPERT, C., BEAUDOUIN-LAFON, M., CHAPUIS, O., DU, Y. and 
FEKETE, J. 2007. Touchstone: Exploratory Design of Experiments. Proceedings of 
CHI'07: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, San Jose, CA, 
ACM Press, 1425-1434. 
MACKINLAY, J., CARD, S. and ROBERTSON, G. 1990. Rapid Controlled Movement 
Through a Virtual 3D Workspace. Proceedings of SIGGRAPH '90: Computer Graphics, 
Dallas, Texas, ACM Press, 171-176. 
MACKINLAY, J., ROBERTSON, G. and CARD, S. 1991. Perspective Wall: Detail and 
Context Smoothly Integrated. Proceedings of CHI'91: ACM Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, New Orleans, 173-179. 
MCGUFFIN, M. and BALAKRISHNAN, R. 2002. Acquisition of Expanding Targets. 
Proceedings of CHI'02: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, ACM Press, 57-64. 
MULLET, K., FRY, C. and SCHIANO, D. 1997. On Your Marks, Get Set Browse! 
Extended Abstracts of CHI'97: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computer 
Systems, Atlanta, Geogia, 113-114. 
MUNZNER, T., GUIMBRETIERE, F., TASIRAN, S., ZHANG, L. and ZHOU, Y. 2003. 
TreeJuxtaposer: Scalable Tree Comparison using Focus+Context with Guaranteed 
Visibility. ACM Transactions on Graphics 22(3): 453-462. 
NEKRASOVSKI, D., BODNAR, A., MCGRENERE, J., GUIMBRETIERE, F. and 
MUNZNER, T. 2006. An evaluation of pan & zoom and rubber sheet navigation with 
and without an overview. Proceedings of CHI'06: ACM Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems, Montreal, Quebec, ACM Press, 11-20. 
NORMAN, D. 2004. Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) Everyday Things. Basic 
Books, New York, New York. 
PATRICK, E., COSGROVE, D., SLAVKOVIC, A., RODE, J., VERATTI, T. and 
CHISELKO, G. 2000. Using a Large Projection Screen as an Alternative to Head-
Mounted Displays for Virtual Environments. Proceedings of CHI'00: ACM Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 478-485. 
PERLIN, K. and FOX, D. 1993. Pad: An Alternative Approach to the Computer 
Interface. Proceedings of the 20th annual conference on Computer graphics and 
Interactive techniques, ACM Press, 57-64. 
PIETRIGA, E. 2005. A Toolkit for Addressing HCI Issues in Visual Language 
Environments. Proceedings of VL/HCC'05: IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and 
Human-Centric Computing, 145-152. 
 
40
PIETRIGA, E., APPERT, C. and BEAUDOUIN-LAFON, M. 2007. Pointing and 
Beyond: An Operationalization and Preliminary Evaluation of Multi-Scale Searching. 
Proceedings of CHI'07: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, San 
Jose, California, ACM Press, 1215-1224. 
PIROLLI, P., CARD, S. and VAN DER WEGE, M. 2001. Visual Information Foraging 
in a Focus+Context Visualization. Proceedings of CHI '01: ACM Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, Seattle, Washington, ACM Press, 506-513. 
PIROLLI, P., CARD, S. and VAN DER WEGE, M. 2003. The Effects of Information 
Scent on Visual Search in the Hyperbolic Tree Browser. ACM Transactions on 
Computer-Human Interaction 10(1): 20-53. 
PLAISANT, C., CARR, D. and SHNEIDERMAN, B. 1995. Image-Browser Taxonomy 
and Guidelines for Designers. IEEE Software 12(2): 21-32. 
PLAISANT, C., GROSJEAN, J. and BEDERSON, B. 2002. SpaceTree: Supporting 
Exploration in Large Node Link Tree, Design Evolution and Empirical Evaluation. 
Proceedings of InfoVis '02: The IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, 57-64. 
PLAISANT, C., MILASH, B., ROSE, A., WIDOFF, S. and SHNEIDERMAN, B. 1996. 
LifeLines: Visualizing Personal Histories. Proceedings of CHI'96: ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Vancouver, BC, 221-227. 
PLUMLEE, M. and WARE, C. 2002. Modeling Performance for Zooming vs Multi-
Window Interfaces Based on Visual Working Memory. Proceedings of AVI'02: ACM 
Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interface, Trento, Italy, 59-68. 
RAMOS, G. and BALAKRISHNAN, R. 2005. Zliding: Fluid Zooming and Sliding for 
High Precision Parameter Manipulation. Proceedings of UIST'05: ACM Symposium on 
User Interface Software and Technology, Seattle, Washington, ACM Press, 143-152. 
RAO, R. and CARD, S. K. 1994. The Table Lens: Merging Graphical and Symbolic 
Representations in an Interactive Focus+Context Visualization for Tabular Information 
Proceedings of the CHI'94: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
Boston, Massachusetts, ACM Press, 318-322. 
ROBERTS, J. 2007. State of the Art: Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory 
Visualization. Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization, ETH, 
Switzerland, IEEE Press, 61-71. 
ROBERTSON, G., CZERWINSKI, M., BAUDISCH, P., MEYERS, B., ROBBINS, D., 
SMITH, G. and TAN, D. 2005. The Large-Display User Experience. IEEE Computer 
Graphics and Applications 25(4): 44-51. 
ROBERTSON, G. G. and MACKINLAY, J. D. 1993. The Document Lens. Proceedings 
of UIST'93: ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. Atlanta, 
Georgia, ACM Press: 101-108. 
SARKAR, M. and BROWN, M. 1992. Graphical Fisheye Views of Graphs. Proceedings 
of CHI'92: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Monterey, CA, 
ACM Press, 83-91. 
SARKAR, M., SNIBBE, S. and REISS, S. 1993. Stretching the rubber sheet: A metaphor 
for visualising large structure on small screen. UIST'93: Proceedings of the 16th annual 
ACM symposium on User interface software and technology, Atlanta, Georgia, ACM 
Press, 81-91. 
 
41
SCHAFFER, D., ZUO, Z., GREENBERG, S., BARTRAM, L., DILL, J., DUBS, S. and 
ROSEMAN, M. 1996. Navigating Hierarchically Clustered Networks through Fisheye 
and Full-Zoom Methods. ACM Transactions on Computer Human Interaction 3(2): 162-
188. 
SHOEMAKER, G. and GUTWIN, C. 2007. Supporting Multi-Point Interaction in Visual 
Workspaces. Proceedings of CHI'07: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, San Jose, California, ACM Press, 999-1008. 
SPENCE, R. 2007. Information Visualization. Pearson Education Limited, Harlow. 
SPENCE, R. and APPERLEY, M. 1982. Database Navigation: An Office Enironment for 
the Professional. Behaviour and Information Technology 1(1): 43-54. 
SUH, B., WOODRUFF, A., ROSENHOLTZ, R. and GLASS, A. 2002. Popout Prism: 
Adding Perceptual Principles to Overview+Detail Document Interfaces. Proceedings of 
CHI'02: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, 251-258. 
SUMMERS, K., GOLDSMITH, T., KUBICA, S. and CAUDELL, T. 2003. An Empirical 
Evaluation of Continuous Semantic Zooming in Program Visualization. Proceedings of 
the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (Infovis 2003), Seattle, Washington, 
155-162. 
TAN, D., ROBERTSON, G. and CZERWINSKI, M. 2001. Exploring 3D Navigation: 
Combining Speed-coupled Flying with Orbiting. Proceedings of CHI'01: ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Seattle, Washington, 418-425. 
TOBLER, W. 1973. A continuous transformation useful for districting. Annals of New 
York Academy of Science 219: 215-220. 
TVERSKY, B., MORRISON, J. and BETRANCOURT, M. 2002. Animation: Can It 
Facilitate? International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 57: 247-262. 
VAN WIJK, J. and NUIJ, W. 2004. A Model for Smooth Viewing and Navigation of 
Large 2D Information Spaces. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer 
Graphics 10(4): 447-458. 
WARE, C. 2004. Information Visualization: Perception for Design. Morgan Kaufmann, 
San Francisco. 
WARE, C. and FLEET, D. 1997. Context Sensitive Flying Interface. Proceedings of the 
1997 Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics, Providence, RI, 127-130. 
WARE, C. and LEWIS, M. 1995. The DragMag Image Magnifier. Companion 
Proceedings of CHI'95: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
Denver, Colorado, ACM Press, 407-408. 
WOODSON, W. and CONOVER, D. 1964. Human Engineering Guide for Equipment 
Designers. University of California Press, Berkeley, California. 
ZANELLA, A., CARPENDALE, S. and ROUNDING, M. 2002. On the Effects of 
Viewing Cues in Comprehending Distortions. Proceedings of NordiCHI'02, Aarhus, 
Denmark, 119-128. 
ZELLWEGER, P., MACKINLAY, J., GOOD, L., STEFIK, M. and BAUDISCH, P. 
2002. City Lights: Contextual Views in Minimal Space. Extended Abstracts of CHI '02: 
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 
838-839. 
 
42
ZHAI, S., CONVERSY, S., BEAUDOUIN-LAFON, M. and GUIARD, Y. 2003. Human 
On-line Response to Target Expansion. Proceedings of CHI'03: ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, ACM Press, 177-184. 
 
 
