 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language: The past and future of a field 
 
Neil Cohn 
 
neilcohn@emaki.net 
www.emaki.net 
 
An abridged version of this paper appears in: 
 
F. Bramlett (Ed.), Linguistics and the Study of Comics. New York: Palgrave 
MacMillan. 2012 
 
 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
2	  
Introduction 
 
Many authors of comics have metaphorically compared their writing process 
to that of language. Jack “King” Kirby, celebrated as one of the most influential 
artists of mainstream American comics, once commented, “I’ve been writing all along 
and I’ve been doing it in pictures” (Kirby, 1999). Similarly, Japan’s “God of Comics” 
Osamu Tezuka stated, “I don’t consider them pictures …In reality I’m not drawing. 
I’m writing a story with a unique type of symbol” (Schodt, 1983). Recently, in his 
introduction to McSweeny’s (Issue 13), modern comic artist Chris Ware stated overtly 
that, “Comics are not a genre, but a developing language.” Furthermore, several 
comic authors writing about their medium have described the properties of comics 
like a language. Will Eisner (1985) compared gestures and graphic symbols to a 
visual vocabulary, a sentiment echoed by Scott McCloud (1993), who also described 
the properties governing the sequence of panels as its “grammar.” Meanwhile, Mort 
Walker (1980), the artist of Beetle Bailey, has catalogued the graphic emblems and 
symbols used in comics in his facetious dictionary, The Lexicon of Comicana.  
Truly, there seems to be an intuitive link between comics and language in the 
minds of their creators—a belief shared by several researchers of language who, with 
growing frequency, are discussing properties of comics in a linguistic light. Exploring 
these works can provide insight into what extent this comparison might hold, its 
limitations, and how it can guide future research. 
 
In order to gain an understanding of the place of comics in linguistics, it 
remains necessary to examine what exactly is being (or should be) analyzed. Comics 
do not fall within the normal scope of inquiry for contemporary linguistics—not 
because they are an inappropriate topic, but because language is a human behavior 
while comics are not. Comics are a social object that is the result of two human 
behaviors: writing and drawing. Believing “comics” are an object of inquiry would be 
akin to linguists focusing on “novels” as opposed to studying English, the language 
that novels are written in. Analogously, the sequential images used in comics 
constitute their own “visual language” (details of which will be expanded on at length 
further on). Thus, the behavioral domains of writing (written/verbal language) and 
drawing (visual language) should be the object of linguistic inquiry, stripping away 
the social categories like “comics,” “graphic novels,” “manga,” etc.  
Comics then become the predominant place in culture that this visual language 
is used, often paired along with writing (a learned importation of the verbal modality 
into the visual-graphic). That is, contrary to the metaphor used by their authors, 
comics themselves are not a language, but comics are written in visual languages the 
same way that novels or magazines are written in English. This makes comics 
potentially written in both a visual language and a written language—reflecting the 
multimodality of human expression found in co-speech gestures (e.g. Clark, 1996; 
McNeill, 1992, 2000) which have received much attention in linguistics (compared to 
only an emerging literature on text-image relations in the linguistic/cognitive sphere).  
Overall, the guiding questions of linguistic inquiry can thus be applied to the 
study of the visual language that comics are written in: 
 
1. How is the form of the expressive system organized? 
2. How is meaning conveyed by a form? 
3. How do perceivers encode both form and meaning? 
4. How do perceivers draw connections between and encode sequential units? 
5. How do perceivers learn all this given cultural variability across systems? 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
3	  
 
These are the fundamental motivating questions of various subfields of linguistics and 
all apply to the study of the expressive system used in comics (i.e. phonology, 
morphology, semantics, grammar, acquisition). While these questions have specific 
ways in which they are answered in linguistics proper, direct analogies between the 
verbal and graphic modalities (i.e., like “words = panels”) are less important than the 
fact that the same questions are being addressed in both the verbal and graphic forms.  
Finally, the orientation of these questions will be situated as an examination of 
cognition. The approach outlined here seeks to understand how people comprehend 
the structures used in comics rather than examining the cultural trends present in the 
graphic form or the verbal text used within comics (though worthy endeavors in their 
own right). Rather, here commonality is examined between the understanding of 
verbal and sign languages and of the visual language used in comics—both with and 
particularly without written language—using the methodologies that linguistics uses 
to look at language.  
Naturally, research in other domains of cognition (such as visual attention and 
perception) will be necessary for a complete theory of the comprehension and 
appreciation of comics. Indeed, there are numerous studies on comics from other 
fields of cognitive science, particularly in the fields of cognitive psychology, 
cognitive neuroscience, and developmental psychology. However, this discussion will 
mostly stay constrained to linguistic approaches, keeping in mind that other important 
and applicable cross-disciplinary work contributes to the overall endeavor as well. 
Given this focus, let’s first look at what work has already been done in the linguistic 
paradigm to examine comics. 
 
 
Survey of Linguistic approaches to comics 
 
Comics have been studied using many of the formalisms that span the history 
of modern linguistic inquiry, from structuralism and generative grammar to cognitive 
and applied linguistics. These approaches have framed their analyses within their own 
paradigms, so the contributions of each will be discussed in a broad overview of the 
linguistic research that has been done using comics.   
Approaches to comics from a structuralist and semiological perspective 
emerged as early as the 1970s in Europe, summarized in Nöth (1990) and later in 
D’Angelo and Cantoni (2006) as well as in Mey (2006). Structuralism looked at 
“language” as a set of cultural codes, making comics one place that cultural codes 
could be found and reduced to minimal units. Comics are one of several types of art 
and media analyzed in this vein. Several authors aimed at describing the minimal 
units of comics’ representations at various levels of representation. Koch (1971) and 
Hünig (1974) both created taxonomies of unitization that build from the inner parts of 
comic panels’ graphic representations of characters, places, etc. (logemes) to whole 
panels (syntactemes), up through whole sequences (texts). Gubern (1972) also 
differentiates aspects of the form of representations (morphemes) with their color 
(coloremes). With more specific aims, several works in particular have attempted to 
identify morpho-graphemic minimal units using Charles Schulz’s Peanuts, 
highlighting how individual graphic elements of hands, eyes, noses, etc. combine to 
create differences in full-blown representations of various characters (Gauthier, 1976; 
Kloepfer, 1977; Oomen, 1975). Other approaches have focused on comics’ sequences 
by identifying elementary units of narrative functions, consistent trends in plots and 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
4	  
stories, and then comparing them with other narrative genres (Fresnault-Dervelle, 
1972; Hünig, 1974). More recent works following from this tradition include 
Groensteen (1999) who has couched his approach within the equation that “comics 
are a language,” yet has eschewed the search for minimal units, while semiological 
approaches are used in dissertations by Dean (2000) and Miller (2001).  
Aside from approaches looking at the structure of codes, some works have 
also used the philosopher C.S. Peirce’s (1931) “semiotics,” which focus on the 
expression of meaning through various types of reference. Peirce’s formulation of 
semiotic types—particularly his distinction between icons, indexes, and symbols—
has been applied to comics in broad strokes by Magnussen (2000) and specifically to 
the differences between cartoony, realistic, and abstract representational styles by 
Manning (1998). Peirce’s philosophies also provides the framework for Cohn’s 
(2007, 2010b) work describing the semantics and other systematic patterns in the 
morphology of graphic expression. 
While European work drew from structuralist traditions, contemporary works 
on comics in a linguistic light—both in America and abroad—have exploded since 
the publication of comic artist and theorist Scott McCloud’s (1993) graphic book 
Understanding Comics. In it, McCloud posited cognitive principles to explain the 
ways in which people understand both individual images and sequential ones. For 
example, McCloud proposes the principle of “closure,” where the mind “fills in the 
gaps” between panels in order to comprehend the sequence of images. McCloud 
characterizes the linear relationships between juxtaposed pairs of panels with a set of 
six types of “panel transitions” based on changes in actions, characters, or the 
environment, among others. He also quite overtly compares the medium to language, 
claiming that the “iconography” of graphic meanings constitutes the vocabulary and 
closure is the grammar.  
McCloud’s approach has permeated nearly all linguistically-driven studies 
since its publication. Both Saraceni (2000) and Stainbrook (2003) focused their 
dissertations on adapting McCloud’s panel transitions to theories of verbal discourse 
studies, while Narayan (2001) compared them to cognitive theories about event 
structure. Similarly, Saraceni (2001), Bridgeman (2005), and Lim (2006) all invoke 
McCloud’s ideas in their discussions of multimodal texts that integrate images and 
words. 
The analysis of comics has been the most prevalent in cognitive linguistics, 
which attempts to relate the comprehension of meaning in linguistic structure to 
aspects of general cognition. Cognitive linguistic research on conceptual metaphor 
(Lakoff & Johnson, 1979), which involves the mapping of one conceptual domain 
onto another, has been of particular interest to comic theorists. Forceville (2005) has 
examined the expressions of anger in Asterix comics, especially related to the 
metaphor “ANGER IS HOT FLUID IN A CONTAINER”—which in verbal form 
appears in sentences like “He was steamed” or “His rage erupted,” where concepts 
about anger map to aspects of boiling water coming out of a container. In the graphic 
form, this metaphor is visible in the common trope of steam coming out of the ears of 
angry characters, as if the emotion were bubbling over in the container of the head. A 
recent volume edited by Forceville looks at multimodal metaphor, including further 
examination of emotion in Asterix (Eerden, 2009) and similar metaphors driving 
emotion in Japanese manga (Shinohara & Matsunaka, 2009), as well as metaphor in 
other contexts such as political cartoons (El Refaie, 2009) and editorial cartoons 
(Schilperoord & Maes, 2009; Teng, 2009). Additional articles have examined 
metaphor in Neil Gaiman’s Sandman comics (Narayan, 2000), in McCloud’s 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
5	  
Understanding Comics (Horrocks, 2001; Narayan, 1999), in post-September 11th 
political cartoons (Bergen, 2004) and in comic strip advertisements for the Chicago 
Tribune newspaper (Cohn, 2010a).  
Further studies of comics in cognitive linguistics are increasingly appearing in 
conferences, journals, and chapters in this volume. Though the event itself was 
canceled, the 2009 International Cognitive Linguistics Conference catalogue online 
listed three abstracts for studies on comics, ranging from metaphors and image 
schemas in superhero comics (Potsch & Williams, 2009), to an examination of the 
cognitive structures of motion (Nowak, 2009), to multimodal meaning-making 
(Narayan, 2009). Clearly, the study of comics has taken hold in cognitive linguistics, 
extending the field’s intent to explore the connections in semantic systems between 
the verbal and other domains. 
A wide variety of other linguistic methods have been drawn upon for diverse 
purposes as well. Cohn (2005) has argued for sociological distinctions for comics’ 
underlying structure similar to the split between speech acts and the linguistic system 
made by de Saussure (1972) and the distinction between the internal cognitive 
understanding of a language and its external socio-cultural understanding made by 
Chomksy (1986). Chomsky’s (e.g. 1957, 1965) approach to generative grammar—
which hypothesizes that language’s syntax is generated by hierarchic structures 
guided by a system of constraints—has been drawn upon by Cohn (2003) to describe 
sequential images in a different way than panel-to-panel transitions. Meanwhile, an 
approach to a “visual lexicon” (Cohn, 2007) has drawn upon theories of construction 
grammar (Goldberg, 1995; Jackendoff, 2010) with sensitivity to concatenation of 
form-meaning patterns stored in memory at sizes ranging from small scale graphic 
components to full multimodal sequences. Finally, Laraudogoitia (2008, 2009) has 
drawn on the computational linguistics methods of using computer algorithms to 
explore the patterns and structures of language in his examination of the sequential 
structures of comics.  
Despite this growing trend of associating linguistics and comics, few of these 
disparate works are motivated by a central theory of language, graphic expression, or 
comics (acknowledged in D'Angelo & Cantoni, 2006). They all work under some 
intuition that linguistics is the proper discipline with which to study these phenomena. 
However, despite all tapping into the questions posed at the outset, nothing binds 
these works together. Moreover, few of them present any unifying vision to 
accomplish this, much less provide a gateway for future linguistic inquiry and/or 
connect graphic expression to the verbal or manual domains. At their best, these 
studies use comics as further support for particular linguistic theories (Forceville, 
2005; Narayan, 2001), and at their worst, they make equations that “comics are a 
language” without grounding such claims with adequate contemporary linguistics 
knowledge (e.g. Groensteen, 1999). 
However, a “unified theory” is possible, though it requires a deeper 
consideration of the object of inquiry. We turn to that now. 
 
What is “Visual Language”? 
 
In all of these cases, the graphic form used in comics is addressed with the 
methods used to analyze a linguistic system. Ultimately, this research contributes 
towards filling a gap in the cultural category regarding the channel of graphic 
expression. While verbal communication (“speaking) is readily acknowledged as 
using a system of expression (“spoken language”), graphic communication 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
6	  
(“drawing”) has no equivalent system recognized. While language is viewed as a rule-
governed system acquired through a developmental period, drawing is looked at as a 
“skill” subject only to the expressive aims of the artist and their abilities, which are 
assumed to be developed through explicit instruction or practice. While sentences can 
be grammatical or ungrammatical, the predominant intuition is that there is no 
unacceptable way to structure images. However, there is no principled reason why 
these beliefs about the visual-graphic domain are held, and the growing literature 
discussing “comics” in linguistics points towards systematization the same as in 
language. 
Indeed, humans only use three modalities to express concepts: creating 
sounds, moving bodies, and creating graphic representations. A theoretical extension 
can then be proposed: when any of these modalities takes on a structured sequence 
governed by rules that constrain the output—i.e., a grammar—that form becomes a 
type of language. This leads structured sequential sounds to be spoken languages of 
the world, structured sequential body motions become sign languages, and structured 
sequential images literally become visual languages. An analogy can then be made: 
individual manual expressions (which have no grammar) are to sign languages (that 
use a grammar) what individual drawn images (no grammar) are to visual languages 
(grammar).  
This notion of a “visual language” fills the gap in categorization for describing 
the cognitive system at work in graphic expression. When individuals acquire or 
develop systematic patterns of graphic representation, along with the structures 
necessary to string them into sequences, they are effectively using a visual language. 
Just as spoken language does not have a universal manifestation, visual language 
varies by culture. We would expect diverse cultural manifestations of visual 
languages throughout the world, perhaps even not resembling comics at all (such as 
the sand narratives used by native communities in Central Australia1). This provides a 
context to explain why, for example, Japanese and American comics feature varied 
graphic styles and sequential patterns (Cohn, 2010b): they are written in different 
visual languages, used by differing populations. However, while “Japanese Visual 
Language” and “American Visual Language” feature patterns that are unique to their 
speakers, they all still feature patterned sequential images expressing concepts that 
contribute toward their inclusion in the broader “visual language” the same way that 
English and Japanese are both types of “verbal language.” 
Thus, the questions posed to research at the outset of this paper—and the 
growing literature in linguistics—are all situated within the approach of studying this 
system of visual language. Next, what might this new formulation yield in terms of 
future research? 
 
Future Research: “Visual Linguistics” 
 
If visual language is to truly be studied as a language, research can easily 
involve all the traditional areas of linguistic inquiry framed by the questions posed at 
the outset of this paper, though re-understood for the graphic modality. The various 
areas of study can thus follow the major branches of linguistics that address these 
questions: graphemics, photology2 (visual-graphic analogues to phonetics and 
phonology), morphology, semantics, grammar as well as multimodality and 
acquisition. Note that each of these fields address the questions posed for research at 
the outset of this discussion. For each field described, the framing of the overall 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
7	  
inquiry will be described, followed by some pertinent existing research that fits into 
its endeavor. Following this, suggested research endeavors will be outlined. 
At the outset of this discussion of components of visual language, it is 
important to reinforce that the intent is not to force equivalencies between the 
structures used in verbal and visual forms (i.e. not “words = panels”). The goal is not 
to make direct mappings between spoken and visual language, but rather to 
understand how the two systems use analogous functions and units of organization. In 
some cases, correspondences should flow naturally (semantics could apply the same 
to aspects of meaning no matter the modality) while in others, a rigid analogy is 
wholly inappropriate (the graphic form likely has no “phonology,” but has a 
“photology” with its own properties that suits the visual-graphic modality). That said, 
the labels used from linguistics are ultimately less important than the functional roles 
that they describe within the system as a whole.  
 
Graphetics 
The place most disparate between visual language and verbal or sign 
languages is the modality itself—the visual-graphic channel is quite different from 
both the verbal-auditory and visual-manual domains. For example, while the verbal 
form is conveyed temporally, the graphic form is (in most cases) static. The auditory 
form mandates “linearity” to the expression, while the analog nature of vision leaves 
linearity to be guided by specific properties of layouts of panels. However, both 
systems have physical form through which the information is conveyed. As such, both 
spoken and visual languages have constraints on form, and that is the topic for this 
level of analysis. There are two major issues that concern the investigation of the form 
of visual language expression: 1) examination of the physical manifestation involved 
in graphic comprehension and 2) study of the organization of the units of form. In 
verbal language, these goals are met by the fields of phonetics and phonology, while 
corresponding fields of “graphetics” and “photology” can apply to the visual-graphic 
form. 
The study of graphetics should first seek to describe what sorts of information 
are encoded such that drawings can be produced and perceived. Verbal language uses 
“phonemes” of sound (k, l, m, a, e) that are created by physical points of articulation 
in the human vocal tract. Similarly, basic “graphemes” are used and combined 
together to form larger representations. Such basic shapes like dots, lines, and spirals 
combine to form angles, squares, circles, etc. that have been described as the basic 
shapes of various graphic iconography which are then deployed in drawn 
representations (Liungman, 1991). However, there is far more variability in the 
articulation of the hands (or feet, or elbows, etc.) to create graphic forms—there are 
many ways to draw a line with a finger or to hold a pen. In most visual languages, 
drawers have as much time as they need and have a nearly limitless array of media 
and techniques at their disposal. This contrasts with verbal and manual languages, 
which are produced in a rapid manner and are a direct trace of the articulatory 
gestures used to create the signal via the hands or mouth. Thus, while the physical 
production of verbal and manual language has great importance for encoding, for 
visual language, articulation appears to have little bearing on the final graphical 
structure. 
Nevertheless, there are important constraints on the perception of visual 
language. Viewers must be able to recognize the objects that are depicted in the 
scenes, meaning that the elements of visual language must be drawn in such a way as 
to facilitate visual object and scene perception. Drawers must thus be constrained by 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
8	  
the general principles of object recognition—panels must depict scenes that follow for 
example, Gestalt principles of organization (Palmer, 1992; Palmer & Rock, 1994; 
Wertheimer, 1923), principles of figure and ground, and others.   
Some work has described rules for grapheme combinations that resemble 
phonological constraints. For example, illegal combinations of sounds are restricted in 
all languages of the world—such as how “tlk” or “mp” cannot appear at the beginning 
of words in English. Similarly, Willats (2005) draws upon the work of Huffman 
(1971) and Reith (1988) to formulate acceptable versus ill-formed combinations of 
lines in drawings based on the rules allowing types of configurations of line junctions. 
For example, Figure 1 illustrates that the circled portions near the shoulder and leg of 
the kangaroo appear have awkward line junctions that do not accurately show the 
occlusion of objects. Thus, graphetics must be concerned with making sure that the 
graphical units combine to form recognizable objects and scenes.  
 
Figure 1. Ungrammatical line junctions in a child’s drawing of a kangaroo. 
Adapted from Reith (1988). 
 
 
The limitations on graphics shown here are purely involved with the graphic 
form—they have little effect on the meaning of either the parts or whole 
representation. While the comprehension of graphic elements must to some degree 
rely on general aspects of perception, these restrictions appear based on purely 
graphical components. Thus, research is charged with identifying the restrictions on 
structure in the graphic form, as well as where they depart from, and are similar to, 
general aspects of vision. To this end, as with phonetics, graphetics is the part of the 
cognitive architecture that interfaces most seriously with processes from other 
domains (here, visual perception; in phonetics, motor programming, acoustic 
perception).  
Finally, the graphic patterns used in visual language can be explored within 
individual drawers and within broader cultures. Given that a “language,” culturally 
speaking, is essentially the grand average of similar patterns in individuals’ heads, 
identifying such patterns can lend towards the documentation of graphic dialects. For 
example, consistent patterns are recognizable between the authors of most Japanese 
manga such that it can be called a “Japanese style” (big eyes, pointy chins, big hair), 
though with distinguishable subgenres that vary on this “Standard” (Cohn, 2010b). 
These distinctions can be understood as accents or dialects of the broader Japanese 
Visual Language; similar research can be undertaken for all visual languages. 
 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
9	  
Photology 
Beyond identifying basic units, research must also describe how these units of 
combine together and the cognitive principles that motivate such combinations. For 
these qualities in sound, this would be the endeavor of phonology. By analogy, 
“photology” is charged with the study of the organization of the graphic modality. 
Early structuralist approaches looked at how basic graphemes combine to influence 
meaning. Particularly, studies investigating the morpho-graphemic structures in 
Peanuts (Gauthier, 1976; Kloepfer, 1977; Oomen, 1975) frame the issues of searching 
for consistent patterns of graphic representations similar to looking for phonemes—a 
practice that goes all the way back to Töpffer’s ([1845] 1965) analysis of the 
regularities of his own drawings.  
This level of organization, however, should not relate to the basic needs of 
object recognition, but should rather be more arbitrary. This notion may best be 
demonstrated with an example. Note the two faces in Figure 2.  
 
Figure 2. Variation in photology 
 
 
Here, the Simple representation is drawn with simple lines and negligible 
detail. The Complex face, however, appears to use three-dimensional depth and his 
eyes, nose, hair, and ears all are depicted with detail. Crucially, note that even though 
the Complex face is drawn with nostrils and the Simple one is not, we are not 
supposed to infer that the Simple drawing has no nostrils. Rather, the photology of the 
Simple face allows a single graphical element such as a line to depict a lip or a nose, 
whereas the graphology at work for the Complex face requires more complicated 
configurations. One way to describe this difference would be to postulate a 
“minimality constraint” that dictates the minimum number of graphical elements that 
can be used to depict an object. While the Simple graphology allows single graphical 
elements to be a unit of representation (e.g., a circle for an eye, a line for a nose), the 
Complex face’s graphology requires more than one, i.e., requiring the nose and eyes 
to be more than a single line. This restriction would be similar to prosodic minimality 
constraints observed in natural languages that dictate the minimal size that words can 
take (e.g., English and Dutch morphemes must consist of at least a heavy syllable—a 
syllable with a long vowel or a short vowel followed by a consonant (Booij, 1995; 
Hammond, 1999)). Notice that this constraint has nothing to do with object 
perception—both faces are easily recognized as such. Rather, these are arbitrary rules 
for the way graphical elements may combine. 
The study of photology must account not only for the combination of 
individual graphemes to form basic shapes, but also individual characters all the way 
up through full scenes. Just because combinations might build to form objects and full 
scenes, it does not necessarily mean that they involve morphology—there still must 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
10	  
be an accounting for the comprehension of the purely visual-graphic aspects of the 
modality at various levels of processing, as shown in Figure 3. This is similar to 
sound in verbal language, which features phonological combinations within words, 
sentences, and even discourse with aspects of intonation, prosody, and metrical 
structure.  
 
Figure 3. Various levels of photological constructions 
 
 
As in the verbal and manual domains, in building larger levels of graphic 
structure, we might expect the mind to encode units of schematic information (both of 
simple graphemic shapes and combined chunks of them) that can be combined 
together using systematic rules. Research must characterize this schematic 
information, its combinatorial system, and how this purely graphic information maps 
to conceptual structures (be it through iconic or symbolic reference). One approach to 
this issue has been posed by investigation of children’s drawings. Along with 
subsequent research supporting that most children imitate drawings from other 
sources (Lamme & Thompson, 1994; Smith, 1985; Wilson, 1988, 1999), Wilson and 
Wilson (1977) have hypothesized that drawing pulls from schematic encodings of 
these imitated graphemic structures, which then become “averaged” in production to 
create novel forms. That is, a drawer either acquires (from imitating external sources) 
or creates schematic patterns of graphic representations and then produces them in a 
generative fashion to create novel drawings. 
Working out the mechanisms guiding these combinations is the primary 
challenge to a field of photology. As with graphetics, photology must interface with 
the concerns of general studies of vision and perception. Exploring the relations 
between these fields—as well as how they depart—will provide an explication of the 
cognition guiding the form of visual language. 
 
Morphology 
In all modalities, morphology is the study of how meaning is encapsulated in 
explicit forms. Unitized meaning in visual language can be divided similarly to 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
11	  
standard 
linguistic 
understandings, 
with 
productive 
versus 
non-productive 
morphemes, open and closed classes, and varying levels of lexical items. Following 
the construction grammar view that a lexicon is the cognitive encoding of stored units 
of form-meaning pairings in the linguistic system (Goldberg, 1995; Jackendoff, 
2010), Cohn (2007) described the overview of a “visual lexicon” that ranges from 
individual meaningful emblems3 (such as symbolic word bubbles or lightbulbs over 
heads) to fully productive and patterned representations at the level of full panels, 
even beyond to constructional patterns of sequential images.  
Among the straightforward work necessary in visual morphology, one topic 
might include cataloging the graphic emblems used in various cultures visual 
languages. Though humorous in intent, Walker (1980) has provided perhaps the most 
extensive collection of signs, while others have recently begun to emerge. (Forceville, 
2011; Forceville, Veale, & Feyaerts, 2010). Several works have noted the differences 
in morphology between cultures, particularly the disparities in Japanese and American 
emblems (Cohn, 2010b; McCloud, 1993). Shipman (2006) has also used case studies 
contrasting the signs used in certain comics by American and French authors. Still 
further contrast comes from visual languages that are found outside of the cultural 
objects of “comics,” such as Aboriginal Australian sand narratives which carry their 
own morphological systems (Green, Forthcoming; Munn, 1962, 1966, 1986; Wilkins, 
1997). 
Like verbal languages, visual languages appear to use distinctions between of 
attachment and binding to other signs that follow bound forms versus free forms. For 
example, words might affix a morpheme that cannot stand on its own like “–ness” to a 
root like “happy” or “sad” to make “happiness” or “sadness.” Similarly, focus can be 
given to the combinatoriality of various morphological signs in the graphic form 
(Cohn, 2007). For example, speed lines and speech balloons are “bound morphemes” 
that cannot appear without affixing to a root object like someone running or speaking. 
They cannot appear on their own and even imply a root if one is not shown. Other 
bound signs might have more restrictive areas of binding, such as those that appear 
above individuals’ heads (lightbulbs, hearts, rainclouds, etc.), but not to the side of the 
head or body, as in Figure 4. These above-the-head signs also require a degree of 
“agreement” with the facial expression—a happy face with rainclouds or an angry 
face with a lightbulb would be an ungrammatical combination. Again, it is important 
to emphasize that these graphic components are not implied as being equivalences to 
roots and affixes in verbal language, but that both types engage similar relationships 
in their concatenation of bound and free forms. 
Other morphological processes are similar to language as well. Some signs use 
“suppletion”—the substitution of all or part of an entire morpheme as a variant for 
another, such as “people” or “men” for the plural of “person” or “man.” Graphically 
for example, hearts, stars, dollar signs, etc. can be substituted in place of a character’s 
eyes to add meaning (see Figure 4), or full form suppletion of dotted lines for all the 
lines of a character’s body to stand for invisibility. Reduplication is also a common 
process where morphemes repeat to create expanded meaning, as in the repetition of 
the second morpheme in the Hebrew “klavlav” for “puppy” expanded from “kelev” 
for “dog” (Moravcsik, 1978). A similar process is used graphically when the lines of a 
character or object are repeated and layered on top of each other to show shaking, as 
in Figure 4.  
 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
12	  
Figure 4. Morphological processes in graphic form 
 
 
Again, it is important to remember that these processes involved in the 
combinatorial strategies of graphic morphology are not necessarily viewed as direct 
unit-to-unit analogues to the verbal form (i.e. there is no search here for the graphic 
equivalent of a “word”). However, the same general strategies are used in both the 
graphic and verbal forms. Both modalities attach meaningful elements together 
(affixing), substitute them within each other (suppletion), and repeat them 
(reduplication) to varying effects on the meaning of an expression. Exploring the 
constraints mediating these usages in the graphic modality echoes morphological 
research on other types of languages. 
Further, work should be done on the complex relationships between elements 
within an individual image. Studies in semiotics have sought to do this by describing 
the vectors between semantic roles of characters in an image (Kress & van Leeuwen, 
1996). However, others have also argued that generative approaches to individual 
images can also work for examples such as maps and diagrams, meshed with 
morphological cues (Engelhardt, 2002; Sonesson, 2005). Further study of this domain 
must seek to explain how both semantic and formal aspects of individual images 
facilitate understanding, as well as how the comprehension of individual images 
might differ from general visual perception.  
 
Semantics 
Semantics may be the field of linguistics shared the most clearly between all 
modalities. Beyond the categorization and combination of meaning in stored 
morphological signs, meanings in visual language can take on a number of more 
complex representations. One track for this can involve directly exploring the features 
of emblems and signs, such as Cohn’s (In Press) treatment of the semantic features 
underlying word balloons and thought bubbles. Other explorations of semantics can 
no doubt take on much greater complexity, such as the cognitive linguistics 
approaches to conceptual metaphor and blending in both individual images (e.g. 
Bergen, 2004; Forceville, 2005) and sequential images (Cohn, 2010a) as reviewed 
above. 
Common semantic phenomena like metonymy and synecdoche also appear in 
the graphic form (Cohn, 2010a; Kennedy, 1982; Kukkonen, 2008). Metonymy can 
take various types, especially the substitution for one thing to mean a related thing. 
For example, in the sentence “The White House issued a statement,” it is accepted that 
“The White House” stands for the administration that works in that building, not the 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
13	  
building itself. Similarly, this same metonymy is commonly used in the comic 
Doonesbury, which shows word bubbles coming from the White House to represent 
things said by people inside the building. Synecdoche, referring to the whole through 
the parts, also appears graphically. For example, anytime a panel uses an “extreme 
close-up” of a person or object, it uses a sliver of information about that entity to refer 
to the whole. Further exploration of these types of conceptual correspondences will 
inform existing research on metonymy in the graphic form. 
Finally, a primary focus of semantic research of visual language has focused 
on inference, the drawing of non-provided meaning from the existing forms. Inference 
has been a motivating notion in discourse studies particularly, as how in the sentences 
“The fireman sprayed the water on the house. Smoke rose from the building.” the 
reader derives the meaning that the house was on fire and it went out, though such 
concepts are never mentioned overtly in the text. Essentially, McCloud’s (1993) 
invocation of “closure” as the process of “mentally filling in the gaps” is a view 
setting inference between every pair of panels. However, inference may happen 
within a particular panel. For example, note the fifth panel of the sequence in Figure 
5. 
 
Figure 5. Inference generated by an Action Star (Mahfood 2002: 36)  
 
 
The fifth panel here uses the morpheme of an “action star” to take up the entire panel 
(Cohn, July, 2009). By only showing the action star, the actual event of the security 
guard being hit by the backpack is never shown and only implied. Studying how 
comprehension deals with making predictable inferences (as here with the 
information of the backpack being thrown) versus cases that are less predictable 
seems a formidable task for any study of visual language semantics. 
 
Grammar 
 
Grammar has been a central part of linguistic research since the 1950s, and 
must also factor importantly into research of visual languages. At the outset, this 
inquiry was posed as “How do you draw connections between and encode sequential 
units?” More directly for the graphic form we can ask “what are the constraints placed 
on sequential images that allow some sequences to be acceptable and others not (at 
the very least between “normal” narrative sequences and purely random panels)?”  
Semiological European approaches addressed this sequential structure by 
analyzing elementary narrative functions, often related to types of plotlines and their 
components (Fresnault-Dervelle, 1972; Hünig, 1974), while the first theory presented 
with any sort of cognitive aim in mind was in McCloud’s (1993) panel transitions. 
These transitions characterized various ways in which panels linearly connect to their 
juxtaposed neighbors, as in Figure 6, which uses Action-to-action transitions to 
describe a progression of an action between panels. 
 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
14	  
Figure 6. Panel transitions analyzing a sequence of images 
 
 
Cohn (2003, 2010c) has criticized transitional approaches relying on 
individual panel relationships and has presented an alternative perspective drawing 
upon tools of generative grammar. This hierarchic approach has been used to show 
that juxtaposed panel transitions are not enough to account for distance dependencies 
and structural ambiguities (Cohn, 2003, August, 2007, Under Review). In verbal 
language, distance dependencies arise when one unit must connect to another much 
further unit, such as in “My roommate, who is a total bore, watches TV all day” 
where an embedded clause separates the subject “My roommate” from its predication 
“watches…” Similarly, Figure 7 shows an embedded clause with a hierarchic 
approach in contrast to the analysis of panel transitions in Figure 6.  
 
Figure 7. Sequential images with center-embedded clause analyzed with a tree 
diagram highlighting the narrative structure. Within the maximal node of an 
Arc, categories describe different roles played by panels in the overall 
architecture. The culmination of a predication occurs in Peaks, the initiation of 
an interaction in the Initial, and an aftermath of the predicate in a Release.  
 
 
Additional ideas related to grammar have come from construction grammar, 
which describes schematic patterns at the various levels of language grammar 
(Goldberg, 1995; Jackendoff, 2010) including syntax. For example, the pattern “Verb-
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
15	  
ing the TIME Away” construction (Jackendoff, 1997) appears in “twistin’ the night 
away” or “lounging the afternoon away.” This same approach has led to proposals of 
schematic patterns in this visual language grammar (Cohn, 2007, 2010a). For 
example, sometimes a scene might flip back and forth between panels showing each 
character individually before coming together at a panel that shows both together in 
the same panel, as in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8. “Environmental Alternation” construction from a sequence in Usagi 
Yojimbo by Stan Sakai (Sakai 1987: 28) 
 
 
As described, the pattern here flips back and forth between panels depicting 
only the ninja and the samurai rabbit before both characters are depicted together in 
the final panel. This pattern of “Environmental Alternation” appears prevalently in 
sequential images, and could possibly be explained using a schema such as:  
 
Environmental Alternation:  
[[ (A) (B)]Xn   [(AB)]] 
 
Environmental Alternation in Figure 8 
[ [(Ninja) (Rabbit)]  [(Ninja) (Rabbit)]  [(Ninja Rabbit)]] 
 
Here, square brackets represent clauses, parentheses represent panels, while A 
and B stand for different characters. The construction begins with a clause X with 
panels just showing A and B, that can repeat n number of times before coming 
together in a panel with both A and B. In the case of Figure 8, there are two clauses of 
individual panels prior to final joined panel. With further understanding of the visual 
grammar as a whole, additional constructions like this can be identified and described 
using the formal tools of linguistics. 
Future study of visual language grammar must seek to explain the rules and 
restrictions that guide graphic sequences, while also addressing the elements from 
semantics and morphology that may motivate grammatical categorization. For 
example, in the verbal modality nouns can be nearly any semantic class (objects, 
events, etc.), though adjectives are most often properties (Jackendoff, 1990). 
Comparatively, the visual-graphic form may have correspondences to meaning that 
limits the roles that panels play in a sequence. For example, the action star in Figure 5 
is able to substitute for a full event, but would seem awkward at the start of a 
sequence; what are the semantic properties that motivate it to take the sequential role 
that it does? Additionally, study of this grammar must involve identifying and 
codifying types of grammatical patterns (such as Environmental Alternation), as well 
as diagnostic tests for their constraints (such as that in Figure 8, switching the order of 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
16	  
the third and fourth panels would result in a less felicitous reading: why?). Finally, 
like other fields, beyond understanding the cognitive system itself, this study will 
benefit aim at cross-cultural comparisons, such as McCloud’s (1993) contrasting of 
panel transitions in American, European, and Japanese comics. Like syntactic 
categories in the verbal form, it may be the case that the same grammatical elements 
are used cross-culturally in diverse ways. 
 
Multimodality 
Most speech in discourse contexts often appears with gesture, just as most 
visual language does not appear on its own, occurring in conjunction with written 
language. Again, Australian sand narratives can provide a good contrast, since their 
production not only accompanies speech, but also with an auxiliary sign language in 
interactive multimodal exchanges (Green, Forthcoming; Wilkins, 1997). Since the 
graphic form does not involve temporal co-occurrence the way that speech and 
gesture do, various interfaces are required to achieve unified expressions in the spatial 
form. Cohn (Cohn, 2003, In Press) has described these various ways in which the 
verbal and visual modalities interface, focusing especially on how text and image can 
combine to form singular units of expressions. More attuned to the expression of 
meaning in multiple channels, McCloud (1993) has outlined a general taxonomy for 
the interactions between modalities, while Cohn (In Preparation) has expanded this to 
investigate the contributions of cognitive structures in multimodal expressions of all 
types. 
The study of multimodality must not only seek to understand how different 
modalities interact in expressions and their regularities, but also how cognitive 
structures contribute to such interactions. Do modalities share a common conceptual 
structure? Are there constraints on how much each modality contributes to the whole 
of meaning? What is the architecture of a grammatical model that can distribute 
semantics into various modalities at the same time? A great challenge here is posed to 
approaches of semantics that can be expressed by numerous modalities concurrently. 
 
Acquisition  
Beyond just knowing how the structures of a language work, it is also 
important to understand how a child can acquire them. Research on how children 
learn to draw and their abilities to create sequential images has largely been addressed 
by the field of Art Education, with minimal focus from linguistics and developmental 
psychology. However, the expectations of a focus centered on advising education are 
different than those aiming simply to describe the processes of cognitive 
development.4 Nevertheless, among this work several insightful works can 
importantly inform the Visual Language paradigm, especially since the development 
of drawing appears to have similarities to that of language. For example, like 
language acquisition, drawing begins with a period of “babbling” before progressing 
to increasingly complex forms (Kindler & Darras, 1997; Willats, 2005). Additionally, 
drawing does appear subject to a critical learning period. It has been well established 
that American children (and those of most cultures) show a “drop off” in the 
development of drawing skills at puberty (Davis, 1997; Kindler & Darras, 1997). 
However, this drop off does not occur in Japan (Toku, 1998, 2001), where children 
imitate and draw Japanese comics throughout childhood (Wilson, 1999; Wilson & 
Wilson, 1987). In this light, such a “drop off” appears to be the apex of a critical 
developmental period, in which American children do not receive adequate stimulus 
to overcome, but Japanese children do. 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
17	  
Some theories of child drawing are particularly appropriate to mention for 
their comparisons of the structure and acquisition of drawing to language. For 
example, Willats (2005) outlines a trajectory of development for children’s drawings 
that is tied with the perceptual theories of Marr (1982) and inspired from ideas in 
generative grammar. Also key are the insights of Brent and Marjorie Wilson, who 
have compared the acquisition of graphic schemas to language (Wilson & Wilson, 
1977), and have described numerous places in which cultural knowledge and 
imitation factor into drawing ability both for individual images (Wilson, 1988, 1997, 
1999; Wilson & Wilson, 1979) and sequential images (Wilson & Wilson, 1987). 
Additional work has looked directly at the comprehension of both sequential images 
and text in comics, particularly with a focus on how age and expertise influence 
comprehension (Nakazawa, 2002, 2004, 2005; Nakazawa & Nakazawa, 1993a, 
1993b; Pallenik, 1986). While many other studies are worth exploring, such research 
can lay a foundation towards understanding how children acquire graphic abilities, 
and thereby feed back into an understanding of the visual language itself. 
 
Further inquiries 
The fields described above are merely broad strokes aiming at how an 
orientation of “visual linguistics” might proceed, though really any subfield of 
linguistics proper should apply to the visual form. These might include (though are 
not limited to): 
 
• Linguistic typology – What is the range of variation in the languages of the 
world and are there consistencies that lead to underlying universals? 
• Historical linguistics – How might the structure of a language change over 
time and what are the properties of languages no longer in use? 
• Comparative linguistics/Language contact – How does the structure of a 
language change with exposure to another, and might existing languages share 
historical roots? 
• Anthropology – What are the characteristics of the cultures that arise around 
languages of the world?  
• Sociolinguistics – How is a language used in socio-cultural settings, and how 
does it frame a person’s identity? What biases does that engender towards the 
perceptions of other dialects? 
• Neurolinguistics – What are the brain areas associated with the processing of 
structures of language and how might those brain areas be similar or different 
from those used in other linguistic and non-linguistic domains? 
• Computational linguistics – How might statistical modeling be used to study 
the properties of a language? 
• Cognitive deficits – What can cognitive impairments (aphasics, genetic 
disorders, etc.) teach us about the biological and neural structuring of 
language?  
 
The questions that motivate all of these fields apply equally to verbal, sign, and visual 
languages. Insofar as visual language is a real and actual linguistic system, research in 
nearly any domain related to language should both be conceivable as well as possible. 
In addition to applying to the subfields of linguistics, visual language has the 
ability of being analyzed using nearly all types of linguistics schools: generative, 
cognitive, applied, computational, etc. In some sense, visual language can be seen as 
an equalizing force between such schools of linguistics, since all are applicable given 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
18	  
the proper goals in mind for the research. Truly, the theory of visual language not 
only applies to linguistics, but can serve to unify such disparate research as that of 
comics with that of sand narratives, and in fields as diverse as art history, linguistics, 
cognitive science, and art education. This broad accessibility is a testament to the 
linguistic status of visual language and the potential for a future “visual linguistics” 
across the entire field of the study of language. 
 
Visual Language versus Comics 
 
Having discussed these various fields of inquiry into visual language, it is 
worth reiterating the relationship between comics and linguistics, particularly the 
importance and ramifications of the difference between “visual language” and 
“comics.” While “visual language” is the biological and cognitive capacity that 
humans have for conveying concepts in the visual-graphic modality, “comics” are a 
socio-cultural context in which this visual language appears (often in conjunction with 
writing). By dividing the mode of conceptual expression from the socio-cultural 
artifact, it creates a definition of comics that is not founded on structural properties. 
This split is in direct contrast to approaches that define comics by features of images 
and/or text, such as the requirement of sequential images by McCloud (1993), the 
dominance of images in Groensteen (1999), or the need for multimodal text-image 
interactions by Harvey (1994).5  
By recognizing “visual language” as a system divorced from its predominant 
socio-cultural context, a “comic” can use any combination of writing and images: 
single images, sequential images, some writing, no writing, dominated by writing, etc. 
In fact, all permutations of these combinations do in fact appear in objects that are 
identified as “comics” (Cohn, 2003, 2005). Indeed, such a division also allows visual 
language to be used outside of the cultural institution of comics as well, such as the 
appearance of sequential images in instruction manuals, illustrated books, and various 
other socioculturally disparate contexts that are not labeled as “comics.” Indeed, 
illustrated books and comics both use sequential images and/or writing to (most often) 
tell stories, but they play far different roles in culture, not to mention carrying 
different stereotypes. Both may use visual languages, but both are not called “comics” 
because they belong to different cultural contexts. 
Making this separation between “comics” and the “visual language they are 
written in” should also lead to various entailments about their consideration. For 
example, it should halt the recasting of the modern label of “comics” onto historical 
instances of sequential images like cave paintings, medieval carvings, or tapestries 
(Kunzle, 1973; McCloud, 1993). Rather than call these artifacts historical “comics” 
(or “protocomics”), these cases can be viewed simply as visual language usage, tied to 
their own unique and specific cultural and historical contexts (Horrocks, 2001). 
This split between the sociocultural object/context (“comics”) and the 
structural/cognitive system (“visual language”) is the key to future research of the 
graphic form in the linguistic sciences. It also changes the spotlight of inquiry: the 
focus is not just on “comics,” but on the system they are written in and how the mind 
works to create meaning through various modalities, particularly graphic expression 
and its relation to other systems. 
Truly, the ultimate object of inquiry in linguistics is not physical or social 
phenomena “out in the world” at all. Rather, the units of investigation are the abstract 
representations and principles in the human mind that motivate comprehension of 
various domains, from the understanding of the form and meaning to its use in social 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
19	  
settings. These principles are not tied to any sociocultural context like comics, and 
indeed may be cognitive artifacts abstract enough to engage both the verbal and visual 
domains. Thus, while glossed over as the study of comics, really the linguistic study 
of this visual language illuminates the links between domains that can paint a broader 
picture of the nature of human expression. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Ray Jackendoff, Eva Wittenberg, Stephanie Gottwald, and Ariel Goldberg helped 
tremendously with comments on early drafts of this paper. Kelly Cooper as always 
makes a wonderful editor. Dark Horse Comics is thanked for their contribution to my 
research corpus that appeared here as an example figure. 
 
Notes 
 
1. Native communities in Central Australia, particularly the Walbiri (Munn, 1962, 
1986) and the Arrernte (Green, Forthcoming; Wilkins, 1997), use language-like 
systems of sand narratives in combination with both speech and auxiliary sign 
languages. While the most elaborate sand drawings are used in specific storytelling 
contexts, this system is not conceived of as an auxiliary communicative system and is 
also used in daily conversation: Wilkins (1997) describes the use of this system as 
integrated to the Arrernte’s notion of everyday “speaking.” These graphic systems use 
highly systematized signs that maintain an aerial viewpoint and are drawn into the 
sand. For example, the prevalent sign for “person” looks like the letter “U”, 
representing the imprint that people make in the sand (Munn, 1986; Wilkins, 1997). 
Both Cox (1998) and Wilkins (1997) have noted interesting ramifications of 
children’s reconciling of the differences in sand drawings and Western 
representations. Sequentially, sand narratives unfurl temporally in a single area, as 
opposed to a discrete sequence of images as in comics. Wilkins (1997) notes that this 
difference leads to the Arrernte having strained comprehension of comics, with their 
being unable to make meaningful connections between static images. By all accounts, 
this system would fall under the scope of what is meant by a “visual language,” 
though its properties are vastly different than those in the visual languages used in 
comics around the world. 
 
2. Or, alternatively, “graphology.” My personal preference is asymmetric, with 
“photology” to describe the field and “graphemes” for the minimal graphic units (and 
thus “graphetics” instead of “photetics”). I leave it to future researchers to ultimately 
make this labeling decision. Note though that sign language researchers have opted to 
just maintain “phonology” for the structure of the manual modality and its 
articulation. For the graphic modality this seems inappropriate. If the study of a 
language’s modality used a “domain-neutral” term instead of “phon-“ referencing 
sound, differing names for fields would likely be unnecessary. 
 
3. “Emblems” is here borrowed from gesture research (McNeill, 1992) to mean a 
conventional expression of meaning that cannot enter into sentences as a unit unto 
itself. In gesture this might include the “thumbs up,” “Okay,” or “middle finger” hand 
positions, which are used individually but not as novel productive gestures. In graphic 
form, emblems would include thought bubbles, word balloons, smoke emerging from 
someone’s ears, hearts for eyes, and other conventionalized signs. 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
20	  
 
4. For example, art education has traditionally frowned upon imitation in learning for 
much of the twentieth century (Willats, 2005; Wilson, 1988; Wilson & Wilson, 1977), 
while language development must use imitation (if only to acquire the spoken 
language provided to a child). 
 
5. It is notable that such as split between “comics” and the “language they are written 
in” was forecasted by Horrocks (2001) in his analysis of McCloud’s (1993) definition.  
 
 
Graphic References 
 
Mahfood, Jim. 2002. Grrl Scouts in “Just Another Day”. In Dark Horse Maverick: 
Happy Endings. Edited by D. Schutz. Milwaukie: Dark Horse Comics 
Sakai, Stan. 1987. Usagi Yojimbo: Book One. Seattle: Fantagraphics Books. 
 
References 
 
Bergen, B. (2004). To Awaken a Sleeping Giant: Blending and Metaphor in Editorial 
Cartoons after September 11. In M. Achard & S. Kemmer (Eds.), Language, 
Culture, and Mind. Palo Alto, CA: CSLI. 
Booij, G. E. (1995). The Phonology of Dutch. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Bridgeman, T. (2005). Figuration and Configuration: Mapping Imaginary Worlds in 
Bd. In C. Forsdick, L. Grove & L. McQuillan (Eds.), The Francophone Bande 
Desinée: 115-136. Amsterdam: Rodopi. 
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic Structures. The Hague: Mouton. 
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Chomsky, N. (1986). Knowledge of Language: Its Nature, Origin, and Use. New 
York, NY: Praeger. 
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Cohn, N. (2003). Early Writings on Visual Language. Carlsbad, CA: Emaki 
Productions. 
Cohn, N. (2005). Un-Defining "Comics": Separating the Cultural from the Structural 
in ‘Comics’. International Journal of Comic Art, 7(2): 236-248. 
Cohn, N. (2007). A Visual Lexicon. Public Journal of Semiotics, 1(1): 53-84. 
Cohn, N. (2010a). Extra! Extra! Semantics in Comics!: The Conceptual Structure of 
Chicago Tribune Advertisements. Journal of Pragmatics, 42(11): 3138–3146. 
Cohn, N. (2010b). Japanese Visual Language: The Structure of Manga. In T. Johnson-
Woods (Ed.), Manga: An Anthology of Global and Cultural Perspectives: 
187-203. New York: Continuum Books. 
Cohn, N. (2010c). The Limits of Time and Transitions: Challenges to Theories of 
Sequential Image Comprehension. Studies in Comics, 1(1): 127-147. 
Cohn, N. (August, 2007). Foundations for a Natural Visual Language Grammar. 
Paper presented at the Visual and Iconic Languages Conference.  
Cohn, N. (In Preparation). Meaning in Multiple Modalities: A Cognitive Framework 
for Multimodal Interactions. 
Cohn, N. (In Press). Beyond Speech Balloons and Thought Bubbles: The Integration 
of Text and Image. Cognitive Semiotics, 6. 
Cohn, N. (July, 2009). Action Starring Narrative and Events. Paper presented at the 
Comic Arts Conference.  
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
21	  
Cohn, N. (Under Review). Visual Narrative Structure. Cognitive Science. 
Cox, M. V. (1998). Drawings of People by Australian Aboriginal Children: The 
Intermixing of Cultural Styles. Journal of Art and Design Education (JADE), 
17(1): 71-80. 
D'Angelo, M., & Cantoni, L. (2006). Comics: Semiotics Approaches. In K. Brown 
(Ed.), Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics 2nd ed., Vol. 2: 627-635. 
Oxford, UK: Elsevier. 
Davis, J. (1997). The “U” and the Wheel of “C”: Development and Devaluation of  
Graphic Symbolization and the Cognitive Approach at Harvard Project Zero. In A. M. 
Kindler (Ed.), Child Development in Art. Virginia: National Art Education 
Association. 
de Saussure, F. (1972). Course in General Linguistics (R. Harris, Trans.). Chicago, 
IL: Open Court Classics. 
Dean, M. (2000). The Ninth Art: Traversing the Cultural Space of the American 
Comic Book. Unpublished Dissertation, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 
Milwaukee, WI. 
Eerden, B. (2009). Anger in Asterix: The Metaphorical Representation of Anger in 
Comics and Animated Films. In C. Forceville & E. Urios-Aparisi (Eds.), 
Multimodal Metaphor: 243-264. New York: Mouton De Gruyter. 
Eisner, W. (1985). Comics & Sequential Art. Florida: Poorhouse Press. 
El Refaie, E. (2009). Metaphor in Political Cartoons: Exploring Audiences 
Responses. In C. Forceville & E. Urios-Aparisi (Eds.), Multimodal Metaphor: 
173-196. New York: Mouton De Gruyter. 
Engelhardt, Y. (2002). The Language of Graphics. Unpublished Dissertation, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam. 
Forceville, C. (2005). Visual Representations of the Idealized Cognitive Model of 
Anger in the Asterix Album La Zizanie. Journal of Pragmatics, 37: 69-88. 
Forceville, C. (2011). Pictorial Runes in Tintin and the Picaros. Journal of 
Pragmatics, 43: 875-890. 
Forceville, C., Veale, T., & Feyaerts, K. (2010). Balloonics: The Visuals of Balloons 
in Comics. In J. Goggin & D. Hassler-Forest (Eds.), The Rise and Reason of 
Comics and Graphic Literature: Critical Essays on the Form. Jefferson: 
McFarland & Company, Inc. 
Fresnault-Dervelle, P. (1972). La Bande Dessinée. Paris: Hachette. 
Gauthier, G. (1976). Les Peanuts: Une Graphisme Ideiomatique. Communications, 
24: 108-139. 
Goldberg, A. (1995). Constructions: A Construction Grammar Approach to Argument 
Structure. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
Green, J. (Forthcoming). Multimodal Complexity in Arandic Sand Story Narratives. 
In L. Stirling, T. Strahan & S. Douglas (Eds.), Narrative in Intimate Societies. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Groensteen, T. (1999). Systeme De La Bande Dessinée: Presses Universitaires de 
France. 
Gubern, R. (1972). El Lenguaje De Los Comics. Barcelona: Peninsula. 
Hammond, M. (1999). The Phonology of English: A Prosodic Optimality-Theoretic 
Approach. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Harvey, R. C. (1994). The Art of the Funnies: An Aesthetic History. Jackson, 
Mississippi: University of Mississippi Press. 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
22	  
Horrocks, D. (2001). Inventing Comics: Scott Mccloud Defines the Form in 
Understanding Comics. The Comics Journal, 234. 
Huffman, D. A. (1971). Impossible Objects as Nonsense Sentences. In B. Meltzer & 
D. Mitchie (Eds.), Machine Intelligence Vol. 6. Edinburgh, Scotland: 
Edinburgh University. 
Hünig, W. K. (1974). Strukturen Des Comic Strip. Hildensheim: Olms. 
Jackendoff, R. (1990). Semantic Structures. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Jackendoff, R. (1997). Twistin' the Night Away. Language, 73(3): 534-559. 
Jackendoff, R. (2010). Meaning and the Lexicon: The Parallel Architecture 1975-
2010. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Kennedy, J. M. (1982). Metaphor in Pictures. Perception, 11: 589-605. 
Kindler, A. M., & Darras, B. (1997). Map of Artistic Development. In A. M. Kindler 
(Ed.), Child Development in Art. Virginia: National Art Education 
Association. 
Kirby, J. (1999, Feb 1999). Interview with Ben Schwartz. The Jack Kirby Collector, 
23: 19-23. 
Kloepfer, R. (1977). Komplentarität Von Sprache Und Bild – Am Beispiel Von 
Comic, Karikatur Und Reklame. In R. Zeichenprosesse Posner & H.-P. 
Reinecke (Eds.): 129-145. Wiesbaden: Athenaion. 
Koch, W. A. (1971). Varia Semiotica. Hildensheim: Olms. 
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (1996). Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual 
Design. London: Routledge. 
Kukkonen, K. (2008). Beyond Language: Metaphor and Metonymy in Comics 
Storytelling. English Language Notes, 46(2): 89-98. 
Kunzle, D. (1973). The History of the Comic Strip (Vol. 1). Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1979). Metaphors We Live By. Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press. 
Lamme, L. L., & Thompson, S. (1994). "Copy?...Real Artists Don't Copy!" But 
Maybe Children Should. Art Education, 47(6): 46-51. 
Laraudogoitia, J. P. (2008). The Comic as a Binary Language: An Hypothesis on 
Comic Structure. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 15(2): 111-135. 
Laraudogoitia, J. P. (2009). The Composition and Structure of the Comic. Journal of 
Quantitative Linguistics, 16(4): 327-353. 
Lim, V. F. (2006). The Visual Semantics Stratum: Making Meanings in Sequential 
Images. In T. Royce & W. Bowcher (Eds.), New Directions in the Analysis of 
Multimodal Discourse. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Liungman, C. G. (1991). Dictionary of Symbols. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO Inc. 
Magnussen, A. (2000). The Semiotics of C.S. Peirce as a Theoretical Framework for 
the Understanding of Comics. In A. Magnussen & H.-C. Christiansen (Eds.), 
Comics and Culture: Analytical and Theoretical Approaches to Comics: 193-
207. Copenhagen: Museum of Tusculanum Press. 
Manning, A. D. (1998). Scott Mccloud Understanding Comics: The Invisible Art. 
IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication, 41(1). 
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. San Francisco, CA: Freeman. 
McCloud, S. (1993). Understanding Comics: The Invisible Art. New York, NY: 
Harper Collins. 
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and Mind: What Gestures Reveal About Thought. Chicago, 
IL: University of Chicago Press. 
McNeill, D. (2000). Language and Gesture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
23	  
Mey, K.-A. L. (2006). Comics: Pragmatics. In K. Brown (Ed.), Encyclopedia of 
Language and Linguistics 2nd ed., Vol. 2: 623-627. Oxford, UK: Elsevier. 
Miller, J. (2001). Critical Analysis of Comic Strips: A Semiological Approach. 
Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, State University of New York, Buffalo. 
Moravcsik, E. (1978). Reduplicative Constructions. In J. H. Greenberg (Ed.), 
Universals of Human Language, Iii: Word Structure. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press. 
Munn, N. D. (1962). Walbiri Graphic Signs: An Analysis. American Anthropologist, 
64(5): 972-984. 
Munn, N. D. (1966). Visual Categories: An Approach to the Study of 
Representational Systems. American Anthropologist, 68(4): 936-950. 
Munn, N. D. (1986). Walbiri Iconography: Graphic Representation and Cultural 
Symbolism in a Central Australian Society. Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press  
Nakazawa, J. (2002). Analysis of Manga (Comic) Reading Processes: Manga Literacy 
and Eye Movement During Manga Reading. Manga Studies, 5: 39-49. 
Nakazawa, J. (2004). Manga (Comic) Literacy Skills as Determinant Factors of 
Manga Story Comprehension. Manga Studies, 5: 7-25. 
Nakazawa, J. (2005). Development of Manga (Comic Book) Literacy in Children. In 
D. W. Shwalb, J. Nakazawa & B. J. Shwalb (Eds.), Applied Developmental 
Psychology: Theory, Practice, and Research from Japan: 23-42. Greenwich, 
Connecticut: Information Age Publishing. 
Nakazawa, J., & Nakazawa, S. (1993a). Development of Manga Reading 
Comprehension: How Do Children Understand Manga? In Y. Akashi (Ed.), 
Manga and Child: How Do Children Understand Manga? : 85-189: Research 
report of Gendai Jidobunka Kenkyukai. 
Nakazawa, J., & Nakazawa, S. (1993b). How Do Children Understand Comics?: 
Analysis of Comic Reading Comprehension. Annual of Research in Early 
Childhood, 15: 35-39. 
Narayan, S. (1999). The Language of Comics: Metaphor in Scott Mccloud's 
Understanding Comics. Unpublished Class essay: Linguistics 106, UC 
Berkeley. 
Narayan, S. (2000). Mappings in Art and Language: Conceptual Mappings in Neil 
Gaiman's Sandman. Unpublished Senior Honors Thesis, University of 
California, Berkeley. 
Narayan, S. (2001). A Window on a Trail: The Metaphorical Structuring of Scott 
Mccloud's Web-Comics. Paper presented at the Comic Arts Conference.  
Narayan, S. (2009). Iconicity and Creativity in the Structure of Comics. Unpublished 
Abstract 
for 
International 
Cognitive 
Linguistics 
Conference 
11. 
http://linguistics.berkeley.edu/~iclc/board.html, Accessed 5/6/09. 
Nöth, W. (1990). Handbook of Semiotics. Indianappolis, IN: University of Indiana 
Press. 
Nowak, P. (2009). Representing Motion in Comics. Unpublished Abstract for 
International 
Cognitive 
Linguistics 
Conference 
11. 
http://linguistics.berkeley.edu/~iclc/board.html, Accessed 5/6/09. 
Oomen, U. (1975). Wort-Bild-Nachricht: Semiotische Aspekte Des Comic Strip 
"Peanuts". Linguistik und Didaktik, 24: 247-259. 
Pallenik, M. J. (1986). A Gunman in Town! Children Interpret a Comic Book. Studies 
in the Anthropology of Visual Communication, 3(1): 38-51. 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
24	  
Palmer, S. (1992). Common Region: A New Principle of Perceptual Grouping. 
Cognitive Psychology, 24(3): 436-447. 
Palmer, S., & Rock, I. (1994). Rethinking Perceptual Organization: The Role of 
Uniform Connectedness. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1: 29-55. 
Peirce, C. S. (1931). Division of Signs. In C. Hartshorne & P. Weiss (Eds.), Collected 
Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce: Vol. 2: Elements of Logic.: 134-173. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Potsch, E., & Williams, R. F. (2009). Motion and Force in a Static Art Form: Image 
Schemas and Primary Metaphor in American Superhero Comics. Unpublished 
Abstract 
for 
International 
Cognitive 
Linguistics 
Conference 
11. 
http://linguistics.berkeley.edu/~iclc/board.html, Accessed 5/6/09. 
Reith, E. (1988). The Development of Use of Contour Lines in Children's Drawings 
of Figurative and Non-Figurative Three-Dimensional Models. Archives de 
Psychologie, 56(217): 83-103. 
Saraceni, M. (2000). Language Beyond Language: Comics as Verbo-Visual Texts. 
Unpublished Dissertation, University of Nottingham. 
Saraceni, M. (2001). Seeing Beyond Language: When Words Are Not Alone. 
CAUCE, 24: 433-455. 
Schilperoord, J., & Maes, A. (2009). Visual Metaphoric Conceptualization in 
Editorial Cartoons. In C. Forceville & E. Urios-Aparisi (Eds.), Multimodal 
Metaphor: 213-240. New York: Mouton De Gruyter. 
Schodt, F. L. (1983). Manga! Manga! The World of Japanese Comics. New York: 
Kodansha America Inc. 
Shinohara, K., & Matsunaka, Y. (2009). Pictorial Metaphors of Emotion in Japanese 
Comics. In C. Forceville & E. Urios-Aparisi (Eds.), Multimodal Metaphor: 
265-293. New York: Mouton De Gruyter. 
Shipman, H. (2006). Hergé's Tintin and Milton Caniff's Terry and the Pirates: 
Western Vocabularies of Visual Language. Paper presented at the Comic Arts 
Conference.  
Smith, N. R. (1985). Copying and Artistic Behaviors: Children and Comic Strips. 
Studies in Art Education, 26(3): 147-156. 
Sonesson, G. (2005). From the Linguistic Model to Semiotic Ecology: Structure and 
Indexicality in Pictures and in the Perceptual World. Semiotics Institute 
Online, 
Lecture 
4. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.chass.utoronto.ca/epc/srb/cyber/Sonesson4.pdf, 
Accessed 
8/25/08 
Stainbrook, E. J. (2003). Reading Comics: A Theoretical Analysis of Textuality and 
Discourse in the Comics Medium. Unpublished Dissertation, Indiana 
University of Pennsylvania. 
Teng, N. Y. (2009). Image Alignment in Multimodal Metaphor. In C. Forceville & E. 
Urios-Aparisi (Eds.), Multimodal Metaphor: 197-211. New York: Mouton De 
Gruyter. 
Toku, M. (1998). Why Do Japanese Children Draw in Their Own Ways? 
Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. 
Toku, M. (2001). What Is Manga?: The Influence of Pop Culture in Adolescent Art. 
Journal of National Art Education, 54( 2): 11-17. 
Töpffer, R. ([1845] 1965). Enter: The Comics: Rodolphe Töpffer's Essay on 
Physiognomy and the True Story of Monsieur Crépin (E. Wiese, Trans.). 
Lincoln, Nebraska: University of Nebraska Press. 
Comics, Linguistics, and Visual Language	  
25	  
Walker, M. (1980). The Lexicon of Comicana. Port Chester, NY: Comicana, Inc. 
Wertheimer, M. (1923). Untersuchungen Zur Lehre Von Der Gestalt (Laws of 
Organization in Perceptual Forms). Psychol. Forsch., 4: 301-350. 
Wilkins, D. P. (1997). Alternative Representations of Space: Arrernte Narratives in 
Sand. In M. Biemans & J. van de Weijer (Eds.), Proceedings of the Cls 
Opening Academic Year ’97 ’98: Center for Language Studies. 
Willats, J. (2005). Making Sense of Children's Drawings. Manwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 
Wilson, B. (1988). The Artistic Tower of Babel: Inextricable Links between Culture 
and Graphic Development. In G. W. Hardiman & T. Zernich (Eds.), 
Discerning Art: Concepts and Issues. Champaign, IL: Stipes Publishing 
Company. 
Wilson, B. (1997). Child Art, Multiple Interpretations, and Conflicts of Interest. In A. 
M. Kindler (Ed.), Child Development in Art 81-94. Reston, VA: National Art 
Education Association. 
Wilson, B. (1999). Becoming Japanese: Manga, Children’s Drawings, and the 
Construction of National Character. Visual Arts Research, 25(2): 48-60. 
Wilson, B., & Wilson, M. (1977). An Iconoclastic View of the Imagery Sources in the 
Drawings of Young People. Art Education, 30(1): 4-12. 
Wilson, B., & Wilson, M. (1979). Figure Structure, Figure Action, and Framing in 
Drawings by American and Egyptian Children. Studies in Art Education, 
21(1): 36-43. 
Wilson, B., & Wilson, M. (1987). Pictorial Composition and Narrative Structure: 
Themes and Creation of Meaning in the Drawings of Egyptian and Japanese 
Children. Visual Arts Research, 13(2): 10-21. 
 
 
