 
1 
 
Reminiscences of the VLSI Revolution: 
How a series of failures triggered a paradigm shift in digital design*  
 
By Lynn Conway 
Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Emerita 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 
 
Lynn Conway at MIT, October 2008, the 30th anniversary of launching her VLSI design course there. 
  
Preface   
Innovations in science and engineering have excited me for a lifetime, as they have for many friends 
and colleagues. Unfortunately, our wider culture often imagines the engineering life to be one of 
tedium and technical drudgery, seldom witnessing the joys of such creativity. 
     If only I could wave a wand, I've often wished, and say "YOU CAN DO IT" to inspire young folks 
to dedicate their lives to such adventures. But then various friends asked me to write about my own 
career – a tale wherein travails, setbacks, dark days and obscurity at times seemed the theme – and I 
wondered who’d be inspired by such a journey, so often apparently lonely, difficult and discouraging? 
     However, after deeper contemplation and review, I realized that each setback in my story, each 
hardship, actually strengthened my skills, my perspectives, and my resolve. And when colleagues 
began reading the early drafts, they reacted similarly: "Wow, this is really something!" The story was 
authentic, real – maybe even surreal – and it actually happened. 
     The child who once dreamed of "making a difference," indeed made a difference after all. And with 
that, I'd like to inspire YOU to imagine how you too can positively impact our world. Be assured, it 
won't be easy, and fame may never come your way, but the satisfaction gained from a life of creative 
work will be immense. Trust me on this! 
 
 
 * Copyright © IEEE 2012. A memoir published by the IEEE; posted online with permission. Citation:  
Lynn Conway, “Reminiscences of the VLSI Revolution: How a series of failures triggered a paradigm shift in 
digital design”, IEEE Solid State Circuits Magazine, VOL. 4, NO. 4, FALL 2012, pp. 8-31.
 
 
 
2 
 
Childhood Fascinations 
I loved listening to the radio as a child during WWII, 
especially to BBC broadcasts from London. Thrilled 
by hearing people speak from far away, I wondered 
how this mysterious machine worked, with all the 
glowing tubes and strange-looking parts inside.  
     My father was a chemical engineer, and he gave 
me The Wonder Book of Knowledge as one of my 
first ‘big books.’ From it I learned not only how to 
read, but also how electricity was tamed and radios 
were created, and that engineers did these things.  
     Becoming fascinated by astronomy, math, physics 
and electronics, and encouraged to build things that 
worked, I was channeled to become an engineer. 
Among my heroes were Charles Steinmetz and 
Edwin Armstrong; I knew their stories well and 
dreamed of doing such things.  
     Steinmetz pioneered methods for calculating 
alternating 
current 
phenomena 
using 
complex 
numbers, complex exponentials and vector diagrams, 
simplifying a highly arcane field. His books and 
passionate teaching launched the AC revolution, and 
his story carried an embedded message: Someone 
who faced physical challenges (he was afflicted with 
hunchback and hip dysplasia) or who was somehow 
perceived as different might become liked, even 
honored, if they made valuable contributions. 
     Edwin Armstrong pioneered the regenerative and 
super-regenerative circuits, the super-heterodyne 
radio receiver and FM radio. His visionary inventions 
involved elegant arrangements of simple electronic 
components, and helped launch a revolution in radio.  
Time and Place Are Everything 
Just as Steinmetz had with electrification and 
Armstrong with wireless communication, I found 
myself a student at the beginning of a technological 
revolution: digital computing in the early 1960s. And, 
I was at the right place: Columbia University’s 
School of Engineering and Applied Science, with its 
close ties to IBM, then a leading force in the 
emerging industry. 
     Along with delving into every relevant course in 
math, physics, electrical engineering, and computing, 
I also did an independent study there with Dr. Herb 
Schorr, just prior to his joining IBM. I must have 
made a good impression, for I was quickly recruited 
by IBM Research and in 1965 found myself at the T. 
J. Watson Research Center at Yorktown Heights, 
working on a highly proprietary and secretive 
supercomputer project, a project unknown even to 
many within the company. 
     The Advanced Computing Systems (ACS) project 
had been personally launched by IBM’s then-CEO 
Thomas. J. Watson, Jr., and given the mission to “go 
for broke” to create the most powerful scientific 
computer in the world. Staffed with pre-eminent IBM 
computing experts of the time including the 
legendary John Cocke, the project soon moved to 
what would become Silicon Valley [1], [2].  
     Herb Schorr led ACS’s architecture department, 
where I worked on an architectural simulation model 
of the evolving hardware design. The initial design 
for the ACS-1 exploited cache memory, instruction 
pre-fetch, multiple pipelined functional units, and an 
innovative instruction set and branch hardware for 
anticipating and minimizing branch disruptions in 
instruction flow. There was a bottleneck in 
instruction issuance, however, and functional units 
often stood idle as stalled instructions awaited results.  
     Gene Amdahl, already famous inside IBM for his 
work on System 360, along with other prominent 
computer architects of the day, presumed that no 
single-stream architecture could be found that issued, 
on average, more than one instruction per machine 
cycle [3]. Cocke questioned this presumption, but no 
way had been found around the bottleneck – as yet. 
     Unaware that this was an open research question, I 
took it on as a design challenge and obsessed on it for 
over a month. I explored varying ways to represent 
and issue instructions, mentally juggling all aspects 
of the problem simultaneously – everything from 
mathematical abstractions, to architectural structures, 
to circuit-level implementations, but to no avail.  
My First Invention 
In the fall of 1965, however, it suddenly beamed 
down to me: By holding pending instructions in a 
queue, and representing source and destination 
registers and functional units in unary positional form 
rather than in binary, I determined that it would be 
possible to scan the queue, resolve dependencies, and 
issue multiple instructions out-of-order (OOO), even 
when various entries were stalled [3].  
     The scheme involved not only mathematical and 
micro-architectural ideas, but also tricks at the logic 
and circuit levels, using arrays of ACS high-speed 
emitter-coupled logic (ECL) integrated circuits and 
exploiting their ‘wired-OR’ connections to scan 
queue-columns 
within 
machine 
cycle-time 
constraints. An ACS colleague at the time, Brian 
Randell, coined a perfect name for the scheme, 
Dynamic Instruction Scheduling (DIS). It was 
quickly incorporated into the ACS-1 design [3], [4], 
[5]. 
 
3 
 
FIGURE 1:  DIS Functional Diagrams. 
 
     DIS provides a sort of 'turbocharger’ for pushing 
more instructions through a processor during each 
machine cycle than would otherwise be possible. 
Although huge regular arrays of ECL circuits were 
required to implement that ‘turbocharger’ for the 
ACS-1 (a moderate fraction of the main processor’s 
total circuitry), the scheme proved simple and elegant 
in both function and structure, and more than doubled 
the machine’s performance.  
     This was a personal Edwin Armstrong moment for 
me. I now knew what it felt like to invent something 
cool. In fact, DIS proved to be a fundamental 
advance in computer architecture and by a circuitous 
route has since become a standard fixture in modern 
high-performance microprocessors.  
Lessons Learned 
One might ask how could a shy, naïve, freshly-
minted MSEE be the one to invent multiple-OOO 
DIS? The problem had been clear to others; why 
hadn’t they found a solution?  
     The belief that it couldn’t be done undoubtedly 
held back progress, while ethnographic observations 
reveal further problems: By the mid-1960s, chasms 
had developed between the various specialized 
groups working on computer architecture, logic 
design, circuit design, and packaging – with each 
specialty optimizing their work at a particular level of 
abstraction, and then tossing it over the wall to the 
next.  
     As a result, most computer 
architects lacked knowledge about 
the 
rapidly 
advancing 
ECL 
integrated circuitry, and couldn’t 
envision how to reach down into and 
more fully exploit it. Nor could 
expert ECL circuit designers provide 
architects with the necessary circuit 
level hooks to resolve intractable 
computer architecture problems. DIS 
revealed that only a rethinking of the 
basics across all levels of abstraction 
could break the logjam – a lesson 
that deeply affected my later work in 
VLSI [3]. 
     Another 
problem 
inhibiting 
progress was the complexity of the 
ACS-1’s design. I realized that a 
rigorous 
overall 
system 
design 
methodology was required – based 
on a coordinated, hierarchical, multi-
level 
computer 
simulation 
of 
formalized design partitions – for there to be any 
hope of collective group activity to generate the 
sequences 
of 
internal 
subsystem-interface 
test 
patterns for debugging, bringing up and maintaining 
such a complex machine.  
     These realizations, along with many insights into 
interpersonal team behavior that I had gained from 
the then-recent ethnomethological work of Harold 
Garfinkel, led me to design and propose a formalized 
design of the ACS design process, a proposal which 
was well-received and also strongly impacted my 
later thinking on VLSI design methods [3], [5], [6], 
[7]. 
My First Failed Project 
In hindsight, it is now recognized that had the ACS-1 
been built, it would likely have been the premier 
supercomputer of the era, eclipsing both the CDC 
7600 and the IBM Model 91 [1]. But, that was not to 
be.  
     Instead, in 1968 Gene Amdahl proposed that the 
ACS-1 
be 
replaced 
with 
a 
S360-compatible 
supercomputer, and the ACS project fell victim to the 
ensuing political confrontation. Declared “a failure” 
by IBM executive B. O. Evans, the ACS project was 
disbanded [8]. Apparently, neither Amdahl nor Evans 
nor other key IBM people had a clue about the novel 
DIS architectural innovations that had been made 
within the secretive project; the invention was 
shelved away and apparently lost in dusty technical 
reports. 
 
 
4 
 
Fired by IBM 
At that same time in 1968, I was pioneering along 
another path, as well. I alerted HR at IBM that I was 
undertaking a gender transition to resolve a terrible 
existential situation I had faced since childhood. I 
was hoping to quietly maintain employment during 
that difficult period. However, the news escalated to 
IBM’s Corporate Executive Committee (including 
CEO T.J. Watson, Jr.), and I was summarily fired [3].   
     Finding myself unemployed and in the midst of 
transition, I watched my contributions to ACS go 
down the tubes as the failed project simultaneously 
imploded. I grieved over this misfortune, but there 
was nothing I could do about it. And not surprisingly, 
given ACS-1’s stained image within IBM, little 
curiosity ever arose at the company about what 
developments had occurred there. The DIS concepts 
eventually 
leaked 
out, 
however, 
and 
began 
propagating through the architecture community, the 
full story only beginning to emerge in recent years.  
Starting All Over Again 
I completed my transition and started my career all 
over again in early 1969, remaining right in the Bay 
Area. A gritty survivor, I began at the bottom of the 
ladder as a contract programmer, with a new identity 
that allowed me to work in “stealth mode”.  
Nonetheless, it was a terrifying time. Any public 
outing would have killed my new career and I could 
have ended up unemployed, a social outcast, living 
on the streets.   
     Fortunately, after a series of rapid upward moves I 
was hired as a systems programmer at Memorex 
Corporation. On joining Memorex, I described the 
general nature of my computer design work at IBM 
to the HR department. When Memorex entered the 
computer business I was given responsibility for CPU 
architecture and design for the Memorex 30 System 
(MRX30), an entry-level competitor to IBM’s 
System 3. It was now mid-1971. 
     Creating a TTL micro-programmed minicomputer 
from a blank sheet of paper, under tight time and cost 
constraints, was a tremendous hands-on experience. I 
loved the intense teamwork and gained confidence as 
an enthusiastic thought leader on the project. Using 
methods I’d developed at ACS, I quickly built a 
register transfer level simulator to coordinate the 
overall design effort. When first powered up in early 
1972, the ‘Memorex 7100’ processor (the MRX30 
manufacturing prototype, shown in Figure 2.) came 
up smoothly and ran code with just two minor wiring 
errors. It was a triumph. 
 
FIGURE 2:  The Memorex 7100. 
Explosive News  
Then in November 1971, Intel announced the 4004 
microprocessor, followed by the 8008 in April 1972. 
These were blockbuster events for digital system 
designers and seriously grabbed my attention. I 
attended several intensive short courses to learn about 
the chips. They proved architecturally simple and 
easy to use.  
     Detailed knowledge about the underlying MOS 
(metal-oxide-semiconductor) digital circuitry about 
which I was so curious, however, was still 
inaccessible outside Intel (except for knowledge 
about the rapidly emerging application of MOSFET’s 
in dynamic memories [9]). Did architects have to 
understand MOS circuits and devices to design such 
microprocessor 
chips? 
 
Did 
folks 
outside 
semiconductor houses have futures in computer 
architecture?  
     The future of digital design seemed to be in MOS, 
but I had no clue how to get into it.  
My Second Failed Project 
Just as we completed the MRX30 manufacturing 
prototype, Memorex left the computer business – a 
victim of monopolistic pricing moves by IBM. I was 
crushed and no longer saw a future there. Not only 
had IBM fired me, it was now stamping out many 
competitors that I might possibly work for! 
 
 
 
5 
 
     Nonetheless, in late 1972 I asked my headhunter 
to open a job search and received two excellent 
offers: 
to 
be 
the 
architect 
of 
Fairchild 
Semiconductor’s next microprocessor or to join 
Xerox at the new Palo Alto Research Center (PARC).   
     The Fairchild opening seemed a great opportunity, 
but I felt uneasy. Knowing nothing about MOS 
circuitry, I hesitated at the prospect of merely 
blocking out simple architectures that others would 
implement. I also had doubts about fitting into the 
semiconductor industry, with its famously macho 
disdain of women. 
     Xerox was different, however. A movement was 
underway there that promised to revolutionize 
computing by creating a new world of interactive 
personal computers and related storage devices, 
scanners, 
copiers, 
laser-printers 
and 
network 
communications. PARC was recruiting the best and 
brightest young talent from across the U.S. to join the 
effort, including a number of women scientists. A 
diverse and eclectic group, I’d heard of many of the 
‘names’ already working there. I took the job at 
PARC in 1973. 
     My project was a tough one: create a compound 
OCR/FAX system that compressed office documents 
for efficient communication. It took two years of 
work on character-recognition algorithms, as well as 
the architecture, logic design, and packaging of a 
novel image processing system, to create the TTL 
prototype. The Xerox Sierra filled a full rack of 
circuit boards, and there was no way to then reduce it 
to a few LSI chips. It was clearly doomed.  
My Third Failed Project 
The end came in 1975 when William R. (Bert) 
Sutherland joined PARC as manager of the Systems 
Sciences Lab (SSL). Bert had led the Computer 
Science Division at Bolt, Beranek and Newman 
(BBN) and knew where he wanted his new lab to 
focus. He began vetting staff and projects, bringing in 
Wesley (Wes) Clark of LINC fame to advise him.  
     By then I had told Bert in confidence about my 
IBM work, and in an intense follow-on interview, I 
presented the details of Sierra and my ACS-1 
innovations to both Wes and Bert. Afterwards, Wes 
told Bert, “This is the real thing!”  
     I was able to keep my job, but Sierra had to go. I 
was severely disheartened over yet another failed 
project. There was no way to know at the time, of 
course, that all of those failed projects had prepared 
and positioned me to launch a revolution in what 
would become known as ‘VLSI design’. 
Concurrent Events at Fairchild, Intel, IBM 
and Caltech 
In 1970, Carver Mead at Caltech had coined the term 
“Moore’s Law” for Gordon Moore’s 1965 prediction 
[10] that chip device counts would double every two 
years. A specialist in device physics in addition to his 
teaching duties at Caltech, Mead became a high-level 
consultant at Intel, gaining access to vital projects 
and know-how there. Around this same time Mead 
reportedly independently invented a metal-gate 
PMOS circuit design for PLA-based finite-state 
machines, realizing that it would be easier to code 
logic than to draw it [11]. 
     In 1972, Bruce Hoeneisen and Mead described 
MOS device scaling principles in a widely read 
paper, predicting that MOS field-effect-transistors 
(MOSFETs) would function properly at gate lengths 
as small as 0.25 micron, far smaller than the 10 
micron gates of the time [12].  
     Motivated by the possibilities of scaling, Mead 
began teaching MOS integrated circuit design 
courses at Caltech, based on the dynamic-logic 
design methods that were rapidly evolving within 
several semiconductor firms to exploit the new 
technology – from the early work of Frank Wanlass 
at General Microelectronics, to that of Bob Booher at 
Autonetics, to that of Lee Boysel and his teams at 
Fairchild Semiconductor and then at Four Phase 
Systems, to that of Federico Faggin and others at 
Intel on the Intel 4004, 8008 and other early 
microprocessors [13], [14], [15], [16].  
     The latest Intel circuit design methods well 
exploited the new self-aligned silicon-gate fabrication 
technology, a concept invented in 1966 by Bower and 
Dill at Hughes Research [17] and by Kerwin, Klein, 
and Sarace at Bell Labs, and first commercialized by 
Faggin while at Fairchild [16]. Bright Caltech 
students studying these methods under Mead's 
guidance had no difficulty applying them to basic 
digital circuit design. 
     In 1974, IBM’s Robert Dennard, inventor of the 
single 
transistor 
DRAM, 
showed 
that 
when  
MOSFET geometries, voltages and dopings were 
scaled down, gate transit times also scaled down and 
performance thus improved by the same factor [18]. 
Taken together, the density improvements predicted 
by Moore’s Law and the performance improvements 
predicted by Dennard signaled a coming explosive 
growth in chip processing power. 
     Bert’s brother Ivan Sutherland joined Caltech in 
1974 as founding Chair of the new Computer Science 
Department there. Famous for his pioneering work in  
 
 
 
6 
 
computer graphics, Ivan was excited about the 
potential for microelectronics. He recruited Mead to 
join his new department, bringing in Mead’s 
expertise in device physics and circuit design and his 
many connections in industry. 
     In ‘75 Ivan Sutherland, Carver Mead and Tom 
Everhart (then chair of EECS at U.C. Berkeley) 
conducted a major ARPA study of the basic 
limitations of microelectronics fabrication. Their 
ARPA 
report 
(published 
in 
‘76) 
urgently 
recommended research into the system design 
implications of “very-large-scale integrated circuits” 
in light of coming advances in scaling – pointing out 
that no methods existed for coping with such 
complexity and no approaches then underway held 
promise of solutions [19].  
    Bert introduced me to Carver and Ivan that fall, 
and I began studying their recent work – having no 
idea what adventures lay ahead. Ivan soon wrote a 
letter to his brother Bert – a letter that has since 
proven to be historic – proposing that PARC and 
Caltech work together to attack the system 
complexity problem [20], [21]. 
The PARC/Caltech Collaboration 
In early '76, the Sutherland brothers formalized a 
collaborative research project between Xerox PARC 
and Caltech. The mission: to explore ways to more 
easily create systems in silicon, and apply the 
emerging personal computing technology at PARC to 
the task.  
     At Caltech, Ivan Sutherland asked Carver Mead, 
and his students Jim Rowson and Dave Johannsen, to 
be part of the team. At PARC, Bert asked two 
researchers to join the team: one was Doug Fairbairn, 
a brilliant young computer engineer then designing 
Xerox’s NoteTaker, the world’s first portable 
personal computer. Bert's other invitation was to me.  
     Personally, I could hardly believe this reversal in 
fortune! I was being propelled into MOS-LSI, and 
was confident my experiences at ACS would give 
clues on how to proceed.  
     By now it was clear that commercially viable 
chips would inevitably contain several million 
transistors by the early 1990s. By scaling supply 
voltages 
and 
exploiting 
the 
coming 
CMOS 
technology, MOS circuits would become as fast as 
ECL but with far lower power dissipation. The 
capabilities of an entire ACS-1 processor could 
eventually be ‘printed’ on a single chip, and personal 
computers like those emerging at PARC were 
destined 
to 
have 
the 
power 
of 
current-day 
supercomputers. It also meant that my DIS invention 
would inevitably come to life. These electrifying 
possibilities launched me into hyperdrive. 
Exploration Begins 
Our work began with concentrated studies, including 
taking a number of short intensive courses on the 
very latest relevant technologies in Silicon Valley. 
And, while Mead taught us about NMOS device 
physics, circuit design and fabrication processes, I 
shared my knowledge of computer architecture, and 
of 
multiple-abstraction-level 
computer-design-
process design, with him.  
     We then waded in by building hands-on prototype 
chip subsystems, learning as we went along. 
Fairbairn and Rowson created an interactive layout 
system called “ICARUS” on the Xerox Alto 
computers, which we all used to gain design 
experience. 
Mike 
Tolle, 
Chris 
Carrol, 
Rod 
Masumoto, Ivan Sutherland, Dave Johannsen and 
Carver Mead worked on the “OM” microprocessor 
data path at Caltech, using symbolic layout software 
(ICL/ICLIC) by Ron Ayres. Ron and Ivan crafted a 
graphical interchange format (Caltech Intermediate 
Form, CIF), to circumvent the n2 translation problem 
that arose when converting each design tool’s output 
to one of many mask specs.  
     Our tool building and design work in that early 
period went well, but chip prototyping proved 
difficult. We could obtain masks from Silicon Valley 
mask makers of the time, using reticle pattern-
generator code produced by ICARUS. However, 
wafer fabrication was quite another matter.  
     Engineers within semiconductor firms could get 
small lots of prototype chips via regular fab runs – 
either by stepping reticles of prototypes into a few die 
locations on production masks, or by substituting 
masks containing multiple prototype designs as one 
particular boatload of wafers transited the fab line. 
However, it was nearly impossible for outsiders to 
access such prototyping. Only ‘writers’ working for 
the ‘printing plant’ could become ‘published'; i.e., 
only designers working for the semiconductor firms 
could get their chips manufactured. 
     Mead’s contacts occasionally provided access to 
MOS fab for Caltech circuit designs, and he worked 
to gain similar access for our PARC/Caltech project. 
This involved extensive coordination during design 
and mask-making in order to meet the many 
requirements of the target fab line. Each line had 
different layout design rules, mask polarities, 
alignment marks, process test patterns, scribe lines 
and more – with all of that data communicated via 
detailed paperwork unique to each company. We 
 
7 
 
sometimes obtained prototype chips for our project 
this way. However it was a daunting activity, full of 
easily-derailed arcane practices, and turnaround times 
spanned many months.  
     Even so, we made great progress in 1976 as we 
cranked up our knowledge in MOS design and tool 
building – although learning more than we wished to 
know about what can go wrong in prototype 
implementation.  
     Meanwhile, Ivan Sutherland prepared an article 
for 
Scientific 
American 
about 
the 
challenge 
microelectronics posed to computing theory and 
practice. Since most of a chip’s surface was occupied 
by ‘wires’ (conducting pathways on the various 
levels) 
rather 
than 
‘components’ 
(transistors), 
decades of minimization theory in logic design had 
become irrelevant. And by co-mingling logic and 
memory within regular lateral arrays of small 
processing structures in silicon, it was possible to 
save both time and energy in internal on-chip 
communications. 
     The resulting article, co-authored by Carver Mead, 
was a powerful statement of the challenges we faced 
as 1976 drew to a close [22]. The bottom line: A huge 
and 
previously-unknown 
territory 
for 
creative 
architectural innovation had opened up, and as yet 
there were no theories or methods to guide those 
explorations. 
Simplification and Convergence 
By late 1976, I sensed in our work a parallel to 
Steinmetz’s time – a time when DC technology was 
well established but was running out of steam – while 
the emerging AC concepts seemed mysterious, even 
to expert practitioners, who as yet had no formal 
theories to develop AC technology. 
     Steinmetz had broken the logjam by coalescing 
mathematical methods and design examples that 
enabled practicing engineers to routinely design AC 
electrical systems with predictable results. This 
starter set of knowledge was sufficient to launch the 
AC revolution. By applying Steinmetz’s principles, 
practicing engineers spawned a whole new industry.  
      Similarly, this seemed the right way to attack the 
VLSI complexity problem. Instead of visualizing an 
ever more complex future into which all current and 
evolving developments were projected, why not 
begin by simplifying, simplifying, simplifying? 
Would that not spawn something starkly simple and 
eminently practical instead?  
      
    This wasn’t about engineering new things; it was 
about the engineering of new knowledge. My key 
idea was to sidestep tons of accumulated vestigial 
practices in system architecture, logic design, circuit 
design and circuit layout, and replace them with a 
coherent but minimalist set of methods sufficient to 
do any digital design – restructuring the levels of 
abstraction themselves to be appropriate for MOS-
LSI.  
     I theorized that if such a starter set could be 
composed, it would enable thousands of system 
designers to quickly migrate from TTL into MOS-
LSI – just as I had. Most of what was needed was all 
around us, including the latest Intel’s MOS-LSI 
design lore. The challenge was to make wise 
decisions about what to keep, and what to toss.  
Structuring a Design Methodology 
With this theory in mind, I convinced Mead we 
should set a far more ambitious goal for the work.  
We should move to create a simplified methodology 
for designing whole systems in silicon, not just 
circuits – and aim it specifically at computer 
architects and system designers. He agreed, and in an 
incredibly intense period in the spring of 1977 we 
formulated the basics of the new methods. Happily, 
NMOS was perfect for this simplification. 
     Seen from an architect’s perspective, an NMOS 
chip could be visualized as a miniature 3-layer 
printed circuit board, with wires printed on the metal 
(MET), polysilicon (POLY) and diffusion (DIFF) 
levels, and with vias (i.e., “contacts”) connecting 
wiring levels where needed. As a result of the new 
self-aligned silicon-gate 
fabrication process, a 
MOSFET 
transistor 
was 
formed 
(and 
easily 
conceptualized) wherever a path on the POLY level 
crossed over a path on the DIFF level.  
 
FIGURE 3: Lynn Conway at Xerox PARC in 1977. 
 
 
8 
 
     But there was more. The resistance of wires was 
small 
compared 
to 
on-transistors, 
while 
off-
transistors had extremely high resistance. Thus an 
NMOS FET could be abstracted as an almost perfect 
‘bi-directional switch’ with its control gate on POLY 
and switch contacts on DIFF. Additionally, wiring 
and stray capacitances were often modest compared 
to gate capacitances. Thus turning a transistor on for 
a sufficient time and then off could charge (or 
discharge) the gate-capacitance of a subsequent 
transistor and then isolate it – dynamically storing the 
on (or off) state as in a Dennard dynamic RAM cell 
[18]. 
     At the top level, architects composed digital 
systems as arrangements of interconnected registers 
and intervening logic, with data movement and 
logical sequencing controlled by state machines. 
Registers could now be built in NMOS as arrays of 
inverters, each composed as a simple pull-up/pull-
down transistor pair using depletion-mode MOSFETs 
as loads. Data movement between registers could be 
controlled by pass transistors, using two-phase non-
overlapping clocks to isolate the dynamically stored 
data. Clocking times could be calculated as simple 
multiples of minimum FET-gate delays. Logic 
functions could be crafted using simple NMOS 
structures placed between successive register stages. 
State-machines 
could 
be 
built 
using 
NMOS 
programmable logic arrays (PLAs), with registers 
holding state to feedback to inputs at successive 
machine cycles. All this could be done using simple 
rules of thumb for gate geometries, pullup/pulldown 
ratios, fan-outs, power distribution and timing. 
     By routing control lines perpendicular to data 
lines, important subsystems could be woven as 
regular arrays of cleverly designed NMOS cells – 
resurrecting long-lost non-gate-logic methods, as in 
symmetric networks of relay contact switches, and 
elevating the bi-directional ‘switch’ as a basic level 
of abstraction. We sketched cell topologies as stick 
diagrams, using blue, red and green pencils to 
indicate cell wiring on the MET, POLY and DIFF 
levels – and wherever a ‘red wire’ crossed a ‘green 
wire’ an FET ‘switch’ was created. Cell topologies 
were then geometrically expanded to form cell 
layouts, compacted to the degree possible under the 
target fab line design rules for spacings and widths.  
     When implemented, such designs often required 
far less area, time and energy to perform functions 
than those produced using traditional abstraction-
levels and optimizations at each level – shattering 
years of established academic theory and industry  
 
practice – and they were often dramatically simpler 
to design.  
Layout design rules: The Fly in the Ointment 
The stick diagrams of cell topologies contained all 
information necessary for laying out functionally 
unique cells. The layout design rules merely said 
what was prohibited during the compaction of 
geometrically expanded cell topologies towards 
minimal areas.  
     Unfortunately, 
MOS 
fabrication 
engineers 
produced large books of layout design rules unique to 
each new process, often running 40 pages or more. In 
efforts to increase yields, layout designers valiantly 
applied these rules, including those enabling only 
tiny compactions, often using arbitrary angles and 
curvatures to scrunch on-chip features down in size. 
Just imagine the complexity of the layouts, hand-cut 
into rubylith patterns for maskmaking, that resulted 
from such efforts! 
     To ease the burden for students in his earlier 
circuit-design classes, Mead crafted ad-hoc rules 
having reduced complexity by tossing low-return 
constraints and formulating ‘covering’ sets of rules – 
using 
line-widths, 
separations, 
extensions 
and 
overlaps somewhat larger than the minimums 
required for target processes. Such rules were easier 
to teach, apply and check, and were far better for 
prototype design where extreme compaction was not 
needed. 
However, 
such 
rule-crafting 
required 
expertise, judgment and close coordination with fab 
lines. The resulting layouts were also tied to 
particular processes, and had to be redone as new 
processes came online.  
     In contrast to our other successes, circuit layout 
seemed an intractable level of design abstraction. 
Questions of computational complexity also loomed: 
How 
could 
such 
complex, 
rapidly 
changing 
geometric layout rules be encoded, applied, and 
checked – given the increases in circuit density 
anticipated in the coming years? 
Invention of Scalable Design Rules 
In early 1977, I began asking myself: What is the 
simplest possible set of layout design rules? I found 
the answer in a different question: What is the 
maximum from among the minimum lateral line 
widths, separations, extensions and overlaps at all 
levels for a given process?  Once found, I knew this 
one measure of process resolution could be used to 
limit minimum sizes for all layout features.  
 
 
 
9 
 
FIGURE 4a: The λ-based scalable NMOS design rules 
[23], [24]. (Courtesy Pearson Publishing) 
     The resulting, minimalist covering rules were 
crude and non-optimal, but they fit onto a single page 
– that in itself, a breakthrough. I also noticed 
something else: The minimalist-rules generated 
layouts having a timeless quality. They remained 
unchanged, even as the process scaled down.   
     Suddenly it beamed down to me: MOS design 
rules should not be framed as sets of lengths but as 
sets of ratios of lengths. Such dimensionless rules 
could then be scaled to any process as multiples of a 
basic length unit in microns, a unit I called Lambda 
(λ). 
  I quickly crafted an NMOS 
rule set to explore this idea, 
setting 
λ 
at 
one-half 
the 
maximum of minimum line-
widths, separations, extensions, 
and overlaps. The resultant rule 
set was less toy-like than the 
minimalist rule set, and revealed 
the full potential of the idea. 
     I 
vividly 
recall 
seeing 
Mead’s jaw drop that spring 
morning in 1977 as I presented 
my strategy for λ-based rules on 
my whiteboard at PARC. This 
was 
it! 
We 
now 
had 
a 
‘structured’ 
design 
methodology (as Mead called it) 
from top-to-bottom. 
     Of course the rules needed 
tweaking to gain compactions 
and to better anticipate scaling 
effects. For example, we set line 
widths and separations on the 
MET layer to 3λ, while keeping 
those on the POLY and DIFF 
layers at 2λ. Still, the rule set 
remained small at only two 
pages in length, easy to teach, 
learn, apply, and check (see Fig. 
4). 
     These 
simplified 
scalable 
design 
rules 
had 
many 
implications. 
With 
circuit 
density doubling roughly every 
two years, why spend time on 
intense 
layout 
compaction? 
Why not compress design times 
by using these simpler rules, 
and race to the next smaller process that much 
sooner? Even more importantly, scalable rules 
allowed cell topologies to be laid out in a timeless 
form – opening the door to widely-sharable, time-
durable MOS cell libraries. 
     Adjacent subsystems could also often be abutted 
by designing their cells at the same pitch (extending 
some cells’ lateral dimensions, where needed), saving 
space and improving performance by eliminating 
wiring channels. EDA tools for generating and 
checking layouts were also greatly simplified and 
speeded-up by using rectilinear wiring on a Lambda-
based integer grid, rather than at arbitrary angles and 
dimensions as in earlier practices.  
 
10 
 
FIGURE 4b: The λ-based scalable NMOS design rules 
(cont.) [23], [24]. (Courtesy Pearson Publishing) 
Thus the Lambda-based design rules played a 
similarly simplifying, empowering and unifying role 
at the knowledge-interface between VLSI designs 
and EDA tools, as had the self-aligned MOS gate at 
the knowledge-interface between LSI designs and 
semiconductor fabrication. 
     The scalable design rules opened another door, as 
well. Suddenly a clean separation between chip 
design and fabrication was possible, with extremely 
simple rules providing the interface.  
The “Tall Thin Man” 
The transparency of the new methods enabled 
architects to design systems from top-to-bottom, as 
they had in the days of relay contact switches and 
vacuum tubes in the 1950’s, when I was a student.  
     Now once again, digital circuitry could be easily 
envisioned and crafted, using simple rules of thumb.  
No 
longer 
were 
extensive 
calculations 
and 
circuit 
simulations needed as in bipolar 
IC design. While such efforts 
were still needed during process 
development to ensure circuit 
function and performance, they 
were not needed when designing 
prototype circuits and layouts. 
So long as on-chip test patterns 
found that electrical parameters 
were within spec, our design 
rules of thumb worked perfectly 
well.  
     For years, ECL and TTL had 
imposed logic-gate and clock-
edge-triggered flip-flop register 
abstractions onto system design 
– 
impeding 
top-down 
visualizations of alternatives for 
expressing 
architectures 
in 
silicon. Using our methods, 
architects could clearly visualize 
and instantiate their creations all 
the way down to the switches in 
silicon. It was a tremendous 
breakthrough! 
     A new world of architectural 
exploration opened up before us, 
a world I had peered into twelve 
years before, when inventing 
DIS at ACS. I sensed that 
thousands of engineers could now have similar 
experiences as system architects by exploiting our 
new methods. At least, that was my theory at the 
time.  
     Meanwhile, Fairbairn’s and Rowson’s ICARUS 
software and Ayres’ ICL/ICLIC enabled us to input, 
edit, print, and visually inspect our layouts. However, 
these were only the beginning of a parallel revolution 
in EDA, as new tools evolved to support work across 
the restructured levels of abstraction. The scalable 
design rules in particular had dramatic implications 
for tool-building and chip prototyping.  
     By this time, however, signs of resistance were 
emerging at PARC, as critics in the competing 
Computer Science Lab (CSL) looked askance at what 
they saw as our “toy” designs and “toy” design tools. 
Not surprisingly, they questioned what our tiny effort 
could possibly bring to the huge semiconductor 
industry.  
    What we clearly needed were classy tutorial design 
examples, and in June 1977 Dave Johannsen set out 
 
11 
 
to rigorously apply the new methods to the design of 
a follow-on data path chip at Caltech. The OM2 
would be completed by year-end, yielding excellent 
examples of subsystem design using the new 
methods. Unlike the OM1, the OM2 actually worked. 
     Early in our work Mead had coined a term – The 
“Tall Thin Man” – to describe system designers like 
Johannsen who used our exploratory methods, and 
the term eventually took its place in the lexicon of 
Silicon Valley. Although women engineers (including 
me) were excluded by Mead’s imagery, the phrase 
stuck, for a time. 
What to do with the New Knowledge?  
The rush of ideas in early 1977 led to a host of 
challenges. Most especially, what were we do with 
the new knowledge? In response, I began evolving a 
tutorial to unfold and explain it all, honing a 
minimalist sequence of ideas sufficient for architects 
to visualize what a chip is and how it now might be 
designed.  
     The task was akin to revealing a medieval 
cathedral as composed of pointed arches, ribbed 
vaulting, thin walls and flying buttresses, showing 
how a set of basic principles were sufficient to raise 
such a complex structure. While doing this work, I 
began realizing that launching such an abstract 
system of knowledge by publishing bits and pieces 
here and there in traditional journals would be 
inadequate, especially when it challenged so much 
established practice. What to do? 
The Idea of “The Book” 
The die was cast in early June 1977, during a relaxed, 
evening team-brainstorming meeting at PARC. 
Thinking out loud, I launched the idea: Why not 
write a book about our work, and self-publish it using 
PARC’s Alto systems and laser printers?  
     If the book were comprehensive, well-written, and 
filled with good design examples, it would appear to 
reflect years of mature practice. In yet another echo 
of the Steinmetz story, I theorized that such a book 
would be taken seriously and could launch the new 
methods we were proposing. Mead let out a big, 
“Yeah!”, and Fairbairn was excited as well. So that 
was it. The decision had been made, and off we went. 
     The sophisticated computing environment at 
PARC gave us uncommon confidence. We could 
interactively create documents and designs using our  
 
 
Alto systems, collaborating locally via e-mail and 
file-sharing, and interacting remotely with colleagues 
at leading universities by using the new ARPANET. 
Swept along by PARC’s movement to bring 
computer power to the individual, we had intellectual 
power-tools at our disposal that provided the means 
and the wherewithal to do unprecedented things. 
     As I began writing the book, my Alto became the 
integrating node and control-center for a wildly-
expanding project and community of contributors. 
While I drafted explanations of the structured design 
methods, Mead provided input on NMOS fabrication 
and mask-making, Fairbairn and Rowson crafted an 
ICARUS tutorial, and Johannsen began documenting 
OM2 design examples to round out the text.  
     We introduced the first three chapters in the fall of 
1977, interjecting them into MOS circuit design 
courses taught by Mead at Caltech and by Carlo 
Séquin at U.C. Berkeley. (Séquin had recently joined 
our team as a consultant at PARC). We titled those 
preliminary chapters Introduction to LSI Systems, but 
then paused at how to acknowledge authorship. Mead 
was a well-connected full professor at the time, while 
I was virtually unknown outside of our group. Thus 
even though I was the architect and principal author 
of the book, we listed Mead as first author – to 
enhance the book’s credibility [23]. 
     Building on the feedback that came in, I prepared 
five full chapters for courses set to be taught the next 
spring. Dick Lyon, a brilliant Caltech grad and signal 
processing expert joined our team at PARC. (Lyon 
went on to invent the optical mouse, among other 
things.) The winter of 1977-78, Lyon and Carlo 
Séquin worked with computer graphics expert Robert 
(Bob) Sproull to refine and produce a formal 
description of the CIF language (CIF2.0). Johannsen 
also completed the OM2 in December 1977, in a 
much-needed early validation of the new methods.  
     By February 1978, I had incorporated the 
ICARUS tutorial, the CIF2.0 specification, and the 
OM2 design examples into a draft of the first five 
chapters, just in time for a spring semester courses 
taught by Bob Sproull at CMU and Fred Rosenberger 
at Washington University. This version of the book 
included many color plates I had made on the new 
color copiers at PARC, enabling easier teaching and 
better mastery of the new methods [23].  
     Then one day, in a rush of enthusiasm, I changed 
the title to Introduction to VLSI Systems. 
 
 
 
12 
 
Bert’s Challenge 
By this time, Bert Sutherland had joined the EECS 
Department advisory committee at M.I.T., and soon 
after offered me a challenge: Go to M.I.T. in the fall, 
he said, and introduce a senior/masters-level course 
on this stuff.  I was thrilled. We’d been testing 
portions of the book in various MOS circuit design 
courses, but this was the chance to pioneer a 
completely new full-fledged system design course 
based solely on the book.  
     I was also terrified. A bit shy among strangers and 
fearful of public speaking, I also lived in dread of 
being outed about my past. Up to now, I had been 
sheltered 
as 
a 
researcher 
in 
the 
laboratory 
environment at PARC, and had only recently begun 
to flourish as a research manager there. Teaching at 
M.I.T. would be quite a different matter, involving 
much more public visibility. It seemed beyond my 
reach and in my anxiety I wavered. But Bert insisted: 
“Lynn, you’ve got to do this!”  
     Shortly afterward, while glancing at Steinmetz’s 
photo on my office wall, his story came back to 
mind, especially the impact of his teaching at Union 
College. It was one of the great turning points in my 
life: I threw caution to the wind, and went for it. 
Planning the M.I.T. Course 
The spring of 1978, I immersed myself in finishing 
the book. While I drafted Chapter 6 on the 
architectural level of abstraction, Charles (Chuck) 
Seitz at Caltech drafted Chapter 7 on self-timed 
systems, H. T. Kung at CMU provided material on 
concurrent processing for Chapter 8, and Mead 
drafted Chapter 9 on the physics of computation. A 
full draft would be ready by summer, just in time for 
the course [23]. 
     I also got an important idea: If I could compress 
teaching of the new methods into the first half 
semester, students could launch design projects 
during the second half. If I could then organize 
quick-turnaround (QTA) implementation of the 
student projects – including layout file merging, 
mask file formatting and generation, mask-making, 
wafer fabrication, dicing, packaging and wire-
bonding – I might be able to get packaged chips back 
to students shortly after the course ended. 
     I felt that the unprecedented opportunity to design 
your own chip would attract very bright students to 
the course. And their projects would, in turn, heavily 
test the design methods, design tools, book, course,  
 
 
and quick-turnaround implementation methods. As 
the summer of 1978 progressed, I based the whole 
course plan around these ideas. 
     With Bert’s support, I also launched a summer 
program for the VLSI Systems Area (my new 
research department at PARC), recruiting Steve 
Trimberger of Caltech and Rob Hon of CMU as 
research interns. Trimberger worked with Fairbairn 
on design tool development, while Hon organized 
mask-making and fabrication of a set of PARC 
designs as a multi-project chip (MPC), enhancing our 
experience in quick turnaround implementation 
during the run-up to the course.  
     Building on that experience, Hon and Séquin 
compiled The Guide to LSI Implementation, as a 
guidebook to our innovative clean interface between 
chip design and chip fabrication and to the logistical 
details of implementation. Dick Lyon created a 
library of critically important cells (input pads with 
‘lightning arrestors’ for electrostatic protection, 
output pads with tri-state drivers, PLA cells, etc.), 
contributing CIF code and color plots of the cells to 
the guidebook. Lyon also updated ICARUS to accept 
and manipulate oversized CIF code files as outlines 
and produce a merged MPC CIF file. Rick Davies 
and Maureen Stone from other Xerox labs joined in 
the effort; in fact, the whole team pitched in to help 
compile the new guidebook [25].  
     Summer passed in a whirlwind of preparations. 
Before long I was packing-up boxes of freshly-
minted texts and course handouts – and heading out 
on my 3000-mile road trip to M.I.T.  
Launching the Course 
Launching the course was a formidable experience, 
in particular because I was terrified of becoming 
tongue-tied in front of the students. My solution was 
to be massively over-prepared.  
     I wrote out each lecture in complete detail, 
including every instructional point, every drawing 
and every calculation. Along the way, I unfolded the 
fundamental concepts of electric circuit theory, 
electronic design, switching theory, digital logic 
design, and computer system design, to ensure that 
all students were well-grounded in every level of 
abstraction, independent of their background upon 
entering the course. I didn’t see it coming at the time, 
but this work to avoid gaps in student comprehension 
would have unforeseen, far-reaching effects. 
 
 
 
13 
 
     Jonathan (Jon) Allen was my faculty host for the 
course, and his student Glen Miranker was my TA. 
The class included 32 students and 9 faculty/staff 
auditors. Staff researcher Bill Henke built CIFTRAN, 
a 
symbolic 
layout 
tool 
for 
encoding 
CIF 
specifications, while Miranker set up a lab where 
students could access CIFTRAN via DEC20 
terminals and plot their layouts using HP pen plotters. 
Meanwhile, I kept in close contact with my team at 
PARC, using a portable, acoustic-coupled, TI printer-
terminal to transmit e-mails via the ARPANET.  
 
Figure 5: Students at DEC-20 terminals in the MIT '78 
VLSI design lab. 
 
Figure 6: Students Jim Cherry and Gerald Roylance 
and TA Glen Miranker study a checkplot, MIT '78. 
 
 
 
 
     Contrary to my apprehensions, the students 
became tremendously excited by my teaching. They 
seized the opportunity to learn by doing and ran with  
the new knowledge. Many ambitious projects got 
underway and I began holding my breath, realizing if 
things went well, this could be a huge win. 
     By now, Alan Bell of BBN had joined my team at 
PARC. He and Dick Lyon began preparations for the 
QTA implementation of the projects, and everyone 
pulled together at both ends to coordinate things as 
the design cut-off date approached.  
     I sent the final student design files to PARC via 
the ARPANET on December 6, 1978. Lyon and Bell 
then merged the 19 projects into a multi-project-chip 
CIF file, converted it to Mann PG format, and had 
masks made by Micro Mask using their new electron 
beam system. In this first phase of an important 
collaboration with Pat Castro at Hewlett-Packard, 
wafers were fabricated at her Integrated Circuit 
Processing Lab (ICPL) at nearby HP Research using 
a 6-micron (λ = 3μm) silicon-gate NMOS process. 
Everything went off without a hitch, and the 
packaged chips were shipped back to M.I.T. on 
January 18, 1979 (see Fig. 7).  
     Although my students had only primitive EDA 
tools, and had resorted to hand-checking of design 
rules, the new methods so simplified the design work 
that not many errors were made, and the course led to 
a very exciting group of projects.  
    Jim 
Cherry, 
for 
example, 
designed 
a 
transformational memory system for mirroring and 
rotating bit-map image data, and his project worked 
completely correctly. Guy Steele, in an even more 
ambitious project, designed a complete LISP 
microprocessor. The processor almost worked on this 
first try, except for three small wiring errors. As such, 
it set a high mark for others to follow. 
     After finishing the semester at M.I.T., I took a 
leisurely route back to California, traveling through 
the South and Southwest. I knew something profound 
had happened in the M.I.T. course, but I only vaguely 
sensed where it might lead. I had also gained real 
confidence as a research team leader, and itched to do 
more. I drove on, rock music blaring on the radio, my 
head in the clouds, savoring the moment.   
     Something powerful rode along on that trip – an 
instructor's guidebook on how to teach such a course, 
in the form of hundreds of pages of carefully 
handwritten lecture notes [26] 
 
 
 
14 
 
FIGURE 7: MIT '78 chip set (Melgar Photography) 
 
Problems Arise, Pushback Begins 
Mead and I had contracted with Addison-Wesley to 
publish the book, and in early 1979 I began the 
tedious task of coordinating the copy-editing, hoping 
to have it ready for courses slated for that fall. 
     Word spread quickly on the ARPANET about the 
M.I.T. course, especially the news about Steele’s 
LISP microprocessor. Many professors asked how to 
offer similar courses, and how to lead ambitious 
design projects. In response, my group at PARC 
began to train instructors in the new methods of 
teaching VLSI design.  
     Doug Fairbairn and Dick Lyon ran an intensive 
short course for PARC researchers during the spring 
of 1979, which was videotaped. We began using 
those tapes as the basis for short, intensive courses at 
PARC for university faculty members in the summer 
of 1979. With the help of the PARC tapes, Mead and 
Ted Kehl also ran a course at the University of 
Washington that summer.  
 
 
 
 
     I also organized my M.I.T. lecture notes to create 
the Instructor’s Guide to VLSI System Design and 
began printing copies for all those interested in 
teaching the course [26]. It was these notes, rather 
than the textbook alone, that for the first time 
contained the full exposition of the new design 
methods – unfolding a teachable, accessible, 
minimalist, covering set of knowledge that enabled 
students to quickly learn how to competently do 
VLSI system design. 
     However, we had a big problem: there was no way 
to implement design projects from so many 
universities, other than for each to arrange for their 
own mask and fab. We had defined a clean interface 
between design and fab at the layout design-file level, 
but the logistics of implementation were far too 
complex for isolated departments or design groups to 
handle.  
 
 
15 
 
     I felt that unless students could learn by doing, 
and make things that worked, they would have 
merely learned a theory of design. Attacking this 
problem head-on, I launched work to further simplify 
and document the logistics in a new edition of Hon & 
Sequin’s Guide to LSI Implementation, hoping to 
help more instructors implement their students' 
projects in the fall 1979 semester [25].  
     Mead coined the name “foundry” for any 
semiconductor firm that could ‘print’ externally 
generated designs created using the scalable design 
rules, and he began popularizing the term to lure 
firms into providing this type of service. Given 
Mead’s high-level business connections, it wasn’t 
long before folks across the industry were buzzing 
about his provocative term, wondering what it meant 
for them. 
     As noise spread about Mead and Conway, signals 
of serious resistance began to arise. Experts at 
various levels of abstraction began having allergic 
reactions: when seen from the viewpoint of each 
narrow abstraction our stuff looked far too crude and 
naive to possibly work.  
     Trouble also arose within PARC. My new 
research department in SSL came under increasing 
attack from the leaders of the Computer Science Lab 
(CSL), who wondered why budget and headcount 
were being devoted to such questionable work. They 
didn’t seem to grasp why the freedom to improvise 
and playfully create things was so important when 
working in a new medium – whether in art or music 
or engineering – especially when exploring what it is 
possible to do. 
     Some in academe even began to wonder if we 
were nuts. “Who are these people?” they asked. To 
them, Mead was a device physicist making wild 
pronouncements on computer design, while Conway 
seemed some totally unknown woman tagging along 
as Mead’s ‘assistant.’ Such reactions to appearances 
were totally understandable. Something had to be 
done to turn things around, but what?  
Necessity is the Mother of Invention 
It began as a daydream that spring of 1979, as I 
fantasized about the impact of large numbers of 
M.I.T. type VLSI design courses.   
     I could feel the powerful energy out there: the 
young faculty members hoping to stand out and get 
tenure, the students seeking careers in a frontier area, 
the folks who wanted to start companies and make 
their fortunes. Imagine how they’d rush to participate  
 
in the new courses, get into VLSI and design their 
own chips!  
     Back in reality: My group had maxed out our 
capability when handling projects from just one 
school. How on earth could I scale up chip-
prototyping to handle ten or more such courses?  
     I began doodling on my whiteboard, searching for 
ways to simplify the implementation process, shorten 
its turnaround time, and scale it up. Although we’d 
documented static technical interfaces in the Guide to 
LSI Implementation, many procedures needed to be 
charted and many questions remained about who 
should do what, and when. Plus we had no means to 
handle information flow and coordinate interactions 
on such a large scale. 
     Suddenly it struck me: What if we positioned an 
interactive message-handling and file-handling server 
that orchestrated interactions over the ARPANET? 
That would streamline everything, eliminate the need 
for constant human interactions, and bring the needed 
scalability.  
     What I envisioned was an early form of Internet 
commerce system, where design files could be sent to 
a server and packaged chips returned after 
implementation. From an information management 
point of view, it would be analogous to sending many 
separate magazine articles to a remote server, where 
they’d be coalesced into a printable mosaic and 
queued for magazine printing. 
     With such a system, we could send messages to 
the chip ‘authors’, coordinate all activity, do CIF-
syntax checking and space requirement checking, and 
then at the design cut-off time, reel in the final 
projects’ design files. It was clear that such a “VLSI 
implementation system”, as we called it, could then 
under operator control plan die layouts for multiple 
multi-project chips (MPCs), merge the design files 
into 
those 
MPCs, 
and 
generate 
MEBES 
(Manufacturing Electron Beam Exposure System) 
files for mask generation.  
     When I excitedly revealed this idea to Mead, he 
went cold and said “Don’t do it.”  
     Mead worried that the event would appear to be 
orchestrated by DARPA and they would “take all the 
credit”. I understood, for DARPA had ended up 
gaining much of the visible credit for Stoner’s M16 
rifle after simply running field trials and promoting 
the weapon, but so what?  That’s the way the world 
worked. Why let concerns about credit interfere with 
doing something cool?  
 
 
 
16 
 
FIGURE 8: Map of the Arpanet, circa 1980. 
     Mead also felt that each school should connect 
directly with mask and fab services on its own, just as 
he’d been doing at Caltech, rather than fall under the 
control of a centralized service. I disagreed, for I 
thought his notion of foundry as yet undeveloped, in 
that it relied too much on undocumented personal 
expertise, 
lacked 
methods 
for 
information 
management, and hence lacked scalability. More 
importantly, it could not be widely implemented in 
time for courses in the fall of 1979. Uneasy 
collaborators from the start, these sharp differences 
pretty much ended our interactions. 
     Fortunately 
Bert 
Sutherland 
remained 
enthusiastic, and I forged ahead. We ramped up work 
on the implementation system, with Alan Bell and 
graphics expert Martin Newell developing the 
software. 
Although 
the 
software 
itself 
was 
conceptually straightforward, the space of possible 
user interactions was highly complex. It took great 
effort to anticipate all such interactions and formulate 
specially constrained key-worded messages to handle 
them all; Bell began making critical innovations in 
this area. 
     As summer approached, it seemed we just might 
be able to pull it off. By now faculty members at 
many universities were planning to offer the course, 
but we hadn’t yet announced the chip implementation 
service. Time was running short and I had to make a 
decision.  
     With just a tinge of fear, I drafted an e-mail, 
complete with a huge promise to the many faculty 
members and many, many students out there: We at 
PARC would implement the chip designs from all 
Mead-Conway courses offered that 
fall, in an ARPANET happening 
called “MPC79”. I knew if what I 
was offering didn’t work, I would 
have to go into hiding. I hesitated, 
suspended in the moment, then 
pulled the trigger and pushed 
“SEND”. 
 
MPC79: The Network Adventure 
The summer passed in a rush.   
     Alan Bell and Martin Newell 
readied the implementation system 
software, while Bell, Rob Hon and 
I carefully crafted e-mails to send 
at intervals during the fall – 
establishing a strict timeline to 
coordinate activities. Hon and Séquin completed the 
second edition Guide to LSI Implementation, which 
included the definition of CIF2.0 by Bob Sproull and 
Dick Lyon, an expanded set of PLA cells and I/O 
pads created by Lyon for all designers to use, along 
with a lot more information about implementation 
procedures [25].  
FIGURE 9: MPC79 implementation system: overview 
of the software. 
 
17 
 
     All sort of wild things happened as we went along 
– some serendipitous, some funny, some scary.  A 
young Stanford professor named Jim Clark asked if 
he could hang out at PARC, learn the basics of chip 
design and do a project for MPC79. I said sure, and 
helped him with some basic instruction. An expert in 
system architecture and computer graphics, Clark 
seemed a perfect adventurer to launch into VLSI. 
After 
taking 
Fairbairn 
and 
Lyon’s 
PARC 
videocourse, Stanford professor Forest Baskett and 
his Ph.D student Andreas Bechtolsheim also did 
projects for MPC79; they would later become famous 
as architects of the SUN workstation and more. 
     A crisis then developed. A senior academic of 
impeccable standing called an urgent meeting with 
George Pake, Director of PARC. Apparently my 
announcement of MPC79 seemed incomprehensible 
to the establishment at the time, and the academic’s 
school was among those threatened by the perceived 
infection. His message: Conway is “crazy”, the 
MCP79 project is unsound, and Xerox will suffer 
huge embarrassment unless it’s cancelled.  
     I could feel the apprehension in Bert’s voice as we 
hurried to Pake’s office, and I nearly panicked when 
they told me what happened. We knew the concerns 
were truly justified. Although the new methods had 
worked at M.I.T. and our computers provided powers 
outsiders couldn’t imagine, MPC79 was a huge 
gamble. However, Bert stood by me and the cloud 
lifted. Pake said “Not to worry. Just do it.”  
     The vibrant counter culture within PARC helped 
brace us against all doubts; it seemed everyone there 
was reaching for dreams. On the outside people saw a 
prestigious corporate lab housed in a castle-like 
building, high on a hill overlooking Palo Alto. It was 
a dignified image much like that of IBM’s lab at 
Yorktown Heights, i.e., one that established folks 
took very seriously. How could they possibly 
imagine what went on within PARC’s walls? 
     This contrast came home to roost one weekend 
evening, as I passed by a young Rob Hon at his Alto. 
In T-shirt and jeans, feet propped on a chair, using 
his Alto to send an important MPC79 message to the 
universities: “If only they knew who’s doing this,” he 
quipped.  
     Primed and bonded by our experiences during the 
1978 M.I.T. course, the team was really on a roll, and 
an atmosphere of excitement and fun permeated our 
work. Everyone seemed to know what to do, no 
matter how novel the situation. Individuals jumped in 
and out, taking on creative improvisational roles as 
opportunities arose, much as seasoned musicians 
would in a fine blues and jazz band. 
     A huge phenomenon unfolded that fall as our 
coordinating messages and files surged across the 
ARPANET. Twelve universities participated, with 
courses given by Jon Allen and Lance Glasser at 
M.I.T., Chuck Seitz and Carver Mead at Caltech, 
John Newkirk and Rob Mathews at Stanford, Richard 
Newton and Carlo Séquin at Berkeley, Bob Sproull at 
CMU, John Murray at University of Colorado, Jacob 
Abraham at University of Illinois, Ted Kehl at 
University of Washington, Edward Kinnen and 
Gershon Kedem at University of Rochester, Vance 
Tyree at UCLA, Fred Rosenberger at Washington 
University, St. Louis, and John Nelson at USC.  
     All courses used the new Mead-Conway text (see 
Fig. 10), published just in time by Addison-Wesley 
[24], while faculty and TAs had access to the new 
Instructors Guidebook and the latest edition of the 
Guide to LSI Implementation, which I’d printed-up in 
large numbers at PARC [25], [26].  
FIGURE 10: The Mead-Conway text. 
     All courses were synchronized with the MPC79 
schedule see Fig. 11), and most students completed 
projects for inclusion in MPC79. This was 
remarkable, as many schools were offering the course 
for the very first time, and design tools were being 
programmed as they went along. These events in the 
fall of 1979 escalated into a giant network adventure 
that climaxed as the design-cutoff time approached, 
and as the final rush of design files flowed through 
the ARPANET to PARC. 
 
18 
 
FIGURE 11: Flowchart of events for MPC79.  
FIGURE 12: Alan Bell at PARC, completing the design-
file merge for MPC79. 
 
 
     At 5:00 pm sharp on December 4, 
1979, 
Alan 
Bell 
closed 
external 
interactions 
and 
began 
die-layout 
planning, file merging (see Fig. 12), 
and MEBES format conversions. E-
beam mask-making was again done by 
Micro Mask, pipelined with wafer 
fabrication 
to 
reduce 
time 
to 
completion. With the support of Merrill 
Brooksby and Pat Castro at HP, 
fabrication was again provided by HP’s 
ICPL using a 5-micron (λ = 2.5μm) 
silicon-gate NMOS process. 
     Meanwhile, Dick Lyon, Alan Bell, 
Martin 
Newell 
and 
I 
readied 
“Implementation Documentation” for 
designers, including lists of projects, 
die-maps, 
wire-bonding 
maps, 
electrical process test data, chip photos 
by Melgar Photographers and more. 
When the wafers arrived, we scribed 
and diced them, mounted die into 40-
pin packages (enough for three per 
project), and 
wire-bonded to the 
individual projects within each die (see, 
for example, Fig. 14). Packaged chips 
were shipped, along with chip photos 
and documentation, to students and 
researchers at the 12 universities on 
Jan. 2, 1980 [27], [28]. 
 
      
          We’d 
done 
the 
impossible: 
demonstrating that system designers 
could work directly in VLSI and 
quickly obtain prototypes at a cost in 
time and money equivalent to using 
off-the-shelf TTL.  
     The MPC79 chip set contained 82 
design projects from 124 designers, 
spread across 12 die-types on two 
wafer sets. Astoundingly, turnaround 
time from design cutoff to distribution 
of packaged chips was only 29 days 
[27]. 
 
 
 
19 
 
FIGURE 13: Lynn Conway, Alan Bell, Martin Newell 
and Dick Lyon complete the final packaging of MPC79 
chips for distribution to designers.  
  
FIGURE 14:  MPC79 wafer, die and packaged chip.  
 
 
20 
 
     Importantly, these weren’t just any designs, for 
many pushed the envelope of system architecture. 
Jim Clark, for instance, prototyped the Geometry 
Engine and went on to launch Silicon Graphics 
Incorporated based on that work (see Fig. 16). Guy 
Steele, Gerry Sussman, Jack Holloway and Alan Bell 
created the follow-on ‘Scheme’ (a dialect of LISP) 
microprocessor, another stunning design. Along with 
scores of other innovative projects, these designs 
signaled that an architectural gold rush was 
underway.  
 
FIGURE 15:  Photo of MPC79 die type BK, from 
Stanford University. (Melgar Photography) 
 
FIGURE 16:  "Geometry Engine" prototype by Jim 
Clark of Stanford (a project on MPC79 die-type BK). 
(Melgar Photography) 
 
New Media Proclaim Revolution 
As engineers, our ideas are often tested by primal 
forces, and in the end what works, works. No matter 
how unknown the designer or how controversial the 
design, if a bridge stands, it stands.  
     MPC79 stood, and with it, the design methods, the 
instructor’s guide, the book, the implementation 
guide, the course, and many innovative EDA tools 
and chip designs (see Fig. 17). To most participants it 
had all seemed pretty straightforward. Taking the 
courses for granted, most must have thought “I guess 
this is the way things are done in Silicon Valley.” 
They had passed through a huge paradigm shift [29] 
without even knowing it, never having designed or 
implemented prototype chips “the old-fashioned 
way” – and the entire system of methods had been 
proven sound by the success of MPC79. 
 
FIGURE 17: The evolution of a multi-level system of 
knowledge: design projects provide feedback for 
debugging at all levels [28]. 
     But what about the rest of the world? MPC79 
hardly seemed believable unless you were there. Like 
the Impressionist Movement in France, we needed 
our own “Salon” – a separate place for showing our 
works where people could stand back, grasp the thing 
in its entirety, and see that the new methods stood. 
Badly needed, that level of success wasn’t long in 
coming. 
     Chuck Seitz had organized the first VLSI 
Conference at Caltech in January 1979, to provide a 
forum for the new VLSI systems researchers. In 
January 1980, a second conference was held at 
M.I.T., quickly bringing news of the success of 
MPC79 to an influential audience.  
 
 
 
21 
 
 
     Meanwhile, during the exciting summer of 1979, 
Doug Fairbairn and Jim Rowson had had the idea of 
publishing a magazine for the emerging community 
of VLSI designers and tool builders, and began 
working on it in parallel with our work on MPC79. 
The first issue appeared in January 1980 (see Fig. 
18), and Lambda (later known as VLSI Design, then 
Integrated System Design Magazine) soon attracted 
scores of technical articles about VLSI architectures, 
design tools and implementation methods [30]. Those 
articles, 
along 
with 
the 
many 
Melgar 
chip 
photographs it featured, made Lambda a potent 
medium for spreading the revolution [27], [28].  
 
 
FIGURE 18: The premiere issue of Lambda, the 
Magazine of VLSI Design (1st Qtr, 1980). 
 
     In another exciting move, Fairbairn left PARC to 
become a founding member of VLSI Technology, 
Inc. (VTI), a company that pioneered VLSI ASIC 
design.  Working with Merrill Brooksby (Manager of 
Corporate Design Aids at HP and by then a strong 
advocate of our new methods), Fairbairn also 
organized the videotaping of a short intensive VLSI 
Design Course. Fairbairn and Stanford professors  
 
 
 
Newkirk and Mathews gave the primary lectures, 
with guest lectures given by Mead, Lyon, Rowson, 
Johannsen, Seitz and myself– along with Richard 
Newton of U. C. Berkeley, Jack Holloway of M.I.T 
and Jim Clark of Stanford. In addition to wide use 
within HP, the VTI videotaped courses were run at 
other places to ramp up their ASIC business. 
Meanwhile, Jon Allen ran intensive VLSI design 
summer courses at M.I.T., impacting design practices 
at DEC and other East-coast high-tech firms. Carlo 
Sequin also began offering intensive courses in VLSI 
design, as part of the Hellman Associates Tutorial 
Series, at many locations around the country. 
     Mead also began exploring opportunities to 
capitalize on the work. Always a charismatic 
personality, he generated lots of buzz among Silicon 
Valley venture capitalists. In 1981 Mead, along with 
Dave Johannsen and Ed Cheng, founded Silicon 
Compilers Inc. to commercialize Johannsen’s work. 
Mead went on to start even more companies as time 
went by.   
     Perhaps the most powerful medium for spreading 
the new methods, however, was the ARPANET, as 
messages told the story of MPC79. Before long, 
many more schools around the country began 
offering Mead-Conway courses, and design tools and 
design files rocketed across the ARPANET into a 
growing community of participants, in a huge wave 
of disruptive technology and innovation.  
      Struggling to cope with these fast-moving 
developments, we planned yet another MPC system 
run in the spring of 1980. Led by Ted Strollo at 
PARC, the ‘MPC580’ project implemented 171 VLSI 
system design projects from 15 different universities 
and research organizations. It was another crashing 
success and a further validation of our methods and 
teachings. These courses generated vast numbers of 
large check-plots – many appearing in the hallways 
of EECS departments around the country – and these 
amazing artifacts attracted even more students to the 
new movement. VLSI adventurers were the new gang 
in town, and our graffiti were on all the walls [28]! 
     As courses spread to major universities all around 
the world, I struggled to supply startup ‘care-
packages’ of Instructor’s Guides, Implementation 
Guides, and Implementation Documentation from 
MPC79 and MPC580. But a bigger question began to 
loom: 
How 
to 
institutionalize 
the 
MPC 
implementation service, and keep it going? 
 
 
 
22 
 
The DARPA VLSI Program  
Robert (Bob) Kahn and Duane Adams at DARPA 
had provided funding for Ivan Sutherland’s Silicon 
Structures Project at Caltech, and with Ivan’s 
guidance had closely followed the subsequent events. 
The success of the M.I.T. course in the fall of 1978 
convinced them that the new Mead-Conway VLSI 
methods were sound. The publication of the book and 
success of MPC79 sealed the deal. 
     Kahn and Adams quickly convinced DARPA’s 
leadership to launch a VLSI Research Program to 
build on the new methods, and major funding soon 
flowed into research on new VLSI architectures and 
EDA tools. Managed initially by Adams in 1980 then 
by Paul Losleben in 1981 and beyond, the program 
sponsored tens of millions of dollars in VLSI 
research. With this level of support, a rush of 
intellectual adventurers jumped into the movement. 
DARPA sponsors MOSIS to Institutionalize 
MPC79 
With DARPA support behind him, Bert Sutherland 
then solved another big problem: He found a home 
for the MPC79 technology and implementation 
service. In the spring of 1980 Bert, Alan Bell, Ted 
Strollo and I met with Keith Uncapher and Danny 
Cohen of USC-ISI (a major DARPA software 
contractor), and arranged a rapid transfer of the 
PARC MPC system technology and methods of 
operation to ISI.  
     ISI soon announced the new “MOSIS” service, 
and it began operations in early 1981. Prominent 
Caltech researcher Chuck Seitz later reflected that 
“MOSIS represented the first period since the 
pioneering work of Eckert and Mauchly on the 
ENIAC in the late 1940s that universities and small 
companies had access to state-of-the-art digital 
technology”.  
     What 
began 
in 
MPC79 
as 
revolutionary 
technology to advance the VLSI design movement 
became one of the earliest examples of automated 
internet commerce. Operating to this day, MOSIS is 
still housed at the USC facility in Marina del Rey, 
California [31]. 
The Paradigm Shifts  
That same year, Electronics Magazine awarded their 
Award for Achievement jointly to Mead and me. The 
magazine’s feature article about the VLSI methods, 
the book and the successes of M.I.T.’78 and MPC79 
put the engineering community on high alert that a 
revolution was at hand [32]. 
 
FIGURE 19: Conway and Mead receive the 1981 
Electronics Award for Achievement.  
     I had now experienced my “Steinmetz moment”, 
for within two years, 120 universities around the 
world were offering Mead-Conway VLSI courses, 
with the book translated into Japanese, Italian, 
French, and Russian (this last, an “unauthorized” 
government edition distributed among many Soviet 
engineers). Introduction to VLSI Systems eventually 
sold around 70,000 copies.  
     To provide further Mead-Conway-compatible 
books on key topics, Chuck Seitz and I served as 
series-editors of Addison-Wesley’s new VLSI 
Systems Series – one of the first being Principles of 
CMOS VLSI Design by Neil Weste and Kamran 
Eshraghian. 
     The design-tool building to support early project 
labs at M.I.T., U. C. Berkeley and Caltech led to 
rapid evolution of tools for the Mead-Conway 
methods, 
triggering 
an 
explosion 
in 
EDA 
innovations. This earthquake of innovation, where 
teams across the globe built on each other’s ideas, 
sharing libraries and tools, presaged and helped lay 
groundwork for the modern open-source software 
revolution. 
 
 
23 
 
 
     In 1979 two M.I.T. graduate students, Chris 
Terman and Clark Baker, developed a pioneering set 
of tools, including a design rule checker, circuit 
extractor and static checker by Baker, and a switch-
level simulator by Terman. The tools provided direct 
support 
for 
‘Mead-Conway 
design’. 
They 
immediately received widespread distribution, and 
began to change the way people thought about doing 
their design work. In particular, Baker’s circuit 
extractor was the first time anyone had “closed the 
loop,” making sure that the actual circuit layout 
implemented the intended circuit – and circuit 
extraction went on to become a mandatory part of 
most IC design processes.   
     During his M.I.T. Ph.D. work in 1979-1980, 
Randy Bryant originated new methods for switch-
level simulation, and he went on to place a much-
needed mathematical foundation under switch-level 
design. By 1983, the MOSSIM-II simulator that 
Bryant and his students developed (then at Caltech) 
was in use at Intel. At Caltech, Dave Johannsen also 
pioneered work on “silicon compilers” which he later 
commercialized with Mead.  John Ousterhout and his 
students at U. C. Berkeley developed IC layout tools 
CAESAR and MAGIC, establishing an architectural 
foundation for many later EDA software systems – 
including 
those 
commercialized 
by 
VLSI 
Technology, Cadence, Valid Logic, Daisy, Mentor 
Graphics and Viewlogic. Others in the movement 
went on to play key roles in creating field 
programmable gate array (FPGA) technology and 
tools, such as Steve Trimberger at Xilinx. 
     The architectural work of Jim Clark on the 
Geometry Engine, and of Steele, Sussman, Holloway 
and Bell on the M.I.T. Scheme microprocessor 
gained high visibility through Lambda and the VLSI 
conferences, triggering a rush of additional brilliant 
young computer scientists and architects into the 
movement.  
     After attending Jon Allen’s course at M.I.T. in the 
fall of 1979, Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir and Leonard 
Adelman implemented their recently invented “RSA 
Cipher” in VLSI using MPC79. At U.C. Berkeley, 
Dave Patterson and Carlo Séquin led a team that 
created the RISC-I and RISC-II architectures in 
VLSI. Carlo reports that this work was inspired in 
part by a private communication with John Cocke, 
concerning work on the 801 at IBM -- another 
pioneering IBM project that was “moth-balled” and 
only published many years later.  
 
 
 
     Similarly, at Stanford, John Hennessey, Norm 
Jouppi, Forest Baskett and John Gill developed the 
RISC-based MIPS architecture and prototyped VLSI 
implementations using MOSIS. At UNC, Henry 
Fuchs and John Poulton developed the Pixel-Planes 
VLSI raster graphics engine, with assistance from Al 
Paeth and Alan Bell at PARC.  
     Dick Lyon at PARC pioneered smart VLSI digital 
sensors based on lateral inhibition, inventing the 
optical mouse and implementing a VLSI prototype, 
and then helped Martin Haeberli and Robert Garner 
design a chip for Xerox’s production Xerox optical 
mouse. Lyon also demonstrated how to create VLSI 
architectural methodologies for special applications, 
using digital signal processing as an example. Lyon 
and Gaetano Borriello went on to create the first 
single-chip Ethernet driver-receiver-encoder-decoder, 
exploiting Lyon’s new semi-digital methods.  
     The collaborations between PARC and HP, 
Caltech and Intel, and MIT and DEC led to rapid 
infusions of the Mead-Conway methods into those 
various firms. VLSI architectural research also led to 
parallel VLSI processors such as the Connection 
Machine by Danny Hillis at M.I.T., the Cosmic Cube 
by Chuck Seitz at Caltech and the WARP Processor 
by H. T. Kung at CMU. Such research was 
increasingly funded by DARPA and led to many 
important startups, including Silicon Graphics, MIPS 
and Sun. 
     MOSIS was initially closed to those outside the 
U.S., triggering the launch of similar systems in other 
countries. DEC computer architect Craig Mudge 
returned to his native Australia to found the CSIRO 
VLSI program and AUSMPC service, and my team 
at PARC assisted in those efforts. Reiner Hartenstein, 
a professor at Technische Universität Kaiserslautern 
then visiting U.C. Berkeley, returned to Germany, 
began 
teaching 
the 
course, 
and 
spearheaded 
Germany’s E.I.S. service – and he and Klaus 
Wölcken also began advocating for a larger 
European-wide service. Ole Olesen from Denmark 
and Christer Svensson from Sweden formed the 
Nordic Multi-Project Chip organization and Francois 
Anceau founded the Circuits Multi-Projets (CMP) 
service in France, led in later years by Bernard 
Courtois. Roger Van Overstraeten and Hugo De Man 
founded IMEC in Belgium, which provided a similar 
service (The ‘EUROCHIP’ service, formed in 1989, 
built upon these earlier efforts.) 
 
 
 
24 
 
 
     With 
many 
researchers 
exploiting 
MPC79, 
MPC580 and then MOSIS, and with hundreds of 
bright students emerging from universities and 
expecting access to silicon as they had experienced in 
school, commercial “foundries” of various forms 
started up to meet the demand for manufacturing of 
independently designed chips.  
     The first was SynMOS, founded by Larry 
Matheny and Bob Smith in September 1980, serving 
as an agent/broker between design groups and mask 
and fab firms. Building on the knowledge generated 
by MCP79 and MPC580, VTI soon offered similar 
services, and by mid 1982 a special issue of VLSI 
Design Magazine identified 38 such companies; 
some were fabless firms such as SynMOS and VTI, 
while others were front-offices to existing fab firms.  
     Everything really took off as venture capital firms 
funded scores of entrepreneurial startups of VLSI 
design companies, EDA companies and foundry 
services – triggering the rapid evolution of what is 
now called the “fabless/foundry” business model, as 
a growing fraction of the semiconductor industry.  
Some Reflections at the time 
Reflecting on all this at the time, I thought back to 
my years at Columbia where I had minored and read 
widely in cultural anthropology – being particularly 
intrigued by processes underlying the diffusion of 
innovations. I realized that somewhere along the way, 
having recalled Everitt Rogers’ early book on the 
topic [33], I had mounted a meta-level exploration in 
‘applied anthropology’ that ran in parallel with and 
guided my design of the VLSI design methods.  
     In my early VLSI work this involved the 
deliberate selection, structuring and encoding of the 
knowledge so as to have a good ‘impendance match’ 
with 
the 
culture 
of 
the 
targeted 
recipient 
communities, and with the simplification of that 
knowledge by creation and adoption of unifying open 
standards.  
     By the time of MPC79, this meta-level thrust 
shifted into enhancing the noticeability of the 
significance of the new knowledge via dramatic 
visible artifacts, the rapid diffusion of those artifacts 
(and with them the new knowledge) through cleverly 
augmented diffusion channels, and the provision of 
means for immediate exploitation of the knowledge 
via the new QTA implementation service – all 
leading to more artifacts and thus ‘gain’ in the 
knowledge propagation process.  
 
 
     The emerging internet and PC technology enabled 
me to operate in wholly new ways as an architect of 
disruptive change. Almost no one at the time could 
visualize what I was actually doing, thus I needed no 
‘permission’ to do it and no one was power-
positioned to stop it. As a corollary, few folks later 
understood what had really happened – much less 
who had done it. Participants simply slid through the 
resulting paradigm shift, and ran with the results. 
     A concise history of these unfolding events is 
given in the book Funding a Revolution, published by 
the National Academy Press in 1999, revealing the 
impact in academia and industry of the Mead-
Conway design methods, the textbook, the VLSI 
design courses and the MOSIS infrastructure [34]. 
     Ivan Sutherland’s challenge had been met, 
inventive simplifications being the key to success. 
Along the way we’d secured “freedom of the silicon 
press”, and great novels were now being written.  
     Along with the thrusts in personal computing at 
PARC and in the Valley beyond, and the vigorous 
entrepreneurial engineering culture they propagated, 
these collective events within ten years spelled doom 
for the domineering IBM of old.  What a dramatic 
reversal of our mutual fortunes since that terrible 
time in 1968 when I was fired by IBM – a firing that 
could have shattered my life back in those days. 
On to New Things  
By 1981, the VLSI work was well on its way. Bert 
thought it time to move on, and I founded the 
Knowledge Systems Area at PARC to explore 
artificial intelligence and collaboration technology.  
     Even so, I was often asked to speak about VLSI. I 
gave the opening talk at the 2nd Caltech Conference 
on VLSI in 1981, describing the interactive meta-
level research methods I had used to generate, test, 
validate and propagate the Mead-Conway methods 
[28], [35], [36]. I also keynoted IEEE Compcon 
Spring 1983 and the ACM/IEEE Design Automation 
Conference in 1984. Although reported to have given 
outstanding talks, as a still somewhat-reserved person 
I found these experiences a bit intimidating, and as 
the VLSI revolution went viral I pulled back from 
additional public exposure. In contrast, Mead was 
now 
in 
his 
element. 
Armed 
with 
top-level 
connections and an outgoing personality, he soared 
toward fame as one of the “founding fathers” of 
Silicon Valley [37]. 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
Figure 20: Lynn Conway in her office at PARC in 1983. 
(Photo by Margaret Moulton, Palo Alto Weekly) 
     In 1983, Bob Cooper, Director of DARPA, asked 
me to lead the planning of a new program called 
Strategic Computing. The agency wanted to organize 
a 
coordinated 
research 
program 
in 
artificial 
intelligence, computer architecture, VLSI design and 
QTA prototyping to create a rich technology base for 
intelligent weapons systems. Reflecting on my 
father’s leadership role in the WWII synthetic rubber 
program, I took the mission, planning to return to 
PARC after my tour. My secretive past was never an 
issue; I was granted a Top Secret clearance. 
     I’m proud of the resulting Strategic Computing 
Plan, for it quickly triggered over $100 million in 
funding for important computing research. I imagine 
it also discouraged the Soviets, as they watched 
brilliant U.S. researchers reach far beyond what they 
could hope to achieve behind the Iron Curtain [38].  
     While at DARPA, I got a call from Jim 
Duderstadt, Dean of Engineering at the University of 
Michigan, asking if I’d consider a faculty position 
along with a position in his office as Associate Dean.  
 
 
 
 
I had served on the Engineering College’s National 
Advisory Committee, and realized that it was a time 
of exciting expansion at the College. The Valley had 
also become so career and money obsessed I found it 
hard to form good relationships there. In 1985, I took 
the job at Michigan and “got a life”. 
 
Figure 21: Mead and Conway receiving the Wetherill 
Medal at the Franklin Institute in 1985. 
Confronting the Past, Coming Out, Moving On 
Thirteen years later, in late 1998, I casually typed the 
word “superscalar” into an internet search and up 
popped: "ACS--The first superscalar computer?"   
     Professor 
Mark 
Smotherman 
at 
Clemson 
University had stumbled onto information about the 
old project, and theorized in his website that ACS 
was indeed the first. This had become a question of 
historical interest, because of the success of the Intel 
Pentiums and other superscalar microprocessors. 
Stunned, I realized the story of my involvement 
would come out, and that I needed to get out ahead of 
it.  
     I contacted Mark and gradually revealed my role 
in the project. Fortunately, I had saved all my ACS 
documentation including the original DIS report. I 
shared these with Mark and pointed him to other 
project veterans who might be able to find additional 
documents; in July 1999 Mark organized an ACS 
reunion at IBM Research, in Yorktown Heights, to 
encourage this effort (see Fig. 22). I also began 
posting information on my website to quietly explain 
my long-ago transition to my colleagues, hoping 
times had changed and some would understand. 
 
 
 
26 
 
 
 
 
Figure 22: ACS Reunion, July 29, 1999: (L-R) John 
Cocke, Fran Allen, Herb Schorr, and Lynn Conway. 
(Photo by Mark Smotherman) 
     Michael Hiltzik of the L. A. Times had earlier 
interviewed me while writing Dealers of Lightning, 
his definitive book about Xerox PARC. He became 
eager to report this further story, and his article 
“Through the Gender Labyrinth” ran on November 19, 
2000 [39]. Since then I have interacted with 
thousands of other gender transitioners via the 
internet – expanding my website’s informational 
support 
as 
time 
went 
along. 
My 
website, 
lynnconway.com, has served as a beacon of hope for 
transitioners all around the world, and this work has 
given further meaning to my life. 
     During the early 2000’s, Smotherman compiled a 
comprehensive history of IBM-ACS in his website 
with the help of many ACS vets [2]. In February 
2010, the Computer History Museum in Mountain 
view, California, hosted a special event to honor 
surviving veterans of the forgotten project. Around 
that same time I also received the IEEE Computer 
Society’s Computer Pioneer Award, based in part on 
my work on dynamic instruction scheduling (DIS) 
[40]. It felt wonderful to see that work, done and then 
lost so long ago, finally acknowledged. 
 
 
 
Finding Closure 
In reviewing my story I am struck by my good 
fortune of having worked at two of the greatest 
research outfits in computing: IBM Advanced 
Computing Systems in the 1960s and Xerox PARC in 
the 1970s. Undeniably cool ideas beamed down to 
researchers at those places, and creative people 
pulled together to really make things happen based 
on those ideas.  
     Along the way, ACS pioneered the superscalar 
computer architecture so important today, and the 
PARC/Caltech collaboration launched the VLSI 
Revolution. What a thrill it has been to watch our 
ideas become reality, ideas that have changed the 
world forever.  
     I’ve also experienced a very special personal 
closure: The VLSI revolution enabled my DIS 
invention to finally come to life, to be implemented 
in silicon – and while I was still around to see it 
happen.  
     What a ride it’s been! 
 
Acknowledgements 
Many people named in these reflections played vital 
roles in the VLSI design revolution; it was a thrill to 
join them on this great adventure. I especially want to 
acknowledge and thank W. R. (Bert) Sutherland [41], 
[42]. Without Bert’s wisdom and guidance, the Mead-
Conway revolution would never have happened. 
 
 
 
 
27 
 
References 
[1]  M. Smotherman and D. Spicer, “Historical Reflections: 
IBM’s Single-Processor Supercomputer Efforts – Insights 
on the pioneering IBM Stretch and ACS projects”, 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 53, no. 12, pp.28-30, 
December 2010. 
http://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2010/12/102128-ibms-single-
processor-supercomputer-efforts/fulltext 
[2]  M. Smotherman, “IBM Advanced Computing Systems 
(ACS) -- 1961 – 1969”, historical reconstruction website, 
Clemson University. 
http://www.cs.clemson.edu/~mark/acs.html  
[3]  L. Conway, "IBM-ACS: Reminiscences and Lessons 
Learned from a 1960's Supercomputer Project"; in: C. B. 
Jones, J. L. Lloyd, (Eds.), Dependable and Historic 
Computing: Essays Dedicated to Brian Randell on the 
Occasion of his 75th Birthday, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 
2011, pp.185-224. 
http://www.springerlink.com/content/u8952k538h128472/ 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/Memoirs/Lynn_Conway%
27s_ACS_Reminiscences.pdf   
[4]  L. Conway, B. Randell, D. Rozenberg, D. Senzig, 
“Dynamic Instruction Scheduling,” ACS Memorandum, 
IBM-ACS, February 23, 1966. 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/ACS/DIS/DIS.pdf 
[5]  L. Conway, "Lynn Conway's IBM-ACS Archive", 
lynnconway.com. 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/ACS/Archive/ACSarchive.
html 
[6]  H. Garfinkel, Studies in Ethnomethodology, Prentice 
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1967. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ethnomethodology 
http://www.amazon.com/Studies-Ethnomethodology-Social-
political-theory/dp/0745600050 
[7]  L. Conway, “The Computer Design Process: A 
Proposed Plan for ACS”, ACS Memorandum, IBM-ACS, 
August 6, 1968. 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/ACS/DesProc/DesignProc
ess.pdf 
[8]  B. O. Evans, “The Ill Fated ACS Project”: pages 27-28 
in Evans’ memoir The Genesis of the Mainframe, Wilhelm 
G. Spruth, ed., University of Leipzig, Department of 
computer science, June 2010. 
http://www.informatik.uni-
leipzig.de/cs/Literature/History/boevans.pdf 
[9]  L. M. Terman, "MOSFET Memory Circuits", Invited 
Paper, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 1044-
1058, July 1971. 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/freeabs_all.jsp?arnumber=1450263 
[10]  G.  E. Moore, "Cramming more components onto 
integrated circuits”, Electronics, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 114-
117, April 19, 1965.  
ftp://download.intel.com/museum/Moores_Law/Articles-
Press_Releases/Gordon_Moore_1965_Article.pdf 
[11]  R.F. Lyon, p.e.c., March 29, 2012. 
 
 
[12]  B. Hoeneisen and C. Mead, "Fundamental Limitations 
in Microelectronics-I. MOS Technology," Solid State 
Electronics, vol. 15, pp. 819-829, 1972. 
[13]  R. Bassett, To the Digital Age: Research Labs, Start-
up Companies, and the Rise of MOS Technology, Johns 
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 2002. 
http://www.amazon.com/Digital-Age-Research-Companies-
Technology/dp/0801868092 
[14]  R. K. Booher, "MOS GP Computer," Proceedings of 
the Fall Joint Computer Conference, AFIPS '68 (Fall, part 
I), San Francisco, December 9-11, 1968, pp.877-889. 
http://origin-
www.computer.org/plugins/dl/pdf/proceedings/afips/1968/5072/00
/50720877.pdf 
[15]  L. Boysel and J. Murphy, "Four-phase LSI logic 
offers new approach to computer designer", Computer 
Design, pp. 141-146, April, 1970. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Four-Phase_Systems 
[16]  F. Faggin, “The Making of the First Microprocessor”, 
IEEE Solid-State Circuits Magazine, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 8-21, 
Winter 2009. 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/freeabs_all.jsp?arnumber=4776530 
[17]  R. Bower and R. Dill, "Insulated gate field effect 
transistors fabricated using the gate as source-drain mask”, 
Proceedings of the Electron Devices Meeting 1966 
International, Washington, DC, October 26-28, 1966, pp. 
102–104. 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/freeabs_all.jsp?arnumber=1474563 
[18]  R. H. Dennard, F. H. Gaensslen, H. N. Yu, L. 
Rideout, E. Bassous and A. R. LeBlanc, “Design of Ion-
Implanted 
MOSFET’S 
with 
Very 
Small 
Physical 
Dimensions”, IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 
SC-9, no. 5, pp. 256-268, October 1974. 
http://www.eng.auburn.edu/~agrawvd/COURSE/E6270_Spr09/RE
AD/Design%20of%20ion-
implanted%20MOSFETs%20with%20very%20small%20physical
%20dimensions.pdf  
[19]  I. Sutherland, C. Mead and T. E. Everhart, “Basic 
Limitations in Microcircuit Fabrication Technology”, 
ARPA 
Report 
R-1956-ARPA, 
Published 
by 
Rand 
Corporation, Santa Monica, CA, November 1976. 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/BackgroundContext/
SMErpt/SMErpt.pdf 
[20]  I. Sutherland, “The Problem: How to build digital 
electronic circuits from now to 1985”, Letter to W. R. 
Sutherland describing challenges presented by advances in 
microelectronics and proposing the Xerox-PARC/Caltech 
collaboration, January 26, 1976. 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/BackgroundContext/
IvanSutherlandLetter1-26-76.PDF 
[21]  L. Conway, Ed., “The VLSI Archive: An online 
archive of documents and artifacts from the Mead-Conway 
VLSI design revolution”, lynnconway.com. 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/VLSIarchive.html  
 
 
 
28 
 
[22]  I. Sutherland and C. Mead, “Microelectronics and 
Computer Science”, Scientific American, pp. 210-228, 
November 1977. 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/BackgroundContext/
Sciam/SM.SciAm77.pdf 
[23]  C. Mead and L. Conway, Introduction to VLSI 
Systems, 
Xerox 
PARC, 
laser-printed 
prepublication 
versions: Chapters 1-3, October 1977; Chapters 1-5, 
February 1978; Chapters 1-9, July 1978. 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/VLSIText/PP-
V1/V1.pdf (11.4mb) 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/VLSIText/PP-
V2/V2.pdf (8.9mb) 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/VLSIText/PP-
V3/1s/V3.one-sided.pdf (28.3mb) 
[24]  C. Mead and L. Conway, Introduction to VLSI 
Systems, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1980. 
http://www.amazon.com/Introduction-Vlsi-Systems-Carver-
Mead/dp/0201043580 
[25]  R. Hon and C. Sequin, A Guide to LSI 
Implementation, Xerox PARC Technical Report, 1st Ed., 
September 1978; 2nd Ed., January 1980. 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/ImplGuide1/ImplGu
ide1stEd.pdf (5.6mb) 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/ImplGuide2/ImplGu
ide2ndEd.pdf (6.9mb) 
[26]  L. Conway, The M.I.T.'78 VLSI System Design 
Course: A Guidebook for the Instructor of VLSI System 
Design, Xerox PARC, August 12, 1979. 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/InstGuide/InstGuide
.pdf  (12mb)  
[27]  L. Conway, A. Bell and M.E. Newell, “MPC79: The 
Large-Scale Demonstration of a New Way to Create 
Systems in Silicon”, Lambda, the Magazine of VLSI 
Design, vol.1, no. 2, pp. 10-19, Second Quarter 1980. 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/MPC79/MPC79Rep
ort.pdf 
[28]  L. Conway, “The MPC Adventures: Experiences with 
the Generation of VLSI Design and Implementation 
Methodologies”, Xerox PARC Technical Report VLSI-81-2, 
January 1981. 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/MPCAdv/MPCAdv.
pdf 
[29]  T. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd 
Ed., University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1970. 
[30]  D. Fairbairn and J. Rowson, “From the Editors”, 
Lambda, the Magazine of VLSI Design, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 2-
3, First Quarter, 1980. 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/VLSIDesMag/Lamb
da1Q80.pdf 
[31]  MOSIS, “The MOSIS Service – More than 50,000 
designs in over 25 years of operation”, mosis.com. 
[32]  M. Marshall, L. Waller, and H. Wolff, “The 1981 
Achievement Award: For optimal VLSI design efforts, 
Mead and Conway have fused device fabrication and system-level 
architecture”, Electronics, vol. 54, no. 21, pp. 102-105, October 
20, 1981.  
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/Electronics/ElectrAc
hievAwd.pdf (3.6mb) 
[33]  E. M. Rogers, Diffusion of innovations, Free Press, 
New York, 1962. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffusion_of_innovations  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Everett_Rogers  
http://www.amazon.com/Diffusion-Innovations-5th-Everett-
Rogers/dp/0743222091 
[34]  Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, 
National Research Council, Funding a Revolution: 
Government Support for Computing Research, National 
Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1999, pp. 113-122. 
http://books.nap.edu/html/far/ 
[35]  M. Stefik and L. Conway, “Towards the Principled 
Engineering of Knowledge”, AI Magazine, vol. 3:3, pp. 4-
16, Summer 1982. 
http://www.aaai.org/ojs/index.php/aimagazine/article/viewArticle/
374 
[36]  L. Conway, “The Design of VLSI Design Methods”, 
Proc. of ESSCIRC’82: Eighth European Solid-State 
Circuits Conference, Brussels, September 22-24, 1982, pp. 
106-117. 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/ESSCIRC82/The%2
0Design%20of%20VLSI%20Design%20Methods.pdf 
[37]  M. Cassidy, “Chip inventors getting their due at Hall 
of Fame induction”, San Jose Mercury, April 30, 2009. 
http://www.tmcnet.com/usubmit/2009/04/30/4158801.htm  
http://www.forbes.com/2009/05/04/computer-inventors-induction-
leadership-citizenship-halloffame.html  
http://news.cnet.com/2300-1001_3-10000815.html  
[38]  D. B. Davis, “Assessing the Strategic Computing 
Initiative”, High Technology, vol.5, no.4, pp. 41-49, April 1985  
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/CSE/SCI/HighTechnology
4-85.pdf 
[39]  M. A. Hiltzik, “Through the Gender Labyrinth: How a 
bright boy with a penchant for tinkering grew up to be one 
of the top women in her high-tech field”, Los Angeles 
Times Magazine (Cover Story), pp. 12-17,  Sunday, 
November 19, 2000.  
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/Media/Through%20the%2
0Gender%20Labyrinth.pdf  
[40]  IEEE Computer Society, “Lynn Conway, 2009 
Computer Pioneer Award Recipient,” January, 2010. 
http://www.computer.org/portal/web/awards/conway  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i4Txvjia3p0 
[41]  W. R. (Bert) Sutherland, "Management of Industrial 
Research: Exploring the Unknown Technical Future", 
Perspective Series 2008-7, Sun Labs, July 2008. 
http://labs.oracle.com/techrep/Perspectives/PS_2008_07.pdf  
[42]  W. R. (Bert) Sutherland, “Faith, Funds, & Fate: 
Prerequisites for the development and transfer of new 
technology”, Presentation at the celebration of the 40th 
anniversary of USC-ISI, Marina del Rey, California, April 
26, 2012. 
http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/VLSI/MOSIS/ISI_40th/FF
F.pdf 
[43]  L. Conway, "The VLSI Archive", Electronic Design 
News, June 3, 2009. 
http://edagraffiti.com/?p=101 
 
 
29 
 
About the Author 
Lynn Conway (lynn@ieee.org ) is Professor of 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 
Emerita, at the University of Michigan.  
     After earning her B.S. and M.S.E.E. from 
Columbia University’s School of Engineering and 
Applied Science in 1962 and 1963, Lynn joined IBM 
Research. There she made foundational contributions 
to computer architecture, including the invention of 
multiple-out-of-order dynamic instruction scheduling 
(DIS). Fired by IBM as she underwent her gender 
transition in 1968, Lynn started her career over again 
in a new identity, soon becoming a computer 
architect at Memorex Corporation. 
      Joining Xerox’s Palo Alto Research Center in 
1973, she invented scalable MOS design rules and 
highly simplified methods for silicon chip design, 
conceived of and became principal author of the 
famous Mead-Conway text, and pioneered at M.I.T. 
the intensive university course that taught these 
methods – thereby launching a world-wide revolution 
in VLSI system design in the late 1970’s.   
     Lynn also invented the internet-based, rapid-chip-
prototyping 
infrastructure 
institutionalized 
by 
DARPA as the MOSIS system – supporting the rapid 
development of thousands of chip designs, and 
leading to many Silicon Valley startups in the 1980’s. 
     After serving as Assistant Director for Strategic 
Computing at DARPA from 1983-85, Lynn joined 
the University of Michigan as Professor of EECS and 
Associate Dean of Engineering, where she continued 
her distinguished career. Now retired, she lives with 
her engineer husband Charlie on their 23 acre 
homestead in rural Michigan. They’ve been together 
for 25 years. 
     An IEEE Fellow, Lynn holds five U.S. Patents 
and has received a number of professional honors for 
her work, including the Electronics Award for 
Achievement (1981), the Pender Award, University 
of Pennsylvania (1984), the Wetherill Medal of the 
Franklin Institute (1985), election to the National 
Academy of Engineering (1989), and the Computer 
Pioneer Award of the IEEE Computer Society (2009). 
 
 
The VLSI Archive 
When reflecting on the past with friends and family, 
we often use photo albums to trigger shared 
memories – memories that bind us together and 
reveal how we got to where we are. 
     However, what of our careers? Although the final 
products of our work may remain, mementos of our 
adventures along the way are often lost in the rush of 
events. Only too late we realize what we should have 
saved. 
     But it was different for the VLSI revolution. 
Perhaps it was the exciting visual artifacts, or the 
shared-sense that we were breaking new ground. 
Whatever the reasons, many participants saved 
original treasures from that era – research notes, 
chips and chip photos, even huge color check plots – 
storing them away for decades. 
     During the past few years members of the VLSI 
research team, along with colleagues in academia and 
industry, 
have 
gathered 
up, 
scanned 
and 
photographed many of those artifacts and posted 
them online. A work in progress, the ‘VLSI Archive’ 
helps bring those exciting days back to life [21], [43].  
 
  
Lynn’s Website                 The VLSI Archive 
      
 
