Interview with
John Horton Conway
Dierk Schleicher
T
his is an edited version of an interview
with John Horton Conway conducted in
July 2011 at the ﬁrst International Math-
ematical Summer School for Students
at Jacobs University, Bremen, Germany,
and slightly extended afterwards. The interviewer,
Dierk Schleicher, professor of mathematics at
Jacobs University, served on the organizing com-
mittee and the scientiﬁc committee for the summer
school. The second summer school took place in
August 2012 at the École Normale Supérieure
de Lyon, France, and the next one is planned for
July 2013, again at Jacobs University. Further
information about the summer school is available
at
http://www.math.jacobs-university.de/
summerschool.
John H. Conway is one of the preeminent the-
orists in the study of ﬁnite groups and one of the
world’s foremost knot theorists. He has written or
co-written more than ten books and more than one-
hundred thirty journal articles on a wide variety
of mathematical subjects. He has done important
work in number theory, game theory, coding the-
ory, tiling, and the creation of new number systems,
including the “surreal numbers”. He is also widely
known as the inventor of the “Game of Life”, a com-
puter simulation of simple cellular “life” governed
by simple rules that give rise to complex behavior.
Born in 1937, Conway received his Ph.D. in 1967
from Cambridge University under the direction of
Harold Davenport. Conway was on the faculty at
Cambridge until moving in 1986 to Princeton Uni-
versity, where he is the von Neumann Professor. He
is a fellow of the Royal Society of London and has
Dierk Schleicher is professor of mathematics at Jacobs Uni-
versity in Bremen, Germany. His email address is dierk@
jacobs-university.de.
We would like to thank Joris Dolderer and Zymantas Darbe-
nas for their contributions to this interview and Alexandru
Mihai for some of the pictures.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/noti983
John Horton Conway in August 2012 lecturing
on FRACTRAN at Jacobs University Bremen.
received the Pólya Prize of the London Mathemati-
cal Society and the Frederic Esser Nemmers Prize
in Mathematics of Northwestern University.
Schleicher: John Conway, welcome to the Interna-
tional Mathematical Summer School for Students
here at Jacobs University in Bremen. Why did you
accept the invitation to participate?
Conway: I like teaching, and I like talking to young
people, and I expected to enjoy myself. I used to
say about myself that if it sits down, I teach it; if it
stands up, I will continue to teach it; but if it runs
away, I maybe won’t be able to catch up. But now
it only needs to walk away and I won’t be able to
catch up, because I had a stroke a short time ago.
Schleicher: Has that ever happened to you that
people have run away from you in your teaching?
Conway: Yes, after ﬁve or six hours being taught
something, people edge away. You know, British
students aren’t so disciplined as German ones.
Schleicher: At this summer school, there are stu-
dents from twenty-ﬁve diﬀerent countries, with dif-
ferent levels of politeness, and they have not edged
May 2013
Notices of the AMS
567
away, quite the opposite. You are a professor in
Princeton, and people come to Princeton to study
with people like you…
Conway: Yes, to some extent.
Schleicher: …and now you come here to the stu-
dents. Of course, the students we have here are even
younger than most undergraduates in Princeton.
Is it diﬀerent for you to teach the summer school
students?
Conway: I never treat anybody any diﬀerently,
roughly speaking. I teach graduate courses in
Princeton, and I teach undergraduate courses. I
come to places like this and other similar events
in the States. I never really change my style of
teaching. I don’t change the topics I teach very
much. If a student is a younger person, I don’t go
into so many details, but it is the same stuﬀfor me.
I am a very elementary mathematician, in a sense.
Schleicher: Then you are a very deep elementary
mathematician.
Conway: I will accept your compliment, if that is
what it was meant to be, but…
Schleicher: Yes, it was.
Conway: …How might I say this? It’s harder to take
easy, baby-type arguments and to ﬁnd something
new in them than it is to ﬁnd something new
in arguments at the forefront of mathematical
development. All the easy things at ﬁrst sight
appear to have been said already, but you can ﬁnd
that they haven’t been said.
Schleicher: That puzzles me a bit, because you are
one of the people at the forefront of mathematics—
perhaps at the forefront of unexpected mathemat-
ics.
Conway: I think the last clause I can accept. But it
is my own mathematics. I discovered the surreal
numbers, which are absolutely astonishing. The
deﬁnitions are absolutely trivial. Nobody had
thought about them before, nobody was trying. In
mathematics, there are worthwhile subjects. Very
famous and deep mathematicians have investigated
them, and it’s very hard to ﬁnd anything new. Most
of my colleagues at Princeton make one topic their
own and become world experts on it. I don’t do
that. I am just interested in a lot of things. I don’t
get very deeply into any of them. I get moderately
deep.
Schleicher: I take this more as an indication of your
modesty.
Conway: Here is another thing I say about myself:
I am too modest. If I weren’t so modest, I’d be
perfect. I am working on the modesty.
Schleicher: Good luck with that work! Speaking of
your modesty, what do you think…
Conway: I don’t think I am modest at all, but carry
on.
Students are clearly not edging away.
Schleicher: Let me ask the question anyway. What
do you consider your greatest idea, your greatest
achievement?
Conway: I don’t know. I am proud of lots of things,
and I don’t think there is one thing I consider
my greatest achievement. My colleagues would
probably say the work on group theory. I don’t
consider that to be my greatest achievement. I
think it’s pretty good, but that’s about it. I am
glad they value it, so it means that in their eyes I
am not regarded as totally frivolous. In my eyes,
I am totally frivolous. But I have two particular
things I can mention. One is fairly recent, the
Free Will Theorem, and the other, rather less
recent, is the surreal numbers. I value them, or
estimate them, in diﬀerent ways: with the surreal
numbers I discovered an enormous new world
of numbers. Vastly many numbers, inconceivable.
Nobody else has discovered more numbers than
I have. In a sense, it beats so-called conservative
mathematicians at their own game, because it
produces a simpler theory of real numbers than
the traditional theory, which has been on the books
for nearly two hundred years now. So I am very
proud of that and astonished I was so lucky to ﬁnd
it.
Free Will Theorem
The other more recent work is the Free Will
Theorem, which I found jointly with a colleague
of mine, Simon Kochen; I would certainly have
never found it by myself. It says something at a
provable level about the notion of free will, which
philosophers have been arguing about for ages,
two thousand years at least. It wasn’t something
everybody wanted to know, but it’s proved at
the mathematical level of certainty—very nearly,
anyway. Personally, I am proud of it because I have
never thought about anything like that before. I’ve
read philosophy books, but I’ve never imagined
568
Notices of the AMS
Volume 60, Number 5
Mathematical toys and games, such as the
Rubik’s Cube, are always an exciting topic of
mutual interest for Conway and his audience.
making any progress. In general you don’t make
progress on philosophical problems. Instead of
tackling the problem as everybody else did, I was
thinking about something else, thinking about
physics, and, whoosh—something about free will
could be said.
Schleicher: So could it be that this or other discov-
eries of yours were shaped by coincidence or by
luck?
Conway: Partly luck. I would have never done
anything without my colleague. He taught me a lot
of quantum mechanics. When I was at the university
in England, I took courses in quantum mechanics,
including one from Dirac, the great quantum
mechanic! A wonderful physicist and a shy man. I
understood nothing. That was strange, but there
is a famous saying by Feynman that if you meet
somebody who tells you they understand quantum
mechanics, then you have met a liar, and not a
good liar at that. So I don’t claim to understand
quantum mechanics. My friend Simon Kochen
taught me one thing about quantum mechanics
which I understood, and I ﬁnd that many physicists
don’t understand that one thing (of course, they
understand many things that I don’t). And that
one thing we were able to pursue until we had this
great theorem. If we make reasonable assumptions,
including the assumption of free will, this one
thing tells us that the little elementary particles
are doing their own thing all over the universe.
One atom is deciding to move a little bit leftwards
and another to move a little bit rightwards. And it
all very nearly cancels out, but not quite. And here
[points to Schleicher] is what we call a life. You
might be a robot, but I doubt it. I rather suspect
you to have the same kind of consciousness as I
have. And that is probably a manifestation of the
freedom of the particles inside you: they do their
own thing.
Schleicher: Could you make a simple statement
about what exactly, or intuitively, the Free Will
Theorem says?
Conway: Yes. [Throws a piece of paper.] I just
decided to throw that piece of paper on the ﬂoor. I
don’t believe that that was determined at the start
of the big bang, 14 billion years ago. I think it’s
ludicrous to imagine that the entire development
of the universe, including, say, this interview,
was predetermined. For the Free Will Theorem, I
assume that some of my actions are not given by
predetermined functions of the past history of the
universe. A rather big assumption to make, but
most of us clearly make it. Now, what Simon and I
proved is, if that is indeed true, then the same is
true for elementary particles: some of their actions
are not predetermined by the entire past history
of the universe. That is a rather remarkable thing.
Newton’s theory was deterministic. In the 1920s,
Einstein had diﬃculties believing that quantum me-
chanics was not deterministic. That was regarded
as a defect of quantum mechanics. Certainly when
I tried to learn quantum mechanics and didn’t
succeed, I thought it was a defect. It’s not a defect. If
the theory could predict what one of those particles
could do, then that theory would be wrong, because,
according to the Free Will Theorem—supposing we
do have free will—a particle doesn’t make up its
mind what it’s going to do until it does it or until
shortly before it does it.
Let me describe the theorem this way. Suppose
there is only a very tiny amount of free will in
humans: you can press either button A or button
B in a manner that is not predetermined. That is a
very tiny part of what we normally consider free
will for humans. And if we have that tiny amount of
free will, so do the elementary particles, in a sense
that a particle in response to some experiment
can choose which path, C or D, that it follows. It
has free action. It chooses C or D in a manner
that is not a predetermined function of all the
information in the past history of the universe.
Schleicher: You believe that humans have free will.
Conway: I do. Strict determinism tells us that all of
our actions are predetermined by the past history
of the universe. I don’t know, maybe it is. I can’t
disprove it. I can prove that I can’t disprove it. I can
prove that you [points to Schleicher] can’t disprove
it either. But I believe anyway that humans have
free will.
Schleicher: That is your belief.
Conway: And it is very strong. If you or somebody
else doesn’t believe this, I am not going to argue
with you, because I know that I can’t disprove
the determinist’s position. After giving lectures
on this subject in various places, sometimes I
have asked whether there were any determinists
in the audience. Usually in an audience of a
May 2013
Notices of the AMS
569
hundred, twenty people put their hands up. They
are usually among the most intelligent members
of the audience, because it takes some intelligence
to disbelieve something that everybody else feels
is obvious or to believe something that everybody
else feels is ludicrous. Several times people have
come up to me and told me they were determinists
and expected me to argue the matter. But since
I’ve proved that nobody can disprove determinism,
what is the point in trying to disprove determinism?
I have no argument with determinists or, I should
have said, I have no arguments with determinists.
Schleicher: The usual interpretation of quantum
mechanics is that the behavior of the elementary
particles is simply random.
Conway: You know, randomness doesn’t help. If
the action of each particle were a predetermined
function of its past plus a random string of bits,
then we might as well suppose that this string of
bits was produced just before the universe was
created, and this is excluded just as well as totally
deterministic behavior.
Cellular Automata
Schleicher: One achievement of yours that you
didn’t mention is one that you are perhaps best
known for, the invention of the Game of Life, the
theory of cellular automata.
Conway: Yes, that is true. And sometimes I wish I
hadn’t invented that game.
Schleicher: Why?
Conway: Well, because I am pretty egotistical.
When I see a new mathematical book for a general
audience, I turn to the index, I look for a certain
name in the back, and if I see this name, it
shines out at me somehow. And it says, page 157,
pages 293–298, or whatever. So I eagerly turn to
those pages, hoping to see some mention of my
discoveries. I only ever see the Game of Life. I am
not ashamed of it; it was a good game. It said
things that needed to be said. But I’ve discovered
so many more things, and that was, from a certain
point of view, rather trite—to me anyway. It is a bit
upsetting to be known for this thing that I consider
in a way rather trivial. There are lots of other things
to be discovered about surreal numbers. And the
Free Will Theorem is recent, and therefore I am
still ﬂushed with enthusiasm about it.
Schleicher: I understand what you are saying. But
is it possible that the Game of Life has perhaps not
been fully developed or understood? Maybe there is
a theory waiting to be discovered?
Conway: No, it’s been overdeveloped. You won’t
interest me in the Game of Life.
Schleicher: But Steven Wolfram is very interested in
cellular automata. Doesn’t he think it is the future
of everything?
John Conway likes to challenge people in a game
of “dots and boxes”—that game is often played
in high schools but has surprisingly deep
mathematical content.
Conway: I think he is wrong. And I am rather
astonished that he has the opinions that he has,
because he supposedly studied physics. I shouldn’t
say “supposedly”—pardon me. He should be aware
of the fact that the universe behaves in a manner
that—at least most competent physicists believe—
is not deterministic. And cellular automata are
things that, like the life game, are deterministic.
So in my opinion, it’s provable that the universe is
not a cellular automaton.
Schleicher: I am a bit surprised to hear you say that
one should believe what the majority of scientists
in a particular ﬁeld say. Have you ever cared about
the opinion of the majority?
Conway: No, not very much. But physics is not my
profession. And I suppose I just try to bolster this
opinion by saying it’s not only me. I’m surprised
Wolfram believes that the universe is a cellular
automaton. I met him a long time ago, and he
was very friendly. He was chieﬂy interested in the
Game of Life. I remember walking with him and a
friend of his when we both attended a conference
near Marseilles. We used to walk down to the
Mediterranean along the nice rocky path and then
come back the same way after spending an hour at
the beach, talking all the time about—well, largely
about things like cellular automata, but also about
philosophy and other things. I didn’t see him for a
long time, and then we had a discussion that wasn’t
entirely amicable about ten years ago. I met him
again last year or the year before at the celebration
of the life of Martin Gardner, and we fell back
into our old habit of having interesting intellectual
conversations. It’s rather funny, because he made
his millions by starting a company and doing a
good thing. This man could give me one or two
million dollars without noticing.
570
Notices of the AMS
Volume 60, Number 5
Conway is always ready for any kind of
mathematical game.
I don’t think that Wolfram’s theories are tenable.
His book is very interesting, but as the explanation
of the universe—I don’t think he’s got the right
idea, possibly because he doesn’t understand the
one thing of quantum mechanics that I do. Lots
of physicists don’t understand this. I won’t claim
any special virtue in understanding it. It took
me ten years to do so by talking with my friend
Simon Kochen for several hours a day, except
Saturdays and Sundays, talking about quantum
mechanics, trying to understand it. Really, we
didn’t know what we were talking about. We were
talking about particular problems at various times.
But in retrospect, perhaps I should say, it was
predetermined that we would go to the Free Will
Theorem! But of course it wasn’t predetermined. I
don’t believe anything is predetermined, roughly
speaking. Things concerning large inanimate ob-
jects are predetermined. This tree is not going
to start walking around the lawn. The building, I
hope, is not going to fall down. Physical laws, as
regards inanimate objects, have a high degree of
predetermination. But as regards animate objects,
such as people walking around on the lawn and a
dog that might accompany them, that doesn’t look
predetermined to me. I can’t prove that it isn’t.
And nobody else can.
Inventing the Game of Life
Schleicher: What made you invent the Game of Life,
and how did it happen?
Conway: I was telling you of my Jugendtraum,
my youth dream, that undecidable complexity is
not as far out as one might expect but might
happen just around the corner. There was a book
called Automata Studies, one of those orange
Princeton books, that gave me quite a lot of topics
to think about. One of them was a mention of
von Neumann’s cellular automaton, which was a
universal computing device in the sense that it
could emulate any other computer. This was a
very complicated thing, with twenty-nine states
and a neighborhood of ﬁve cells, and it had a very
long list of transition rules that would be virtually
impossible to check. Von Neumann had designed
this thing carefully so as to have this universality
property. I thought you didn’t have to design it,
because it would happen almost automatically,
given a suﬃcient amount of complexity.
One metaphor that has been with me for a
long time is the following: I like to think of a
huge abandoned warehouse equipped with logical
devices such as AND, OR, and NOT gates. Suppose
a maniac lived there who would solder together a
big number of these devices just randomly. Then
with enough time you could learn how to program
this, and it wouldn’t take a lot of intelligent design
so that the big circuit would be unpredictable and
probably even universal. This idea also underlies
my recent paper on amusical permutations, which
I wrote for the American Mathematical Monthly
special issue that you invited me to contribute to.
It happens on several occasions that people
have proved something like universality assertions,
and then people start to think that that proof is
an estimate of how complicated a universal device
has to be. Let me give you a number of examples.
Gödel proved his famous incompleteness theorem
by inventing things called “Gödel numbers” for
propositions and then talking about the statement
with Gödel number n and evaluating this for the
parameter equal to n and so on. The books used
to say that the Gödel number of any statement of
any interest must be enormously big, but I didn’t
see why these had to be so big. Similarly, it is
often said that a universal Turing machine has to
be terribly complicated, but I didn’t see why that
had to be so. You see, von Neumann’s universal
cellular automaton had twenty-nine states and very
complicated transition rules, and I didn’t think that
was necessary, so I tried to ﬁnd a much simpler
automaton that was universal too.
The Game of Life was, I think, my ﬁrst foray into
the ﬁeld—well, I’m not quite certain whether it was
really the ﬁrst. I guessed it would be universal.
Schleicher: And how did you discover it?
Conway: I tried out dozens and dozens of diﬀerent
automata, not necessarily to see whether they were
universal, because that is rather diﬃcult to work
out. I tried to design rules that were unpredictable
in behavior but that I could study for long enough
to learn how to program them. If you are shown
into the warehouse that I mentioned and had only
one day, you wouldn’t learn how to program it
[the big circuit]. In the case of the life game, I
studied this with a little community of graduate
students. We studied diﬀerent sets of rules, played
May 2013
Notices of the AMS
571
them on Go boards over what I think was eighteen
months—not all the time, but every now and then
during coﬀee breaks. We eventually found this
wonderful system that appeared to be universal.
The day when we thought it would be successful I
very much remember. Richard Guy was staying in
Cambridge, which he didn’t often do. He was given
the job of blinker-watcher, as he is a very precise
sort of person. Blinkers are three sets of aligned
cells that alternate in period 2.
Schleicher: I know the Game of Life well: when I
was in high school, this was a hot topic among all
the math folks there, and it was the ﬁrst computer
program I ever wrote in binary machine code on
my ﬁrst computer.
Conway: We did this all by hand on Go boards
with blinkers, and other small objects—you don’t
have to update them in every generation. You just
have to keep a note on whether it’s an even or
odd generation. Only when the rest of the game
is getting near it do you bother to update it. To
keep track of these small objects is the job of the
blinker-watcher. At one point, he said, “Come over
here! My bit is walking!” And indeed it was. That
was the discovery of the glider. In the Winning
Ways book there is a little piece on gliders, and
it says, “Some guy said ‘my bit is walking’,”, and
this “guy” was Richard Guy. We had thought of
things like “spaceships” when trying out all sorts
of rules. This was the ﬁrst time that a spaceship
actually happened: ﬁve cells at any given time, and
they appeared naturally. Of course we discussed
this, because we had hoped our cellular automaton
would be universal and in order to have a computer
in which, instead of wires and pulses of electricity,
you had paths on which gliders (or something)
were actually traveling. As soon as we discovered
them we set about having them crash; there are
about forty diﬀerent ways of crashing them. That
led eventually to the proof of universality.
I oﬀered a prize for anyone who could come
up with a Life conﬁguration whose population
grew indeﬁnitely. That aim was purposely stated
rather widely. What I had wanted was what it
eventually became—something that would emit
gliders regularly—but I thought anything that just
showed that the typical conﬁguration didn’t just
die oﬀor settle down would be interesting. Later
on, people found “3–4 Life”. I don’t remember the
details. Here the population is rather large. Nobody
ever proved that it is universal. More or less every
system you can’t understand is probably universal,
but if you can’t understand it, how can you prove
anything about it?
The problem with Life is the problem with
understanding a little bit about it and then studying
it long enough to identify components that would
eventually lead to universality. It’s interesting that
John Conway is always surrounded by students
no matter where—such as here during an
excursion at the summer school.
nobody else has since found a simple thing that’s
universal. That doesn’t mean it’s not there; I think
it’s all over the place! But it means nobody spent
the roughly one year (of coﬀee times) that it takes
to ﬁnd it.
Schleicher: You just mentioned you oﬀered cash
awards. Of the awards that you oﬀered, did you
have to pay most of them, and were you ever sur-
prised you had to pay something you didn’t expect?
Conway: I didn’t oﬀer cash awards all that often…
Schleicher: …you even did that to me when we met
ﬁrst, almost twenty-ﬁve years ago, and then played
a little trick on me [both laugh].
Conway: There was this famous case, rather stupid
of me. I had a little problem about whether a certain
sequence tended to inﬁnity. I was giving a lecture
at Bell Labs—quite a big lecture, actually. There I
proposed two forms of the problem, an easy one
and a hard one. For the easy one I oﬀered US$100,
and I said that for the hard one I would oﬀer ten
times as much, hence US$10,000…
Schleicher: …and that from you, the master of
mental computation!
Conway: I might even have repeated this wrong
number, $10,000, afterwards. There was a person
at Bell Labs, Colin Mallows, who solved the harder
problem. I was quite happy and wrote him a check
for $1,000. Neil Sloane said it was $10,000, and I
didn’t believe it, but it was on tape. I am not sure
whether I ever listened to the tape again, I suppose
I must have, and I wrote a check for $10,000. I
talked to my wife, and we decided we wouldn’t buy
the new car we were planning to buy; she was very
good about it. Mallows got the check for $10,000,
but he said he wasn’t going to accept it. I said,
“You don’t have to feel bad about it” and tried to
persuade him a bit, but not terribly hard [smiles].
He then accepted the check for $1,000. I think he
572
Notices of the AMS
Volume 60, Number 5
Screenshot from the interview in 2011 at the
summer school. This was supposed to be a brief
conversation, but developed spontaneously into
a one-hour interview, interrupted only when the
camera batteries died.
framed the $10,000 check in his oﬃce but didn’t
cash it.
Schleicher: This is a beautiful and famous story
that even made it into the New York Times!
Conway: It actually turned out he made a mistake.
The ﬁrst question was whether a certain sequence
converged to 1/2, and the second question was
what the last time was when it diﬀered from the
limit by more than 1/20. Much later it turned
out that his answer was actually wrong. His
ideas were basically right, but he had overlooked
a stupid thing and I hadn’t caught it, so the
whole thing was replete with mistakes on all
sides. Incidentally, this was not a sequence I had
invented myself: it had been proposed by A. K.
Dewdney, the author of a “Flatland revival” book.
The sequence starts with f(0) = 0, f(1) = 1, and
f(n) = f(n −f(n −1)) + f(n −f(n −2)).
Good or Bad Inﬂuence?
Schleicher: I’d like to ask you about something dif-
ferent now. Some of your achievements have had a
great inﬂuence on people, especially on young peo-
ple, and many of them consider you a role model
or a hero. How do you feel about this?
Conway: Let me say, I may have had a great
inﬂuence on a lot of people, but quite often that
inﬂuence has been to the bad.
Schleicher: Why is that?
Conway: I feel very guilty; I have one particular
person in mind. He didn’t get a Ph.D. because he
became too interested in the kinds of games I
was teaching him. I suspect that sort of thing has
happened quite a lot, not necessarily to the extent
of damaging a person’s career as much as I fear
I have in that case, but by making it harder for
people to concentrate on the work they should be
doing, because I am telling things that are more
interesting. So I’m rather worried when I inﬂuence
people.
Schleicher: Let me ask the question again which I
asked at the very beginning. Why did you invest the
time to come to the summer school to talk to young
students day and night?
Conway: First of all, concerning the possibility
that I might do them harm in the manner I just
mentioned: I can’t do much harm in one week or
so. Hippocrates, the father of medicine, said, “First,
do no harm.” So, when I come to a summer school
like this, I’m fairly sure I’m doing no harm.
Schleicher: I’m surprised that you have these wor-
ries.
Conway: I might do good. I am reminded of
something. I wrote the book On Numbers and
Games. Just before, I had read John Bunyan’s The
Pilgrim’s Progress. He has a little rhyme at the
front of his book. He said he showed it to various
people, and some said, “John, print it”; others said,
“Not so.” Some said, “It might do good;” others
answered, “No.” This rhyme seemed so wonderful
in application to my book that I quoted it at the
end of the preface of On Numbers and Games.
Incidentally, I was imprisoned in the same prison
in which John Bunyan was imprisoned about three
hundred years earlier. When I was a student I
participated in a “ban the bomb” demonstration.
There was a magistrate who asked everybody a few
questions and then sent us to jail. I don’t think it
was literally the same building Bunyan had been
in, but it was a pretty old building. So I have a
fellow-feeling for John Bunyan. Of course, his book
is called The Pilgrim’s Progress, and his pilgrim is
called Christian. I am not religious, certainly not
so religious as John Bunyan was. So, in some sense,
the book is alien to me, except that I recognize the
“Slough of Despond”, a phrase he used to refer to
being depressed.
Schleicher: For how long?
Conway: I was very depressed in 1993. I attempted
suicide. And I very nearly succeeded. That was just
personal problems—my marriage was breaking
down.
Schleicher: I was asking about the prison term.
Conway: That was, I think, eleven days. That’s the
number I remember. My memories are unreliable,
as I am discovering increasingly now. I have a
biographer now, Siobhan Roberts. She wrote a
biography of Coxeter, the famous geometer. She
asked if she could assemble a biography of me,
to which I initially said no, but she persisted, and
eventually I said yes. Every now and then I say
something to Siobhan about something I did, and
she says, “That is not consistent with the letter
you wrote on July 27th, nineteen-sixty-something,
May 2013
Notices of the AMS
573
to Martin Gardner.” That shows you what memory
is like. And my role, whatever it was as I remember
it, is always distinctly better than what Siobhan
ﬁnds that the facts show.
Schleicher: You mentioned Martin Gardner several
times. He dedicated a book to you.
Conway: Yes, I forget which book; it might be
Mathematical Carnival. When Elwyn Berlekamp,
Richard Guy, and I wrote the book Winning Ways,
we dedicated it to Martin. I don’t remember the
dedication.
Schleicher: “To Martin Gardner, who brought more
mathematics to more people than anyone else.”
Conway: Yes, it was “to more millions than anyone
else.” We put in the word “millions” because
Lancelot Hogben wrote a book called Mathematics
for the Millions. I think that dedication is true, and
it’s amazing Martin Gardner did that, because he
didn’t understand very much mathematics. He
certainly didn’t do mathematics. Perhaps it’s unfair
to say he didn’t understand. I’ve been rereading
his book of essays. He was one of the most
knowledgeable men ever, and that shines forth
in his book of essays. But to his misfortune, he’s
still known chieﬂy for his “Mathematical Games”
column in Scientiﬁc American, which he wrote for
twenty years or more. It’s more frivolous. He fell
into the games column by accident: He wrote an
article about hexaﬂexagons, which are ingenious
paper toys that somebody else discovered. It wasn’t
his column yet; it was an article in the magazine. He
died last year, several months after his ninety-ﬁfth
birthday.
Schleicher: We are very happy that we have one
of the young participants, Joris, here. You have a
question for Professor Conway.
Joris: Professor Conway, what did you do to get
where you are now in your career?
Conway: [Laughs] I grew old. It’s rather diﬃcult
to say. I am rather proud of the fact that, in some
sense, I never applied for an academic position
in my life. What happened: I was walking down
King’s Parade, the main street in Cambridge, after I
received my Ph.D. The chairman of the mathematics
department said, “Oh, Conway, what have you done
about applying for jobs?” And I said, “Nothing.” “I
thought that might be the answer,” he said, “Well,
we have a position in our department, and I think
you should apply.” And I said, “How do I apply?”
And he said, “You write a letter to me.” And I said,
“What should I put in that letter?” Then he lost his
patience, pulled out of his pocket a letter—which
had been written on one side—turned it over, and
scribbled “Dear Professor Cassels”—that was his
name—“I wish to apply for dot-dot-dot.” He handed
it to me, and I signed it. It would have been nice if
I’d gotten the job. I didn’t that year, but I got the
same job the next year with the same letter.
Farewell at the airport after another friendly
visit: Dierk Schleicher (left) and John Conway.
Keep Six Balls in the Air
How did I do it? I don’t know. I was astonishingly
lucky. I literally remember my former undergradu-
ate teacher telling my then wife that John would
not be successful. She asked why. And he said,
“Well, he does not do the kind of mathematics
that’s necessary for success.” And that’s true. I
really didn’t do any kind of mathematics. Whatever
I did, I did pretty well, and people got interested in
it—and that’s that. I did have a recipe for success,
which was always keeping six balls in the air. Now
I have had a stroke, so I can’t catch those balls
terribly well. But what I mean is: Always be thinking
about six things at once. Not at the same time
exactly, but you have one problem, you don’t make
any progress on it, and you have another problem
to change to. I had a set mix: one of the problems
could be a crossword puzzle in the newspaper
or something like that. Nowadays it might be a
Sudoku puzzle. One of them might be a problem
that would instantly make me famous if I solved it,
and I don’t expect to solve it, but don’t give up on it;
it’s worth trying. There must also be one problem
where you can deﬁnitely make progress just by
working hard enough. Then when the guilt level
rises suﬃciently—and I felt guilty in Cambridge for
not doing any work—you could make progress. It
is sort of a routine problem that is not completely
dead and might be useful. So that is my recipe for
success. I don’t think you asked me for a recipe
for success. Maybe you did.
Joris: A little bit.
Conway: By the way, it will cost you a quarter
[smiles].
Enjoying Mathematics
Schleicher: What message would you like to send
to the participants of this summer school or to our
future participants?
574
Notices of the AMS
Volume 60, Number 5
Conway: The main component of the message is:
Enjoy yourself! Of course, there is a subsidiary
thing: Don’t just enjoy yourself by fooling around
and doing nothing. If it gets to the point where
you feel that you must study something and
understand it terribly deeply, and it ceases to be
enjoyable—well, do something else, sleep it oﬀ,
hope that it goes away, and come back again. That
has been my recipe for everything. I have enjoyed
myself all my life doing mathematics. I’ve had
ups and downs in my life, but they’ve never been
concerned with mathematics really. Mathematics
has always been a sort of anodyne for me. If my
life gets on top of me, then I can think about
mathematics and put my personal problems aside
for a moment. It’s hard now. I walk with a cane, I
wake up with my leg hurting, and I’m conscious
every day that I’m in my seventies. I used to think
I was twenty-ﬁve—I stayed twenty-ﬁve for roughly
forty-ﬁve years. I don’t feel twenty-ﬁve anymore
as I always used to. It is very sad. Age is really
catching me.
Schleicher: Yet I have to tell you that the same
smile, the same inspiration, the same mathematical
depth, and the impression you leave on me are the
very same as twenty-ﬁve years ago when we met in
Princeton. That is something that I enjoy, and I’m
sure that all the students enjoy.
Conway: You are not consoling me. I still feel old.
I don’t feel as creative as I did a few decades ago.
I’m not entirely dead; I did prove the Free Will
Theorem. It’s already ﬁve or six years old, and that
is a good piece of creative work. And I am proud
of it. But these ideas don’t come as fast as they
used to.
Schleicher: These theorems don’t come every day,
but what comes every single day here—and maybe
this is a good conclusion for this interview—is that
the students enjoy how accessible you are. They
always are around you. We would very much like
to thank you for coming here to Bremen and to this
International Summer School.
Conway: I would like to thank you for inviting
me—and pestering me until I actually came! I enjoy
the students, talking to them, playing games with
them, answering questions about mathematics
when I can. And it’s my life really: I tend to ﬁnd
young people to whom to teach something, or not
necessarily teach something, but play games with
them and learn from them, if necessary.
Schleicher: We are very happy that you are here.
Thank you very much.
Conway: Thank you.
May 2013
Notices of the AMS
575
