NOOBIE: THE ANIMAL DESIGN PLAYSTATIO N
ALLISON DRUI N
Noobie
Abstract
For a year and a half, I lead a group of
researchers in building an alternative to the
traditional computer terminal . Instead o f
building a design workstation complete wit h
keyboard and mouse, we built an anima l
design playstation complete with fur, feathers ,
and an irridescent fish tail . We used the tools
of puppetry, animation, and compute r
electronics, to build what is now called Noobie
(short for "New Beast"). By sitting or standin g
in the lap of this computer creature, a child ca n
build fantasy or real animals . When one
squeezes a part on Noobie, the selecte d
animal part can be seen on the screen i n
Noobie's stomach, and a sound can be heard .
This paper documents the ideas behind th e
conception and creation of Noobie, along wit h
how it fits into the short history of the Vivariu m
research group . This group is a collection of
people, ideas, and projects that focus o n
creating a multi-media environment for childre n
to learn about animal behavior.
SIGCHI Bulletin
45
July 1988 Volume 20 Number 1
Keywords
Vivarium, Noobie, user interface, animal
behavior, furry computer, playstation ,
squeezing .
Vivarium History
The Vivarium took shape at MIT in the Fall of
1985, when a seminar was given at the Medi a
Lab by Alan Kay, Senior Apple Fellow at Appl e
Computer. From this seminar, students wit h
project ideas came forth . The work fell within
the following categories: curriculum design ,
user interface development, graphics and
animation research, and moist model s
(computational learning models) . Alan Kay felt
that it was in the combination of these fou r
areas of research that the Vivarium could
emerge .
For the past two years, our work has lead us t o
question what the next generation o f
computer tools will be . In doing so, we have
begun to develop a multi-media environment
for children to learn about animal behavior.
What this environment will include, how it wil l
be used in the future by students an d
teachers, and what effect it will have o n
education in general, remains to be seen .
single-medium presentation . It's been found
that each medium, because of its uniqu e
representational system and technica l
capabilities, emphasizes different kinds o f
information, and therefore offers the chil d
different representations to process . 1
With this in mind, we have continued t o
experiment, research, and develop new tool s
for a new type of educational environment .
Nooble's History
It was during the fall of 1985, that I initially
proposed the idea of the "furry computer" ; an
alternative to the traditional computer terminal .
I wanted to build a place where you could hug
your tools and build your fantasies . I wanted to
squeeze my stuffed animals, and have the m
appear on my computer screen . I wanted to
learn about animals, by playing with them .
How did my fantasies became a "furry
computer" named Noobie? At times I believe i t
came from a childhood filled with Muppets ,
Disney magic, and video-game-mania . At
other times I believe it was founded in the
words of Alan Kay, back in 1985 . At still other
times, I believe it grew out of my art schoo l
sketchbook of creatures .
What we in the Vivarium can agree upon, a t
this point, is that the computer tools we invent
should not take the place of film, television ,
books, live animals, or people. Children
should be exposed to many different ways o f
presenting ideas . One of the most consistent
findings in literature on media in education i s
the superiority of multi-media over
Whatever the origins, I began my search fo r
what my part in the Vivarium would be by
making a list. This I called my "Vivarium Should
Be List" . It consisted of all the things I believe d
the Vivarium should become .
THE VIVARIUM SHOULD BE.. .
1) ... the crayons, the clay, and the building
blocks of another world .
SIGCHI Bulletin
46
July 1988 Volume 20 Number 1
2) . ..a treehouse to build sandcastles in .
3) ...an environment that can direct
exploration, or allow exploration to be
directed.
4) . . .a place to share, or individually explore .
5) . ..a Disneyland in which to learn.
I suppose in between those words, I found m y
goal : to build an animal design playstation; an
environment where computer animals can b e
played with and explored much in the sam e
way real animals are ; by touching. In doing so, I
have created a new place where people and
computers meet; a place that is not confine d
to a hard plastic box, keyboard, or mouse .
Animal Agents for Childre n
Many people have asked us in the Vivarium ,
"Why use animals?" . "Why not study huma n
behavior?" "Why not use robots?" Those ar e
hard questions to answer. For as many time s
as they are asked, there seem to be as man y
different answers to be heard . This may b e
because the Vivarium research group is a
collection of people, with varying ideas ,
working on projects in many different areas .
Alan Kay sees our use of animals as, " . . .a nice
control on the child's sense of quality .
Whereas doing robots, you could get away
with almost anything and say that's what a
robot does . The representation has to b e
finely textured, and move and act believably .
We have to generate complex behavior from
simple modules ." 2
we already know about representing anima l
behaviors, as well as what we know about
rendering and animating figures. Therefore, i f
we are able to give children the tools t o
explore animal behavior, then we as
tool-makers may learn just as much about our
tools as about animal behavior .
For me though, the use of animal agents wa s
an obvious choice when you want to combin e
childhood learning with fun . Animals fill our
storybooks, our TV, our films, our amusemen t
parks, and of course our zoos. Many of the
special things I remember from my childhood
were connected with animals in some way . I n
books, Winnie-the-Pooh and th e
Cat-in-the-hat were drawn with words an d
pictures; on TV Big Bird, Kermit, and Mis s
Piggy took the furry form of muppets ; in film
Bambie and Braer Rabbit were animate d
colorful creatures; in amusement parks Mickey
Mouse, Donald Duck and Goofy were large
costumed characters; and in zoos the ponies ,
monkeys, and turtles were real .
These animal-filled activities sustained m y
attention, filled my imagination, and peaked m y
curiousity. If the Vivarium could build on thi s
childhood fun, I believe we could create no
more powerful a learning environment . As
Marvin Minsky once wrote, "Enjoyment, which
has been banished to the realm of
entertainment sciences, may be the most
powerful influence of all on how each perso n
learns." 3
For Alan Kay, it seems, the use of animal
agents is a wonderful way of stretching what
The User Interface
Few hardware interfaces have taken
SIGCHI Bulletin
47
July 1988
Volume 20 Number 1
keyboards and mice away from computer
monitors encased in hard plastic boxes .
According to Nicholas Negroponte, director o f
the the MIT Media Lab, "The human interfac e
with computers is the physical, sensory, an d
intellectual space that lies between computer s
and ourselves . Like any place, this space ca n
be unfamiliar, cold, and unwelcoming . But it
can also be like some other places, those w e
know and love, those that are familiar ,
comfortable, warm, and most importantl y
personal ." 4
Even with words like these and labs like the
Media Lab, hard plastic computer boxes stil l
prevail. Let me join in asking with Alan Kay ,
"What kind of emotional contact can one mak e
with this new stuff, if the physical acces s
seems so remote?" 5 The only answer seem s
to be in changing the "user interface", "the
place where people and computers meet" .
6
But people so often forget that people meet
computers from the moment they see and
touch them ; not just from the moment they
actually interact with the software . The user
interface " ...is recognized as being primary
because, to novices and professionals alike ,
what is presented to one's senses is one' s
computer." 7
Therefore the question remains, how can we
build computer environments that do not
deprive our senses? I believe this is, and wil l
continue to be, a crucial matter in th e
development of the Vivarium ; for how can w e
create an environment for children that
emphasizes animals that does not consider th e
way children most often explore animals?
They use their fingers . Children like to touc h
animals. "Studies have been done in setting s
in which there are both things to observe an d
things to interact with, such as scienc e
museums, field trips, zoos, and aquariums .
These studies show a predictable pattern :
children are attracted to activities that let the m
become physically involved . In the zoo, for
example, they prefer pigeons and squirrels ,
with whom they can interact, to the more exotic
animals isolated behind bars ." 8
Then how do we keep our computers fro m
merely being animals isolated behind bars?
I
believe the answer lies with touchabl e
computers; computers that just ask to be felt .
This is not to say that visuals and audio are not
important to an inviting environment, bu t
children have already encountered video
game graphics, flying logos, and Star Wars
special effects . The Vivarium should includ e
something more .
Noobie: The User Scenario
By bringing animal agents to a place wher e
computers and people meet, it was my hope t o
create an animal design playstation . To move
my ideas from paper, to foam, to a computer fo r
children was no small task. It took seven
people* with specialities ranging from softwar e
design, softsculpture creation, electrica l
*Those seven people who became th e
Noobie Design Team were Gwen Gordon ,
Larry Singer, Hans Peter Brondmo, To m
Trobough, Doug Milliken, Margaret Minsky ,
and Idit Hare! .
SIGCHI Bulletin
48
July 1988
Volume 20 Number 1
engineering, and child psychology a year an d
a half to build .
What we created is described in the use r
scenario that follows :
Two children crawl into the lap of Noobie .
They sit facing the screen, contained i n
Noobie's stomach . An adult switches on the
Macintosh Plus and hard disk, by reaching
behind and inside Noobie's torso . The startup
movie begins. With music and animation, i t
shows the children what kinds of animals the y
can make with the different animal parts in th e
database .
After the startup movie is finished, an anima l
(Noobie Jr.) is left on the screen . Its parts ca n
be changed by pressing a microswitch in the
same animal part on Noobie. (Those parts that
can change include : eyes, ears, nose ,
antenna, horns, mouth, arms, hands, legs ,
feet, and tail) Each time a child squeezes a
part, a particular sound is heard, and a new
animal part appears on Noobie Jr . There are
up to four choices that can be cycled through
for each animal part. The children can mak e
animals which include parts from either th e
same animal database (i .e .; all parts belongin g
to a dog), or from different ones (i .e.; a rabbit
Eye s
Ears /Horn s
Antenna /Misc .
Noses
Mouth s
Arm s
Hand s
Legs
D
Tail s
Noobie Animal Parts
SIGCHI Bulletin
49
July 1988 Volume 20 Number 1
mouth, fish eyes, dog nose, bird feet, fish tail ,
etc.). As of now, the selection of animal parts
is only a small fraction of what could eventuall y
be created .
techniques established at Henson Associates ,
to build a lightweight, flexible, yet sturdy
exterior .
Noobie with Child
If one child is to use Noobie, it may be difficul t
for him or her to see the screen while pressin g
the parts. Therefore, the movable arm will b e
useful. By positioning the cursor on th e
screen over an animal part, that part will chang e
when the thumb button is pressed . In this way ,
a tail or leg, for example, can be changed
without having to leave the view of the screen .
Another option is to see the startup movi e
again. If a child wants to review the anima l
combinations available, he or she can do so b y
pressing the bellybutton, located in Noobie's
stomach pocket .
Noobie: The Construction
To write the software application that creates
this scenario, we used the VideoWorks
animation driver, given to us with specia l
permission from MacroMind Inc. Our C
application runs on an Apple Macintosh Plus ,
with a hard disk, wired to a Yamaha synthesize r
and amplifier. All of this hardware is located i n
Noobie's softsculpture belly. The keyboar d
keys were replaced with microswitches that are
embedded in each of Noobie's parts, and the
circuitry for a joystick/mouse is housed in th e
movable arm .
The softsculpture that makes foam, fur, an d
feathers into Noobie was made possible wit h
the expertise of Gwen Gordon, a forme r
Muppet builder for Sesame Street. In four
months, Gwen adapted the Muppet
Explorations with Noobl e
In February of 1987, we began a formativ e
study with Noobie and children from th e
Fitzgerald After School Program through th e
Department of Human Services in Cambridge .
There were 15 children ranging in ages fro m
5-8, ranging in grades from kindergarte n
through 4th grade . The children were broke n
into groups that contained 2, 3, or 4, children .
Each group was given no more than 1 5
minutes to interact with Noobie .
We used these sessions with the children t o
focus on five main areas that we thought woul d
later help us to evaluate the user interface of
Noobie. These five areas included :
(1) Comprehension: How much time did it
take to figure out what to do with Noobie?
(2) Ease of Use: How easy was it to use
Noobie for this short period of time ?
SIGCHI Bulletin
50
July 1988 Volume 20 Number 1
(3) Interaction Styles :
How did the kids
interact with Noobie and with each other ?
(4) Attention Span :
How much time did it take
before they lost interest ?
(5) Expectations: What did the kids want or
expect to do with Noobie ?
The answers to our questions were foun d
through observing and interviewing th e
children while they were with, and were awa y
from Noobie. What follows is a summary of ou r
results :
Interaction Styles (children with each other)
Interestingly enough, what we had thought to
be drawbacks in Noobie's design were actually
instrumental in supporting cooperative
behavior among the children . One instance of
this was in the location of the screen. Many
times when pressing certain sensors, the
children were out of view of the screen .
Therefore, one child would almost alway s
watch the screen for the animal parts the y
wanted, while the others would squeeze th e
different parts .
Comprehensio n
Regardless of the children's previou s
knowledge of computers, television, o r
animation, it took no more than 1-2 minutes for
them to understand how they could us e
Noobie. After seeing the startup movie ,
generally they all expected to make animal s
with Noobie, but they were unsure of how t o
do this. One out of three groups needed an
example squeeze before they could figure out
what to do. Then all the groups were off and
squeezing .
Ease of Use
What every child liked the best about Noobie
was how they used it. They visibly enjoye d
being able to climb on Noobie, to touch and
squeeze the different parts . At times ,
however, the sensors seemed out of reac h
and/or hard for them to find because they did
not visually stand out. The sounds, on th e
other hand, were very helpful in letting th e
children know if they had pressed a sensor .
The sounds were also useful in reminding th e
children what animal part they were changing .
Another aspect that forced cooperation was
the restriction of serial input to Noobie . If the
children tried to squeeze different parts at th e
same time, the computer would simply stac k
the commands. The children soon realized
they had to take turns, or they would loose
track of what they had squeezed . In groups of
3 or more, it was quickly obvious that unles s
one child took a leadership role, the group's
interaction was purely chaotic .
Interaction Styles (children with Noobie)
One of the first things we noticed when th e
children encountered Noobie was that they
did not wonder where the keyboard or mous e
was. Only one child even looked for the
computer hardware . To the rest of them ,
Noobie was a new kind of creature . This
observation was supported by the fact that al l
of the children, except 3, talked to Noobie .
They said "hello" to Noobie, "good-bye", and
one group even kissed Noobie . On the othe r
hand, 7 children believed that Noobie was
talking to them when sounds were coming out
of the synthesizer in the softsculpture belly .
SIGCHI Bulletin
51
July 1988 Volume 20
Number 1
In terms of the children's interaction with th e
software application, NoobieSoft, they
noticeably enjoyed changing the animal parts
on the screen . Near the beginning of th e
sessions, they were asked to let us kno w
when they were finished making their animals .
In all cases, there was not one group that let us
know they were done. Most likely, this was
due in part to how easy it was to continu e
squeezing parts and changing them. No
group became attached to any of the animal s
they had made on the screen .
Attention Span
We never did find out how long it took before
boredom became apparent . In each case,
after the 15 minutes were up, all the childre n
wanted to continue to use Noobie . On a later
occasion, we were able to work with a few
children for 45 minute sessions . Each time
they did not want to leave . A more accurate
examination of attention spans should b e
done in the future, perhaps by leaving Noobi e
in one particular place (e.g., in a classroom ,
hospital, or museum) for an extended perio d
of time .
Expectations
After seeing the startup movie, all of th e
groups expected to make animals with Noobie .
It was interesting to note that the one grou p
who did not see the startup movie had no idea
what Noobie could do . In terms of the
software, all the groups ageed that it would be
" . . .great . ..fun . . .the best", if their animals o n
the screen could be animated . Even 8 out of
the 15 expected the softsculpture exterior t o
move as well. Overall, the children did not
expect to do anything more than we ourselve s
had envisioned for future research .
The Future
Marvin Minsky wrote, " . . .we ought to recogniz e
that we're still in an early era of machines with
virtually no idea of what they may become .
What 'rf some visitor from Mars had come a
billion years ago to judge the fate of early life
from watching clumps of cells that haven't
even learned to crawl? In the same way, w e
cannot grasp the range of what machines ma y
do in the future, from seeing what is on vie w
right now ." 9
I believe Noobie is most definitely at th e
clumps-of-cells stage . We need more time ,
more children, and more research, before w e
can truly realize what we have built, and what
we can build in the future . There are so many
areas we need to further explore : color,
animation, sound, visual content, new
interfaces . . .
When I think about the future of Noobies to
come, I see a lot of blue sky. But with clea r
weather and some good navigation, we ma y
find ourselves heading in the right direction .
Acknowledgements
This research took place at the MIT Media Lab ,
supported by a grant from Apple Computer .
To those people from MIT and Apple tha t
understood when I needed to build a furry
computer, I can only say thank you .
SIGCHI Bulletin
52
July 1988 Volume 20 Number 1
The design team that created Noobie : (from back left to front) Doug Milliken- structural hardwar e
design, Margaret Minsky- hardware consultant, Tom Trobough- music synthesis, Allison Druin- principa l
designer/ Noobie creator, Larry Singer- electrical hardware design, Gwen Gordon- soft sculpture design ,
Hans Peter Brondmo- software design.
References
1. W.Schramn, Big Media. Little Media
(Beverly Hills, CA : Sage,1977), p .166 .
2. Stewart Brand, The Media Lab ,
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1987), p.75 .
3. Marvin Minsky, "Position Paper about
AMT's Future," Unpublished Paper, MIT ,
1986, p .4 .
4. Richard A. Bolt, The Human Interface
(Belmont, CA : Wadsworth Incorporated ,
1984), pp.9-29.
5. Alan Kay, "Computer Software," Scientific
American, 251, No . 3 (1984), p .54 .
6. Bolt, p .1 .
7. Kay, p. 54 .
8. Patricia Mark Greenfield, Mind and Media
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press,1984), p .22.
9. Marvin Minsky, The Society of Mind (New
York: Simon and Schuster,1987), p. 30.
SIGCHI Bulletin
53
July 1988 Volume 20 Number I
