Some cognitive tools of literacy
Kieran Egan & Natalia Gajdamaschko
Faculty of Education
Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, B.C. Canada V5A 1S6
2
Introduction
For the educator interested in such topics as how to engage children in
becoming more fluently literate, Vygotsky has offered a crucially important
insight. Prior to his work––and, of course, still commonly the case for those who
have been unable to see its richer implications for education––approaches to
education generally have tended to take one or more of three general approaches.
We will sketch them very briefly below, and then indicate in what way Vygotsky's
insight into the role of cognitive tools helps us to transcend the limitations of the
three traditional approaches.
The main purpose of our paper, however, is to explore some new
implications of Vygotsky's insight, seeking to unfold it in ways that enable
educators to discover new pathways to successfully engage students in literacy.
We think, also, that this analysis of the cognitive tools that come along with
literacy provides a novel expansion of Vygotsky's insight in ways directly
applicable to education.
Three traditional conceptions of the educator's task
The first, and most ancient, conception of the educator's task is to engage
the young learner in what today we call an apprenticeship relationship with an
expert. The child would, consequently, learn by doing with an expert on hand to
guide and correct the novice. This kind of learning has been perhaps the
commonest in human cultures across the world, and was almost the exclusive
3
mode of instruction in hunter-gatherer societies. And, for the teaching of certain
kinds of skills, it remains of significant value to the educator.
The invention of writing transformed the educator's task. Increasingly, as
literacy developed, significant amounts of knowledge were stored in coded form.
Access to this store was attained only through becoming skilled in literacy.
Consequently, all literate cultures invented some formal system of education into
coding and decoding knowledge. The trouble with this task has been that at one
level it seems as though it ought to be easy to teach the principles of the decoding
system, and then all the stored knowledge would be available to the newly literate
person. But it doesn't work so easily, partly because of the difficulty many people
have in learning to become literate in even basic ways, and also because of the
complexity of what is stored in the codes of literate cultures. Not only does one
have to teach the systems of coding and decoding, but one also has the harder
task of trying to bring back to life the meanings inherent in those desiccated
codes. The size of the problem was recognized early on; Plato said that anyone
who wrote something down and assumed that another would be able to
understand just what the writer meant is a fool.
The conception of education that derived from this accumulation of coded
knowledge was one in which the task was to teach as much of certain privileged
forms of knowledge as possible––privileged in the sense that they provided the
learner with the fullest and truest account of the world. These accounts were
systematically coded into forms of knowledge which came to be known as
mathematics, history, science, literature, and so on. The mark of an educated
person was her or his elaborate familiarity with these forms of knowledge. In this
4
tradition, the mind was conceived largely as an epistemological organ; the
educated mind was recognized as such because it contained a great deal of the
most important knowledge.
The third conception of the educator’s task grew out of the recognition
that, somehow, just accumulating lots of important knowledge did not always
produce a satisfactory kind of person. Something was missing, and the element
that was missing was seen to be something to do with the fact that the mind's
development was not exclusively an epistemological matter. During the past two
centuries, it became increasingly recognized by many that the mind also seemed
to have a distinctive form of development of its own. Jean-Jacques Rousseau
forcefully expressed this idea.
Since Rousseau's time, attempts have been made to uncover and describe
this underlying process of mental development, perhaps most spectacularly in the
work of Jean Piaget. Increasingly the mind has come to be seen as a psychological
organ, with its own schedules of development that are more or less independent
of the particular forms of knowledge being learned. Educators were persuaded to
see their task, then, as supporting the development of this internal developmental
process, to further as far as possible this psychological conception of the mind's
development.
The trouble for us today is that these different conceptions of the
educator's task are not entirely compatible, and yet they all remain as having
some claim on schools and on teachers' time and activities. Also, each of the
conceptions by itself has problems. We don't intend to discuss these problems
here (but see Lamm, 1976; Egan, 1997); they have been staples of polemics
5
through the past century, with "traditionalist" educators pointing out the
shortcomings of "progressivist" educators, and those concerned about
"vocational" education deriding those "liberal" educators, and vice versa. Our
concern, rather, is with an alternative conception of the educator's task that
emerges from Vygotsky's work.
A cognitive tools approach
Two difficulties educators have had with, for example, the Piagetian model
of psychological development concern, first, just what is the model describing,
and, second, how can it be integrated into the earlier epistemological conception
of education. That is, first, are those detailed stages Piaget characterizes really
descriptions of some spontaneous mental development, or are they rather
artifacts of cultural contingencies and his research methods and assumptions,
etc? And, second, how does the Piagetian image of Formal Operations
characterize an aim of education, and how can history and literature be
accommodated to his stages? Much ingenuity has gone into answering these
questions, but the results "at the chalk face" of schools have not sustained much
confidence. The psychological conception of the educator's task has been
consistently offered with the promise that if educators just attend to the new
psychological theories about the mind, then a revolution in learning will take
place. It is a century and a half since the beginnings of this
progressivist/psychological promise, in the work of Herbert Spencer (1820-
1903), and the revolution has stubbornly refused to occur. Indeed, maybe we
6
should extend it to two hundred years in the work of Johann Pestalozzi (1746-
1827).
The alternative conception Vygotsky offers is to see the mind as a psycho-
social and cultural organ, and the cognitive tools we learn as providing the
educator with a focus of attention that can make better sense of the task before
us.
The psychological conception, exemplified by Piaget's work, and
enormously influential still in education despite the decline in Piaget's reputation
and increasingly radical criticisms of his work, still sees the educator's task as to
accommodate to some model of psychological development. Vygotsky's crucial
insight was to recognize that education should not be seen as "a superstructure
built on the foundations of psychological functions, [rather] educational activity
is seen a process radically changing these very foundations" (Kozulin, 1998, p.
16).
Kozulin goes further in elaborating this conception by pointing out that,
through formal schooling, people in developed and developing societies today,
"become exposed to a wide array of symbolic tools that not only become
indispensable as cognitive tools but to a certain extent form the very 'reality' of
the modern individual" (Kozulin, 1998, p. 17.) So instead of a the current
assumption that we have some kind of independently developing psychological
substructure to which educator's efforts must be made to conform, we may accept
the liberating insight that the “Cultural devices of behavior do not appear simply
as external habit; they comprise an inalienable part of personality itself, rooted in
7
its new relations and creating their completely new system”  (Vygotsky, 1997, Vol.
4, p 92).
“Even now,” Vygotsky continues, “many psychologists are inclined to
consider the facts of cultural changes in our behavior from their natural aspect
and think of them as facts of habit formation or as intellectual reactions directed
toward a cultural content”  (Vygotsky, 1997, Vol.4, p.92).
Consider, for example, the case of written language. According to
Vygotsky, most of the difficulties in teaching literacy come from
misunderstanding what written language is.  He remarked that neither in theory
nor in practice is written language being viewed as a “special system of symbols
and signs the mastery of which signifies a critical turning point in the whole
cultural development of the child”  (Vygotsky, 1997, Vol. 4, p.132).
Instead, researchers commonly, and mistakenly, focus on written language
as though it is a phenomenon similar in nature to habit formation (like dressing
up or forming any other mechanical habit) that could be taught “naturally”. We
see such assumptions constantly asserted in, for example, the Whole Language
movement. The WL classroom, we are told, is designed to conform with the way
children naturally learn; it is like “homes where children are allowed and
encouraged to be learners from the day they are born” (Peetboom, 1988, p. 246).
Relatedly, if asked how the child arrives at the conscious understanding of
literacy, the answer is that the child “discovers” it. “The key to whole teaching and
learning is the active involvement and enjoyment of children as they play with,
manipulate and construct language through exposure to fun, enjoyable, rich, and
meaningful literature” (Polette, 1990, p. 19). Children are viewed as accomplished
8
learners when they arrive at school and “the teacher should intrude only
minimally into this process of discovery” (Altwerger, 1994, p. 40). Herbert
Spencer’s belief that the teacher should merely facilitate the child’s own active
discovery is a central tenet of WL: “Teaching is not ‘teaching’ at all. It is an act of
guiding and appreciating” (Martin, 1990, p. 3)
In Vygotsky’s words:
[T]he basic difficulty consists in overcoming the traditional prejudice
closely linked with intellectualism, which still continues its cryptic
dominance in child psychology.  The basis of the intellectualistic view of
the process of development is the assumption that development occurs
like a logical operation.  To the question as to how conscious use of speech
develops in the child, the intellectualistic theory replies that the child
discovers the meaning of speech.  In attempts to substitute a simple logical
operation for the complex process of development, not noting that such
approach involves an enormous difficulty because it assumes as given that
which requires explanation” (Vygotsky, 1997, Vol.4, p.94).
So, Vygotsky concludes. “Where researches thus far saw either simple
discovery or a simple process of the formation of a habit, the true study discloses
a complex process of development” (Vygotsky, 1997, Vol. 4, p.95).
Approaching literacy from the Vygotskian perspective as a much more
complex cultural phenomenon, we need to recognize that literacy will bring a new
set of cognitive tools to the child.  It is not only the mechanics of writing to which
a child is being introduced in school but the whole new system of cognitive
psychological tools that literature has historically stored within itself.
9
Our purpose for the rest of this article is to try to elaborate Vygotsky's
insight by considering some of the cognitive tools that come along with literacy.
We will explore how they contribute to forming aspects of the "reality" of modern
individuals, and show how these cognitive tools provide a key to how best to
educate students within this modern world.
There is a tendency to think of cognitive tools as discrete elements that
might be deployed in thinking. Perhaps the unfortunate word "tools" encourages
this kind of somewhat mechanistic tendency. But our concern is with forms of
consciousness, or kinds of understanding, that are created by the deployment of
such tools. The complex nature of the cognitive tools of literacy, if introduced
properly in teaching, encourages not only development of logical operations but
development of imagination, self-reflection, emotions and an awareness of the
child’s own thinking. So the kinds of categories that we will explore below might
initially seem rather odd, perhaps surprising. They are not, certainly, the usual
kinds of topics one sees in psychological discussions of education. Nevertheless
they are the categories we have arrived at by taking Vygotsky's arguments
seriously and exploring their educational implications.
Some cognitive tools of literacy
The limits of reality and the extremes of experience
“The imagination of the adolescence is different from the play of the child in that
it breaks the connection with real objects.” Vygotsky (1998, p.161, Vol.5)
If you tell a typical five year old the story of Cinderella, you are not likely to
10
be asked, “What means of locomotion does the Fairy Godmother use?”  But if you
tell a typical ten year old the equally fantastic story of Superman, you will need to
explain his supernatural powers by reference to his birth on the planet Krypton
and to the different molecular structure of our Sun from that of his home star,
and so on. For the younger audience, magic is entirely unobjectionable as long as
it moves the story along.
One way to simplify what we see happening between
five and ten through such an example is to say that with literacy we begin to focus
on what we come to call reality.  It has been a part of the folk-lore of teaching that
if you want to teach students about reality you must begin with what they already
know, with what is familiar in their everyday environment, with “where they are
at.”  This is a principle that derives from a focus on students’ logico-mathematical
thinking.  But if we also consider that their thinking is not limited by logico-
mathematical capacities but also has access to the range of cognitive tools that
literacy provides to the imagination, we see something quite different from what
this principle leads us to expect.
Consider for a moment, if you want to engage students’ imaginations on a
Friday afternoon whether a unit on “The structure of your neighborhood” or one
on “Torture instruments through the ages” would do the job better.  This is not a
curriculum recommendation (!), but it exposes something that seems profoundly
at odds with the recommendation that we begin with what the student already
knows.  The resolution, of course, is that the students do already know about pain
and horror and cruelty.  That is, if we consider the cognitive tools of their
imaginative lives in what they “know,” we can save the principle.
But we should reformulate that principle if it is to offer clearer guidance to
11
teaching.  The most casual observation of what engages adolescents’ imaginations
shows that materials that deal with the limits of reality and the extremes of
experience are most engaging: the most courageous or cruelest acts, the most
bizarre and strange natural phenomena, the most wonderful and terrible events.
The Guinness Book of Records exploits this characteristic, most profitably for its
publishers, as do T.V. shows, comics, films, books, and so on, that focus on the
bizarre, the amazing, the extreme, the exotic. The initial exploration of the real
world mirrors precisely this fascination with the wonders and extremes of reality
(see, for example, Herodotus's Histories). This capacity for engaging the real
world by such dramatic tools constitutes one of the powerful means students
have to learn about reality.
So let us discard the logical principle that students’ understanding moves
along associations from the known to the unknown; clearly they can directly
engage new knowledge that is affectively engaging and deals with some extreme
or limit. In place of the logical principle we can try the reformulated one that we
should bring out some exotic or extreme feature of any topic.  This does not mean
that every class must become an eye-popping extravaganza of the bizarre, but it
does require the teacher to locate in the material something that is strange,
wonderful, or extreme.
This principle is not intended to lead to empty sensationalism, but is
designed rather to put students in touch with the boundaries, the limits, the
context of the material they are dealing with.  After all, attention to the limits and
extremes is a perfectly sensible strategy for exploring the world being exposed by
expanding literacy.  We begin sensibly by locating the limits, setting clearly in
12
place the context of our world.  The principle of “starting where the student is”
need not be mischievous as long as we remember that the student has an
imagination, and “where the student’s imagination is” can be in the valleys of the
moon as well as in their local neighborhood.  We make sense of our
neighborhood no less in terms of our imagination of the valleys of the moon than
we make sense of the valleys of the moon in terms of our understanding of our
neighborhoods.  There is, that is, constant dialectical play between what we know
and what we imagine.  If our beginning principle focuses only on what we know
in some simplistic logical sense, ignoring how that is enlightened by what we
imagine, we will unnecessarily constrict our teaching, our curricula, and students’
learning, and we will incidentally likely bore them mindless.
”What is substantially new in the development of fantasy during the
transitional age is contained precisely in the fact that the imagination of an
adolescent enters a close connection with thinking in concepts; it is
intellectualized and included in the system of intellectual activity and begins to
fulfill a completely new function in the new structure of the adolescent’s
personality.” (Vygotsky 1998, Vol.5, p.154). It is this new and closer connection of
imagination with thinking in concepts during adolescence that allows more
freedom and new ways to deal with the extremes and limits of reality.
Transcendence within reality - the heroic
 “We can say that creative images produced by an adolescent’s fantasy fulfill the
same function that an artistic work fulfills for the adults.  It is art for oneself.  It is
13
for oneself, in the mind, that poems and novels are produce, dramas and
tragedies are acted out, and elegies and sonnets are composed” (Vygotsky  1998,
Vol.5, page 165).
Adolescents are relatively powerless, but grow increasingly aware that the
society that hems them in and constrains them is one of which they are becoming
a part.  A common imaginative response to the constraints on their lives, such as
the rules of parents, of schools, of authorities of all kinds, is to associate with
those who seem best able to transcend, to overcome, the constraints that most irk
the student.  So a pop-singer or basketball star might form the object of a
“romantic association” because she or he might seem to embody the reckless
disregard of conventions or the independence and strength the students lack or
cannot express in their lives. The student associates with the confidence, self-
reliance, persistence, ingenuity, strength, or whatever, of the heroic character and
so shares the transcendence.
But it is not so much the heroic character with which the student
associates, but rather with the transcendent quality the character embodies.  So it
is not so much that we need to find heroic characters all the time, Sir Galahads or
Florence Nightingales, but we can locate transcendent qualities, such as courage,
compassion, persistence, energy, power, ingenuity, and so on, in almost anything
in the world.  It could be the tenacity of a weed on a rock face, the serene patience
of a cat, or the endurance of standing stones in a gale; almost any feature of the
world can be imbued with a transcendent quality if we conceive of it romantically.
Associating with the transcendent involves the student in imaginatively
14
inhabiting the object in some degree.
A principle that follows from this common observation is that we might
plan to encourage students to see some transcendent quality in the material being
studied with which she or he could romantically associate.  The trick is to see how
one can easily “heroize” anything: that discarded styrofoam cup, instead of being
conceived simply as environmentally-destructive litter, can be conceived, if only
for a moment, as the product of immense ingenuity and the patient work of
chemists over centuries; we can hold our fingers within millimeters of scalding
liquids and not be burned or even discomforted.  For a moment we can see it as
an object of wonder.  This capacity to highlight anything and hold it in a
transcendent light is something we can turn on anything at anytime.  It isn’t
exactly Wordsworth’s “visionary gleam” but is perhaps a little sibling of it that the
teacher can call upon to stimulate imaginative engagement with any material.
Image and concept
 “A real concept is an image of an objective thing in its complexity” (Vygotsky,
1997, Vol.4, p.53).
Bringing the cognitive tools of the literate imagination to the fore in
thinking about education raises the question of the role of affective images in
teaching.  We have inherited ideas and practices of education that give pride of
place to the disembedded concept and seem to have neglected or forgotten what
all the most powerful communicative media in our cultural history make plain to
us––that the affective image is crucial in communicating meaning and
15
significance.
Certainly affective images are not necessary to all imaginative activity.  We
can define imagination as the capacity to think of things as other than they are, or
of things as possibly being so (White, 1990) or even as “the subjunctive mood”
(Sutton-Smith, 1988).  But however we define it, it is clear that somehow
significant to imaginative activity is thinking and feeling using mental images.
The kinds of images that come along with literacy are perhaps not so obviously
new in our experience, but features of them are clearly distinct from those of
childhood.
The images that seem to have most power are those we generate ourselves
from words.  Films, for example, rarely capture the emotional vividness and force
of literature.  This is to emphasize that we are not suggesting that there is a need
for more visual illustration of materials, but rather that the teacher be more
hospitable to the mental images evoked by any topic.  In planning teaching, to
draw a principle from this observation, we should dwell not just on the concepts
that are important, but give at least equal time to reflecting on the images that are
a part of it.  It is the images that can vividly carry the concepts most richly to the
students’ understanding.  The image can carry the imagination to inhabit in some
sense the object of our study and inquiry.  By such means mathematics and
physics, history and auto-mechanics are conceived not as external things that the
student learns facts about but become a part of the student; students thus learn
that they are mathematical, historical, mechanical creatures.
So, for example, in teaching poetry this principle will lead us to attend to
images not only as things to be observed in the mind’s eye and understood in the
16
overall structure of the poem, but also as things the student can inhabit or get
inside of, so to speak.  Poetry, then, is not something we do, but something we
are.  Perhaps this principle is more urgent for the science or the mathematics
teacher, where the image is more commonly neglected, but, even though images
might be the focus of much poetry teaching, the affective power that can come
from inhabiting them could probably be more frequently drawn upon.  If teaching
William Blake’s The Tiger, one can encourage the students to evoke as vividly as
they can “the forests of the night” and then the “Tiger! Tiger! burning bright”
within them.  What are the students’ forests of the night - the dread places of
their imaginations?  On a re-reading, ask them to be the burning tiger, being
violently constructed piece by piece; to feel the distant deeps that become the fire
in their eyes, their massive pounding heart, the deadly terrors of their brain.  On
a further re-reading, ask them to build an image of the maker of this deadly
terror; twisting sinews in the awful factory with its inconceivable hammer,
chains, furnace, and anvil, then after constructing this demonic horror perhaps
turning to compose the Lamb.  The images will likely not be precise quasi-
pictures, so much as intimations of power, terror, immensity in the fragmented,
flashing images Blake uses to express a very particular kind of awe and wonder.
Vygotsky argues that “the false interpretation of fantasy consists in the fact
that is it considered from one aspect alone, as a function connected with
emotional life, with a life of drives and attitudes; the other aspect, related to
intellectual life, remains in shadow. “   (Vygotsky, 1998, Vol. 5, p. 153). Vygotsky
was warning us about the possibility of making a mistake and disconnecting
concept and image in education.  He attributed this mistake to the traditional
17
psychology point of view on how concepts develop: “From formal logic,
traditional psychology adopted the idea of the concept as an abstract mental
construct extremely remote from all the wealth of concrete reality” (Vygotsky,
1997, Vol.4, p.53). In such a tradition, thinking about concepts is viewed as
removed from concrete reality as a result of the process of generalizing and
abstracting from concrete traits of reality.  Highly abstract concepts become
increasingly “poorer, scant and narrow” from the point of view of content.
Vygotsky argues that traditional psychology made a mistake in describing
concept development in what he called a “mechanical way”:
Not without the reason are such concepts frequently termed empty
abstracts.  Others have said that concepts arise in the process of castrating
reality.  Concrete, diverse phenomena must lose their traits one after the
other in course that a concept might be formed.  Actually what arises is a
dry and empty abstraction in which the diverse, full-blooded reality is
narrowed and impoverished by logical thought.  This is the source of the
celebrated word of Goethe:  ‘Grey is every theory and eternally green is the
golden tree of life’.
This dry, empty, gray abstraction inevitably strives to reduce
content to zero because the more general, the more empty the concept
becomes.  Impoverishing the content is done from fateful necessity, and
for this reason, proceeding to develop the teaching of concepts on the
grounds of formal logic, presented thinking in concepts as the system of
thinking that was the poorest, scantiest, and emptiest” (Vygotsky, 1997,
Vol.4, p.53).
18
The true nature of concepts must be viewed in their inseparable
connection to the image: “A real concept is an image of an objective thing
in its complexity. Only when we recognize the thing in all its connection
and relation, only when this diversity is synthesized in a word, in an
integral image through the multitude of determinations, do we develop a
concept” (Vygotsky, 1997, Vol.4, p.53).
Idealism and revolt
“A new active persona enters the drama of development, a new, qualitatively
unique factor––the personality of adolescent himself  (Vygotsky, 1998, Vol.5.
p.180).
Increasingly during adolescence, students recognize that the world that
constrains them is also their inheritance.  It is a period of adjustments, from
powerlessness to growing independence and power.  Inevitably students will
sometimes feel that the adult world is not according them appropriate
independence and power; parents are unjustly restrictive, schools are excessively
restraining, society at large treats them too inconsiderately.  Typically, students
respond with revolt, even if only in the muted form of sulking reluctance to
conform or quiet resistance.  More visibly it takes the forms of flaunting styles of
hair, clothing, music and dancing, that confront adult conventions and values.
It is the world’s failure to live up to some ideal that justifies the revolt, in
the student’s eyes.  The sense of the ideal world typically shifts unstably during
19
these years, as does students’ views of their ideal selves.  We see them trying on
roles; the serene lady, the rebel, the fashion plate or dandy, the hoyden, the
macho, the tease, the socialite, the cool dude, the iceberg, the friendly innocent,
and so on.  These are reflections of roles played out more fantastically in the
imagination––the waster of cities, the film-star beloved of millions, the
swashbuckling savior of nations, the preserver of the planet from polluters, and
so on.
We routinely observe, and no doubt remember, this characteristic of
adolescence.  But how do we extract from it a principle for more imaginative
teaching?  It is a cliché that adolescents develop varied forms of revolt and begin
to fashion ideals, and that these two are connected.  At the simplest level,
material to be learned can be given a heightened “romantic” power of
engagement by being shown in a context of revolt against unjust or inadequate
and constraining conventions.
Even if it is just punctuation and paragraphing that we want to teach, we
might see how it can be made more meaningful and engaging if we see these as
revolts against constraining conventions in early manuscripts.  So we might see
their introduction by revolutionary figures like Hugh of St. Victor (Illich, 1993)
whose daring new ideas made texts easier to decipher and read.  What this
suggests in general is the desirability of re-embedding knowledge we want
students to learn in the emotional and imaginatively reconstructed reality of
people’s lives from which typical textbooks usually rip it. The idealism and
readiness to associate with those who revolt against unjust constraints is another
cognitive tools that comes along with this curious tradition of literacy.
20
Details, details
“Self-control and the principals and means of this control do not differ basically
from control over the environment . . . [T]he bare hand and the mind taken in
themselves do not mean much––the deed is done with tools and auxiliary means”
(Vygotsky, 1997, Vol. 4, p.218).
The cognitive tool we saw at work in the engagement with the extremes of
reality represents one strategy newly literate students may choose to explore the
world.  It is reflected at the other end of the scale by another strategy that we see
at work in students’ collections or obsessive hobbies.  By discovering everything
about something, one can gain further intellectual security.  The typical profile of
a hobby or collection is that it gets seriously underway at about the time literacy
becomes internalized––about seven or eight in our culture––peaks at about
eleven or twelve, and begins to lose energy at about fifteen.
Students may collect almost anything; ornamental spoons, memorabilia of
a favorite pop-singer––records and tapes and C.D.s, tour T-shirts, pictures,
etc.––hockey cards, dolls in national dresses, comic sets, beer bottle caps, the
books of some author in a uniform edition, stones or shells, leaves, illustrations of
costumes through the ages, or whatever.  The object of the collecting instinct or
the hobby seems arbitrary, what matters is the intellectual control of some
feature of reality and the intellectual security it can provide.
This urge to master something in exhaustive detail is perhaps the most
21
powerful learning drive that one sees in the typical adolescent.  It is a drive
exploited more by commercial interests than by educators, however, and seems
largely ignored by educational research.  But how can this observation lead to a
principle for more imaginatively engaging teaching and learning?  Obviously any
material dealt with in schools can become a focus for detailed work.  The trick
here seems to be two-fold.  First, one of the other principles needs to be deployed
to engage students with a particular topic and, second, the teacher needs to focus
on material within the topic that is exhaustible.  Simply indicating material that
might be studied in greater detail does not meet either of these two criteria.
What is needed to meet the second criterion is material about which the student
can learn everything, or at least learn securely what the scale of the topic is.  Even
if the students cannot learn everything, they can learn what would have to be
known to exhaust the topic––as the collector of hockey cards may not have all of
a set but knows which further cards comprise the whole set.
Humanizing knowledge
“We must not forget for a moment that both knowing the nature and knowing
personality is done with the help of understanding other people, understanding
those around us, understanding social experiences”  (Vygotsky, 1997, Vol.4, p.
50).
As any journalist knows, information can be made more engaging if given
a “human interest” angle.  That is, knowledge seen through, or by means of,
22
human emotions, intentions, hopes, fears, and so on, is not only more directly
comprehensible but is also more meaningful and engaging than if presented
disembedded from its human source.  Every teacher knows how the illustrative
anecdote, particularly if it involves extremes of human endurance or foresight or
ingenuity or compassion or suffering, grabs students’ attention.  Can we
generalize from this widely recognized practice, seeing why it is so engaging of
students’ imaginations and develop a more widely applicable principle? The
ability to see text not merely as an object but as a product of another human
mind, provides a further cognitive tools that comes along with literacy.
The structure of typical textbooks with neatly organized and segmented
knowledge tends to support the belief that the textbook or the encyclopaedia
exhibits the ideal form of knowledge.  This bizarre idea is no doubt one of the
more peculiar consequences of literacy.  In the face of this seemingly unconscious
assumption it is necessary to emphasize constantly in education that books do
not contain knowledge.  Books contain symbolic codes, which serve as external
mnemonics for knowledge.  Knowledge exists only in human minds, and in minds
its meaning derives from how it connects with our hopes, fears, and intentions,
and with our imaginative lives.
In emphasizing the difference between inert symbolic codes in books and
living knowledge in human minds, we want to draw attention to something
significant, and often neglected, about teaching.  The point is not to get the
symbolic codes as they exist in books into the students’ minds.  We can of course
do that––training students to be rather ineffective ‘copies’ of books.  Rather, the
teaching task is to reconstitute the inert symbolic code into living human
23
knowledge.  The point about knowledge living seems crucial.  Knowledge in our
minds is a function of the organization of our living organism; it is not some
interchangeable code we can pick up, like computer data.
The educational task, then, involves the resuscitation of knowledge from
its suspended animation in symbolic codes.  The task is to convert, re-animate,
transmute the symbolic codes into living human knowledge in students’ minds.
This is the challenge whether the knowledge is about earthworms or is a literary
text.  The codes do not carry guarantees of meaning.  The instrument best able to
ensure the transformation from codes to living knowledge is the imagination.
The student can most easily resuscitate knowledge if they learn it in the human
context in which it was first generated or discovered.
Vygotsky views knowledge as a cognitive and semiotic tool that serves as a
means of mediation for human activities.  From this point of view, the emphasis
on the mediator, without respect to the fact that knowledge is a tool for
development and mastery of cultural behavior, leads to an inadequate approach
to education. As Vygotsky reminds us constantly through his writing, knowledge
should be viewed as serving two purposes––mediating human activity, on the
one hand, and mediating development of higher psychological processes, on the
other:
We must not forget for a moment that both knowing nature and knowing
personality is done with the help of understanding other people,
understanding those around us, understanding social experiences.  Speech
cannot be separated from understanding.  This inseparability of speech
and understanding is manifested identically in both the social use of
24
language as a means of communication and in its individual use as a
means of thinking (Vygotsky, 1997, Vol.4, p.50).
The narrative mind
Focus on the cognitive tools of imagination brings to the fore, as has been
noted already, the emotions.  The emotions in turn are not subject to neat
categorization, but seem to be expressible only in narratives.  The main narrative
we have for clearly conveying emotional meaning is the story:  “man is in his
actions and practice, as well as in his fictions, essentially a story-telling animal”
(MacIntyre, 1981, p.201).  Any event or behavior or information “becomes
intelligible by finding its place in a narrative” (MacIntyre, 1981, p.196.)  As
Barbara Hardy famously put it:  “We dream in narrative, daydream in narrative,
remember, anticipate, hope, despair, believe, doubt, plan, revise, criticize,
construct, gossip, learn, hate and live by narrative” (1968, p.5).  The focus on the
imagination leads to the bold but entirely plausible claim that “the mind is . . . a
narrative concern” (Sutton-Smith, 1988, p.22).
Jerome Bruner’s Actual Minds, Possible Worlds (1986) has helped
popularize within educational research a conception of the mind that gives
renewed prominence to the role of narrative in our ways of making sense of the
world and of experience.  The conception of the mind as, in whatever degree, “a
narrative concern” is supported by a wealth of modern research, from Bartlett’s
celebrated studies on memory (1932), to Bransford’s and associates’ (1972, 1975)
25
and Rumelhart’s (1975) work in the 1970s, to the recent and current large scale
focus on scripts, schemata, and narratives.
The capacity to increasingly think of the world and experience in narrative
terms represents a further cognitive tool that comes along with literacy. Narrative
provides us with one of the main tools for orienting our emotions to the contents
of our narrative, and consequently gives us the power to make increasingly
complex meaning of our lives and of the world around us. The narratives that
come along with literacy as different from the stories of our "oral" childhood in
that they incorporate many of the cognitive tools we have mentioned earlier.
Conclusion
What we have tried to do, in a somewhat preliminary way, in this paper is
unfold some of the cognitive tools that are embedded within the larger cognitive
tools of literacy. So we may see literate students' minds as routinely deploying
such tools as a ready engagement with the limits of reality and the extremes of
experience, and a desire for a sense of transcendence within reality, which finds
one exemplar in the interest in the heroic, and a complex construction of mental
images and concepts, and an emotional response to forms of idealism that lead to
a tendency to revolt against conventions, and a desire to exhaustively explore
something in great detail, and an easy engagement with knowledge by means of
its human and emotional contexts, and a disposition to make sense of the world
and experience in narrative terms.
26
Now, of course, these are qualities of our cognitive and emotional lives
about which the word 'tool" is hardly ideal. In what sense can we meaningfully
talk of a desire as a tool? Well, what we see develop with literacy are certain set
dispositions of minds, certain characteristic ways of engaging and being engaged
by the world and experience. We do not have a very good vocabulary to talk about
such characteristics of the mind. And what vocabulary we have has been largely
formed in the context of views of the mind that are inhospitable to Vygotsky's
ideas. We may call them mediators––things we learn that we then use to make
richer sense. It may be that the metaphoric extension of the word "tool" is as good
as we can find. One of their most distinctive features, after all, is that they do for
our minds something like what tools do for our bodies. They extend our powers.
References
Altwerger, Bess. (1994). In Art Levine. “The great debate revisited.” Atlantic
Monthly, 38-44.
Bartlett, F.C.  (1932). Remembering.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bransford, J.D., & Johnson, M.V.  (1972). Contextual prerequisites for
understanding: Some investigations of comprehension and recall. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior
Bransford, J.D., & McCarrell, N.S.  (1975).  A sketch of a cognitive approach to
comprehension: Some thoughts about understanding what it means to
comprehend. In P.N. Johnson-Laird and P.C. Watson (eds.), Thinking:
Readings in cognitive science. Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press.
27
Bruner, Jerome.  (1986).  Actual minds, possible worlds.  Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Egan, Kieran.  (1997).  The educated mind: How cognitive tools shape our
understanding.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hardy, Barbara.  (1968).  Towards a poetics of fiction:  An approach through
narrative.  Novel, 2, 5-14.
Illich, Ivan.  (1993).  Hugh of St. Victor.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kozulin,   Alex (1998).  Psychological tools : a sociocultural approach to
education. Cambridge,    Mass., Harvard University Press.
Lamm, Zvi. (1976). Conflicting Theories of Instruction [CHECK1]: Berkeley, CA:
McCutcheon.
MacIntyre, Alasdair.  (1981).  After virtue.  Notre Dame, IN:  University of Notre
Dame Press.
Martin, Bill Jr. (1990). “An overview of a humanistic languge reading program.”
In Nancy Polette, Whole language in action. O’Fallon, MO: Book Lures,
Inc.
Peetoom, Adrian. (1988). “Publisher’s Afterword,” in Jane Bookwill and Paulette
Whitman, Moving on: A whole language sourcebook for Grades three and
four. Toronto: Scholastic-TAB.
Polette, Nancy. (1990). Whole language in action. O’Fallan, MO: Book Lures, Inc.
Rumelhart, D.E.  (1975).  Notes on a schema for stories.  In D.G. Bobrow and
A.M. Collins (eds.), Representation and understanding. New York:
Academic Press.
28
Sutton-Smith, Brian.  (1988).  In search of the imagination.  In K. Egan & D.
Nadaner (Eds.), Imagination and education.  New York:  Teachers College
Press; Milton Keynes:  Open University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1987). The Collected Works of L.S. Vygotsky. Reiber, R. W., &
Carton, A. S. (Eds.). New York: Plenum. Volume 4: The History of the
Development of Higher Mental Functions (1997) Robert W. Rieber, Marie
J. Hall, Joseph Glick (Eds). Volume 5: Child Psychology (1998). Robert W.
Rieber, Marie J. Hall (Eds.)
White, Alan R.  (1990).  The language of imagination.  Oxford:  Blackwell.
