HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION, 1989, Volume 4, pp. 67-94 
Copyright O 1989, Lawrence Erlbaurn Associates, Inc. 
The SonicFinder: An Interface That 
Uses Auditory Icons 
William W. Gaver 
University of California, Sun Diego, and 
Apple Computer Inc. 
ABSTRACT 
The appropriate use of nonspeech sounds has the potential to add a great 
deal to the functionality of computer interfaces. Sound is a largely unexploited 
medium of output, even though it plays an integral role in our everyday 
encounters with the world, a role that is complementary to vision. Sound 
should be used in computers as it is in the world, where it conveys information 
about the nature of sound-producing events. Such a strategy leads to auditory 
icons, which are everyday sounds meant to convey information about 
computer events by analogy with everyday events. Auditory icons are an 
intuitively accessible way to use sound to provide multidimensional, orga- 
nized information to users. 
These ideas are instantiated in the ~onicFinder,' which is an auditory 
interface I developed at Apple Computer, Inc. In this interface, information 
is conveyed using auditory icons as well as standard graphical feedback. I 
discuss how events are mapped to auditory icons in the SonicFinder, and 
illustrate how sound is used by describing a typical interaction with this 
interface. 
Two major gains are associated with using sound in this interface: an 
increase in direct engagement with the model world of the computer and an 
Author's present address: William W .  Gaver, Rank Xerox Cambridge EuroPARC, 
Ravenscroft House, 61 Regent Street, Cambridge CB2 IAB, England. 
' The SonicFinder, Finder Sounds, Finder, and SoundManager are trademarks of Apple 
Computer, Inc. As to SonicFinder, copyright 1987, 1988, 1989 by Apple Computer, Inc. 
GAVER 
CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. WHY USE SOUND? 
2.1. Because It's There . . . 
2.2. We Use Sound in Everyday Life 
2.3. Listening Gomflements Looking 
3. EVERYDAY LISTENING AND AUDITORY ICONS 
3.1. Everyday Listening 
3.2. Auditory Icons 
4. THE SONICFINDER 
4.1. Sound-Producing Events in the Sonidinder 
4.2. A TypicaI Interaction: Dragging a File to the Trashcan 
5. ASSESSING THE SONICFINDER 
6. WHAT MAKES A DISPLAY INTUITIVELY ACCESSIBLE? 
6.1. Conceptual and Perceptual Mappings. 
6.2. Types of Perceptual Mapping 
6.3. Beyond Literal Mappings: Sound Effects and Source Metaphors 
7. FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
added flexibility for users in getting information about that world. These 
advantages seem to be due to the iconic nature of the mappings used between 
sound and the information it is to convey. I discuss sound effects and source 
metaphors as methods of extending auditory icons beyond the limitations 
implied by literal mappings, and I speculate on future directions for such 
interfaces. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Imagine what life would be like without sound. Many events would go 
unnoticed - some pleasurable, like birds chirping in nearby trees; some 
useful, like hearing a person entering the room behind you; and some crucial, 
like hearing a car approach as you cross a street. If given the choice, most of 
us would prefer to hear the world around us. Why should it be any different 
for the world of the computer? 
The appropriate use of nonspeech sounds has the potential to add a great 
deal to the functionality of computer interfaces. Just as there are occasions in 
which pictorial displays (i.e., icons, windows, etc.) can convey information 
more concisely and intuitively to users than writing, so may there be 
situations in which sounds can provide information better than speech or 
visual displays. In Gaver (1986), I outlined what seemed to be a promising 
approach to using sound in the interface. In particular, I advanced a strategy 
for developing auditory icons, which are everyday sounds meant to convey 
information about events in the computer by analogy with everyday events. In 
this article I elaborate and update that argument and show how it may be 
applied by describing the SonicFinder, an auditory interface I developed at 
Apple Computer, Inc. This interface demonstrates a number of the charac- 
teristics of auditory icons that make them an appealing addition to the 
interface designer's repertoire, and raises a number of issues about their use 
in the future. 
Before describing the SonicFinder, I present three arguments for why 
sound should play an integral role in computer interfaces. Then I briefly 
discuss the idea of auditory icons and the theoretical perspective upon which 
this strategy is based. After this foundation is laid, I describe the SonicFinder 
in some detail and illustrate the ways sounds are used in this interface by 
examining a typical interaction with it. Finally, I discuss why the mappings 
used in this interface seem intuitively obvious and speculate about the future 
of auditory interfaces. 
2. WHY USE SOUND? 
Until recently, the use of sound in the interface has been largely confined 
to providing auditory alerts to users. Many people find these bleeps and 
buzzes distracting and irritating. If this is the case, why should sound play a 
larger role in the interface? 
2.1. Because It's There . . . 
Buxton (1986) speculated that if anthropologists of the distant future were 
to find a computer system of the 1980s, they would conclude (among other 
things) that humans must have had a "low-fin ear. Current uses of sound are 
extremely limited in the functions sound perform and in the manipulations of 
sound that are employed. Clearly, a good first reason to use sound is simply 
because it is there. Audition represents another sensory modality for people, 
one that has not been exploited in today's visually oriented interfaces. 
Not only is hearing "theren in most people, but sound is increasingly "theren 
in computers as well. The greater processing speeds and memory capabilities 
of today's machines enable the sorts of sound production and manipulation 
that used to require specialized hardware and software found only in major 
research laboratories. The new generations of personal computers make fairly 
sophisticated uses of sound practical: Indeed, the auditory interface described 
in this article can be run on any of the Macintosh family. Of at least equal 
importance for the future of sophisticated auditory interfaces is the advent of 
GAVER 
the Musical Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI), the standardized protocol 
for communication between computers and more specialized digital music 
devices (Loy, 1985). Using MIDI to control external signal-processing 
equipment allows designers to overcome the signal-processing limitations of 
current personal computers. 
In summary, sound should be used in the interface because hearing is a 
largely untapped modality for people and because sound production is a 
seldom-exploited resource of computers. However, sound is more than just an 
available resource. Sound plays an integral role in our everyday encounters 
with the world, one that is complementary with vision. It is in understanding 
this role that the most compelling reasons for using sound become clear. 
2.2. We Use Sound in Everyday Life 
The promise of nonspeech audio as a display medium stems partly from the 
fact that most of us rely on sound for information in our everyday lives. We 
listen to the thunk of a car door to find out if it has closed properly, to the 
gurgle of pouring liquid to know if a container is almost full, and to traffic 
noises to assess the danger of crossing a street. Mechanics listen to automobile 
engines, and doctors to heartbeats, both with the aim of getting information 
about mechanisms that are not visually accessible. 
Many people also listen to their computers to get information about 
mechanisms that cannot be seen. They listen to their disk drives to find out 
whether data is being accessed properly, to their printers so they know 
whether a misfeed must be corrected, and to their modems to find out whether 
a proper connection has been achieved. It is a paradox of the computer age 
that although sound has been designed out of most systems, people rely a great 
deal on those sounds that remgin. 
In proposing sound as a display medium, the notion is that we can start 
putting useful sounds back into computers. But instead of being accidental 
results of hardware engineering, such sounds can be explicitly designed to be 
useful. Understanding the relations between sound and vision can help 
explain why this is a worthwhile endeavor, as well as the situations in which 
audio will be a particularly valuable addition to graphics. 
2.3. Listening Complements Looking 
Most people both listen to and look at the world. The reason for this is not 
only that using both senses increases the bandwidth of available information, 
but because sound and vision are complementary modes of information. A 
simple way to contrast listening and looking is to say that although sound 
SONICFINDER 
Figure I .  Complementary modes of sound and vision. 
SOUND 
VISIOP 
TIME 
SPACE 
Sound exists &time. 
Good for display of 
changing events. 
Available for a limited 
time. 
Visual objects exist over time. 
Good for display of 
static objects. 
Can be sampled over 
time. 
Sound exists over space. 
Need not face source. 
A limited number 
of messages can be 
displayed at once. 
Visual objects exist &space. 
Must face source. 
Messages can be spatially 
distributed. 
exists in time and over space, vision exists in space and over time (see Figure 
1). 
Sound exists in time: It is an inherently transient phenomenon. Sounds 
have a beginning and an end, and most sounds are brief enough that both are 
experienced. Most visual objects, on the other hand, tend to persist: Their 
creation and destruction are only occasionally witnessed. This means that 
sounds are well suited for conveying information about changing events (e.g., 
closing doors, pouring liquids, and approaching cars), and vision for infor- 
mation about relatively stable objects. Conversely, although auditory infor- 
mation is usually available for a limited amount of time, visual information is 
usually available for repeated sampling (I might not hear a sound again, but 
I can look at an object more than once). Interactions with visual objects are 
more flexible over time, but they also tend to produce more clutter than 
auditory events. 
Vision exists in space: In order to take advantage of visual information, one 
must look in the appropriate direction. Sounds may be heard from all around: 
One does not have to face a source of sound to listen to it. This implies that 
sound can convey information to users despite their orientation, whereas 
visual information depends on users' directed attention. On the other hand, 
many visual items can be displayed simultaneously in different locations. 
There is probably a much lower limit to the number of auditory messages that 
can be presented at once. 
Sound and vision are not only complementary informational media, they 
also convey different sorts of information. Vision largely depends on the 
reflection of light from surfaces, whereas sound is caused by vibrating 
materials. So sound can provide information that vision cannot, for instance 
about occluded events or the internal mechanisms of complex objects. We can 
7 2 
GAVER 
hear events in the next room, or listen to automobile engines, even if we 
- 
cannot see them. In the interface, it may often be more appropriate to use 
sound in providing information about background processing or events in 
occluded windows than to invent visual metaphors. 
In general, auditory displays have the potential to convey information that 
is difficult or awkward to display graphically. Sound can provide information 
about events that may not be visually attended, and about events that are 
obscured or difficult to visualize. Auditory information can be redundant with 
visual information, so that the strengths of each mode can be exploited. Using 
sound can help reduce the visual clutter of current graphic interfaces by 
providing an alternative means for information presentation. Finally, auditory 
interfaces may help make the increasingly spatial interfaces of current systems 
accessible to visually impaired users (see Edwards, this issue). The comple- 
mentary nature of sound and vision is the last - and I believe most powerful - 
reason for creating auditory interfaces. 
3. EVERYDAY LISTENING AND AUDITORY ICONS 
If sounds are to be used in the interface, they should be used much as they 
are in our everyday lives. Other methods for creating auditory displays that 
have been suggested (Blattner et al., this issue; Bly, 1982; Edwards, this issue; 
Mansur, Blattner, &Joy, 1985; Mezrich, Frysinger, & Slivjanovski, 1984) 
are based on using variations of sounds (e.g., in pitch, loudness, or timbre) to 
difierentiate messages. These systems are often quite promising, but mapping 
information about computer events to musical variations is usually somewhat 
arbitrary. In my view, it is better when possible to map the attributes of 
computer events to those of everyday sound-producing events. This is the 
philosophy behind auditory icons, which convey multidimensional informa- 
tion about computer events by analogy with everyday events. To understand 
why I think this strategy is likely to be a useful one, consider how people listen 
to the world in their everyday lives. 
3.1. Everyday Listening 
Traditional accounts of the psychology of hearing approach sound in one of 
three ways: in terms of sound's effects on the auditory system, with the aim of 
explaining music, or in order to measure the effects of environmental noise. 
Usually sounds are analyzed with respect to the physical attributes of the 
sound wave, which correspond fairly well to the fundamental attributes of 
music. Thus, the literature is fd of accounts of pitch and loudness perception, 
the perceptual dimensions of timbre, and the relative effects of octave 
equivalence and pitch contour on the recognition of tunes. As psychologists, 
we tend to talk about sound as if it were always either music or noise. 
But such an understanding does not seem satisfactory in explaining how we 
use sounds in our everyday lives. We do not hear the pitch of closing doors; 
instead we are more likely to hear their size, the materials from which they are 
made, and the force used to shut them. We do not hear the fluctuations of 
loudness in the sounds made by pouring liquids, but instead whether the 
liquid is viscous or fluid, how fast it is pouring, and how full the receptacle is. 
In general, we do not seem to hear sounds, but instead sources of sound. 
The experience of hearing sounds per se is one of musical listening, whereas 
that of hearing attributes of sound-producing events is one of everyday 
listening. Although much more is known about musical listening than 
everyday listening, several studies have explored the experience of everyday 
listening. For instance, Vanderveer (1979) played recorded tokens of 30 
common sounds such as clapping and tearing paper to subjects in a free 
identification task. She found that subjects tended to identify the sounds in 
terms of  he objects and events that caused them, describing their sensory 
qualities only when they could not identify the source events. Ballas and his 
colleagues (Ballas, Dick, & Groshek, 1987; Ballas & Howard, 1987; Ballas & 
Sliwinski, 1986) studied ambiguous environmental sounds: They found that 
the time it takes to identify a sound depends on the number of possible sources 
it might have. Finally, in a protocol study I ran (Gaver, 1988), subjects were 
asked to describe tokens of 17 everyday sounds; like Vanderveer (1979) I 
found that these descriptions were of sources and that misidentifications were 
based on similarities among source events. In general, these studies all 
support the reality of everyday listening as an experience of sound sources, 
quite distinct from the experience of sounds per se. 
Note that this perspective does not imply a distinction between everyday 
and musical sounds, but between the experiences of everyday and musical 
listening. It is possible to listen to most sounds as one does to musical notes - 
to attend to their pitch, loudness, and timbre-and to listen to the ambient 
auditory environment as one does to works of music, attending to rhythms, 
pitch contours, and the like. Conversely, often one listens to musical pieces 
with the aim of discovering the instruments involved, or how many per- 
formers there are. Strictly speaking, only the distinction between the two 
kinds of experience is valid. 
Nonetheless, I refer to everyday and musical sounds in the discussions that 
follow. Although we can usually experience a given sound in terms of its 
source or in terms of the properties of the sound itself, many sounds encourage 
one form of listening more than the other. We seem more likely to notice pitch 
when listening to a continuous, unchanging, synthesized tone, for instance, 
than when hearing the dynamically changing sound produced by shattering 
glass. Noticing the source of the shattering sound, on the other hand, seems 
GAVER 
Fipre 2. Attributes of everyday listening. 
Perceptual Attributes 
Effects on Soundwave 
Material 
Restoring Force 
(e.g., hardness, tension) 
Density 
Damping 
Homogeneity 
Overall Frequency 
Frequency 
Frequency dependent amplitude functions of 
partials; frequency 
Complex effects on spectrum and amplitude 
function 
Configuration 
Shape 
Spectral pattern, frequency 
Size 
Bandwidth, frequency 
Resonating Cavities 
Changes amplitudes of partials; may be 
primary determinant of sound quality 
Interaction 
Type (e.g., hitting, scraping) 
Overall amplitude function, spectrum 
Force 
Bandwidth, amplitude 
much more compelling than that of the synthesized sound. In distinguishing 
everyday and musical sounds, the emphasis should be on the kind of 
experience a given sound affords, whether it is one of the sound itself or of its 
source. In terms of the interface, the distinction is one of the dimensions of 
sound that are used to represent data. 
Sound is produced by the interaction of materials at a location in an 
environment. If the dimensions of musical listening correspond to funda- 
mental physical attributes of the sound, the attributes of everyday listening 
correspond to the attributes of the source. People may be expected to listen for 
auditory information regarding the type, force, and duration of interactions; 
the type, size, and configuration of materials; and the size and kind of 
environment in which sound-producing events take place. Figure 2 contains a 
list of the kinds of attributes I hypothesize are important for everyday 
listening, and suggests the attributes of the soundwave that might be 
responsible for their perception. This figure is meant as an alternative to the 
traditional lists of sound attributes such as pitch and loudness, and may be 
useful in suggesting the kinds of attributes that can be manipulated to create 
auditory icons. 
Several studies have explored how sound conveys information about the 
physical characteristics of sound sources. Warren and Verbrugge (1984) 
showed that the perceptual distinction between breaking and bouncing bottles 
depends on temporal patterning of spectrally identical sounds. Freed and 
Martins (1986) studied the perception of mallet hardness from the sounds of 
struck objects. They identified a number of acoustic correlates to mallet 
hardness that seem to determine a listener's perception of this event. Finally, 
I studied (Gaver, 1988) how people hear the material and length of struck 
wood and metal bars. This work suggests the attributes and acoustic correlates 
of sonic events shown in Figure 2. 
An important property of everyday sounds is that the information they 
convey is multidimensional and organized. A single sound can potentially 
provide information about many different attributes of its source. For 
example, the sound of a slamming door might provide information about the 
size and material of the door, the force with which it was shut, and perhaps the 
size of the room in which the door is closed. These attributes are organized 
simply because sound-producing events have a structure. Attributes like size, 
weight, and material apply to the door, whereas others, like force, type, and 
duration, apply to the kind of interaction. Different sounds might be produced 
by different interactions involving the same door, or by different doors 
undergoing the same kind of interaction. Sonic events can thus be distin- 
guished along some dimensions while remaining the same along others. This 
fact makes everyday sounds particularly suitable for mapping to events in the 
computer. 
3.2. Auditory Icons 
Everyday listening, then, is the auditory perception of the attributes of 
everyday events. Auditory icons exploit people's tendencies to listen to sources 
by mapping attributes of everyday sound-producing events to attributes of the 
model world of the computer. In the SonicFinder, for instance, selecting a file 
makes the sound of an object being tapped. The type of file is indicated by the 
material of the object, and the size of the file by the size of the struck object. 
Auditory icons of this sort are similar to visual icons in that both rely on an 
analogy between the everyday world and the model world of the computer. 
The selection sound, for instance, is based on an analogy between the event 
in the computer - selecting a file - and an everyday event - tapping an object. 
The mappings between other attributes of the computer and everyday events 
are clear once this basic analogy is understood. Because they exploit the power 
of such organizing metaphors, auditory icons may be expected to be as easily 
learned by users as visual icons are. In addition, because listening and looking 
provide complementary kinds of information, auditory icons can be created 
that will both complement and supplement visual icons. 
In particular, it should be possible to create auditory icons that represent 
the objects and actions of the computer world in an intuitive way, simply by 
mapping them to the objects and interactions of everyday sound-producing 
events. The appropriate mappings should be obvious: Objedts in the com- 
76 
GAVER 
puter world should be represented by the objects involved in sound-producing 
events; actions by the interactions that cause sound; and attributes of the 
system environment (e.g., processing load or available memory) by attributes 
of the sonic environment (e.g., reverberation time). When auditory icons are 
based on such analogies, the relations between them and the information they 
are to convey should be obvious. 
Multidimensional information can be conveyed by auditory icons if the 
dimensions to be displayed are mapped to dimensions of everyday events, 
such as the force of an interaction or the size of an object. In this way, any one 
sound can convey a great deal of information. Moreover, "families" of 
auditory icons can be created by exploiting the organization inherent in 
everyday events. For instance, if the material of a sound-producing event is 
used to represent the type of object, all auditory icons concerning that type of 
object would use sounds made by that kind of material. So text files might 
always sound wooden, whether they are selected, moved, copied, or deleted. 
In this way, a rich system of auditory icons may be created that relies on 
relatively few underlying metaphors. 
Further benefits may be realized when the same analogy underlies both 
auditory and visual icons. The increased redundancy of the interface should 
help with learning and remembering the system. In addition, making the 
model world of the computer consistent in its visual and auditory aspects 
should increase users' feelings of direct engagement (Hutchins, Hollan, & 
Norman, 1986) or mimesis (Laurel, 1986) with that world. The concepts of 
direct engagement and mimesis refer to the feeling of working in the world of 
the task, not the computer, and are closely related to the notion of a 
transparent interface. By making the model world of the computer more real, 
one makes the existence of an interface to that world less noticeable. Providing 
auditory information that is consistent with visual feedback is one way of 
making the model world more vivid. In addition, using auditory icons may 
allow more consistent model worlds to be developed, because some computer 
events may map more readily to sound-producing events than to visual ones. 
The idea of using auditory icons in the interface is an appealing one largely 
because it is based on the way people listen to the everyday world. If a model 
world can be used to represent events in the computer (as it is when visual 
icons are employed), then good auditory icons can be created simply by using 
the sounds that would be produced by that model world. Such auditory icons 
should represent multidimensional, organized information in an intuitive 
way. They can provide information that visual displays do not, and thus 
extend the consistency of the model world. Finaily, using auditory and visual 
icons together should help create a more encompassing world for the user. 
4. THE SONICFINDER 
These ideas are instantiated in the SonicFinder, an interface in which 
information is conveyed using auditory icons as well as standard graphical 
feedback. This interface is meant to address several questions about auditory 
icons: 
Can everyday sounds be found that map naturally and meaningfully 
to events in the interface? 
Will auditory icons be useful and acceptable to users? 
When is sound a particularly appropriate display medium? That is, in 
what situations can sound convey information that graphics cannot, 
or in a form that is more appropriate than graphics? 
Finally; developing and using a working auditory interface was expected to 
raise- and has raised- new issues that are not immediately apparent without 
such an example. 
The SonicFinder is implemented in the form of functions called from within 
the original Finder2 (at the time of this writing, version 6.0), which is the 
top-level interface to the Apple Macintosh. The Finder is the application that 
is automatically run when the Macintosh is booted: Organized by analogy 
with a desktop, it provides a visual representation of the items of interest in the 
interface (e.g., files, folders, disks, etc.) and allows users to manipulate them 
(e.g., to move, copy, or delete files). 
The SonicFinder uses the information that is available in the existing 
interface to trigger and control the playback of sounds sampled from 
recordings of everyday sound-producing events. Thus, the SonicFinder 
extends the visual desktop metaphor into the auditory dimension, and does 
little else that changes or adds to the essential events and objects of that model 
world. This interface was felt to be an appropriate domain for implementing 
auditory icons because it is a well-defined direct manipulation interface, 
because it has comparatively general functionality, and because it is used 
relatively often by users of the Macintosh. 
4.1. Sound-Producing Events in the SonicFinder 
In the SonicFinder, events in the interface (e.g., selecting a file) are mapped 
to sound-producing events (e.g., tapping an object). Figure 3 summarizes the 
events in the SonicFinder that are mapped to sounds. 
Computer events are defined as actions upon an item. Items are divided 
into objects, which include files, applications, folders, disks, and the trashcan, 
and windows. The actions that can be performed upon these items, such as 
selection, dragging, opening, or scrolling, are listed below each class of item. 
The SonicFinder exists in two forms: as a special version of the Finder in which the auditory 
portion of the interface is inherent to the Finder, and as an "init" file in which the SonicFinder 
code resides in a separate fde called Finder Sounds. In the latter form, the auditory portion of the 
interface is only called if the init file is in the System Folder when the system is booted. 
7 8 
GAVER 
Figure 3. Mapping evtnts to sound in the SonicFioder. 
F~nder Events 
Auditory Icons 
Objects 
Selection .................... .. .................... 
Type (file, application, folder, disk, 
trash) 
Size 
Opening ............................................ 
Size of opened object 
Dragging. ........................ .. 
................ 
Size 
Where (windows or desk) 
Possible drop-in? 
Drop-In .............................................. 
Amount in destination 
Copying.. ............................................ 
Amount completed 
Hitting sound 
Sound source (wood, metal, etc.) 
Frequency 
Whooshing sound 
Frequency 
Scraping sound 
Frequency 
Sound type (bandwidth) 
Selection sound of disk, folder, 
or trashcan 
Noise of object landing 
Frequency 
Pouring sound 
Frequency 
Windows 
Selection ............................................. 
Dragging. ............................................ 
Growing ............................................ 
Window size 
Scrolling ....................... .. 
................... 
Underlying surface size 
Clink 
Scraping 
Clink 
Frequency 
Tick sound 
Frequency 
Trashcan 
Drop-in ........................... .. 
............... 
Empty ................................................ 
Crash 
Crunch 
Each item-action combination forms an event that is represented by a basic 
sound-producing event. Thus, object selection, the first event in Figure 3, 
maps to tapping an object; dragging an object is represented by scraping a 
surface; opening a window makes a whooshing sound; and scrolling makes a 
clicking sound. 
Secondary attributes of these sound-producing events are used to convey 
further information about the computer events they represent. For instance, 
when an object is selected, its type (i.e., whether it is a file, folder, etc.) is 
represented by the material of the sound-producing object, so that files make 
wooden sounds, applications sound like metal, and other object types make 
other kinds of sounds. The size of the object is also conveyed by the sound, so 
that large objects make lower pitched sounds than small objects (as they do in 
the everyday world). These secondary attributes are shown in italics below the 
major mappings in Figure 3. In general, any one sound in this interface may 
convey several kinds of information, so that the sound made when selecting a 
file not only confirms the basic event, but also provides information about the 
type of selected object and its size. 
Giving the feel of an auditory interface in a written article is obviously a 
difficult task. Listing all the auditory icons of the SonicFinder is only of 
limited use, because the way these sounds work with each other and with 
visual feedback is hard to imagine. Therefore, I instead describe a typical 
interaction with this interface in some detail. 
4.2. A Typical Interaction: Dragging a File to the Trashcan 
Figure 4 shows the series of events involved in dragging a file to the 
trashcan to delete it. First, the user selects the file (Figure 4A). This is 
indicated both visually, by the file becoming highlighted, and aurally by the 
sound of an object being tapped. The type of object is conveyed by the 
material being tapped. In this example, the object is a file, so it makes a 
wooden "thunk." If it had been an application, it would have made a metal 
sound; a folder would have made a sharper paper-like sound; disks a hollow 
metal sound (like a large metal container being tapped); and the trashcan a 
different hollow metal sound. In the Finder, there are standard icons for 
folders, disks, and the trashcan, but applications and files are not distin- 
guished by icon type. These are easily differentiated in the SonicFinder by the 
use of different sounding materials for their selection sounds. 
The size of a selected object is also indicated by the selection sound, so that 
large files or folders with many items in them make lower sounds than small 
files or nearly empty folders. This mapping of frequency reflects the physics 
of sound-producing events, in which large objects typically make lower sounds 
than small ones. Disks make sounds proportional to the available space in 
them, so that hard disks typically make lower sounds than floppies, and disks 
that are empty make lower sounds than disks that are full. Note that visual 
information about the size of objects is not typically available unless requested 
by the user. In this example, such information is only available from the 
auditory icon. 
Once the user has selected the file, he or she can drag it toward the trashcan 
(Figure 4B). An auditory icon is also associated with this event-in this case, 
a simple scraping sound is played continuously while the object is being 
dragged. As with selection, the frequency of the scraping sound depends on 
the size of the object being dragged. 
The scraping sound also conveys information about where the object is 
dragged. If the object is over a window it makes a sound with fewer 
high-frequency components than if it is over the desktop. If it is moved from 
the window (or desktop) where the dragging operation was initiated, then 
another bandwidth change is approximated by changing the sound's fre- 
Figure 4. A typical interaction with the SonicFinder: dragging a file to the trashcan. (A) The user selects the object and 
hears the impact. (B) The user drags the object and hears it scrape along the desktop. (C) The user drags the object 
0) 
o 
over the trashcan; the scraping sound stops and the trashcan makes its noise. (D) The user releases the object; a 
satisfying c
d
 
provides confirmation of the deletion. Typical interactions with the SonicFinder produce many sounds 
which are varied according to parameters of the objects involved. These sounds not only provide information about 
the events, but tend to make the world of the computer more "real" to users. 
quency by an octave. This produces the impression of a similarly pitched 
sound with a different high-frequency makeup and is used to conserve the 
memory necessary to store new sounds. These bandwidth changes are meant 
to convey the sense of different surfaces over which the object is dragged and 
are a start toward conveying the sort of information necessary to discriminate 
whether dropping the object would result in a move or a copy. Ideally, of 
course, this information would be directly mapped to the sounds so that 
dragging sounds would change depending on whether a move or copy was 
implied, but for reasons of practicality such a mapping was not possible in this 
implementation. 
When the object is dragged over the trashcan (Figure 4C), the scraping 
sound stops and the trashcan makes its selection sound. More generally, 
whenever an object is dragged over a container into which it can be dropped 
(e.g., a folder, disk, or the trashcan), the scraping sound stops and the 
container's selection sound is played. Auditory confirmation that a target has 
been hit turns out to be one of the most obviously useful features of the 
SonicFinder, especially in finding small folder icons that may be partially 
obscured by overlapping windows. A common problem in hitting such targets 
comes when the object, but not the cursor, is positioned over the target. In 
this situation, dropping the object does not place it inside the target, but 
instead positions it so it obscures the target further. The auditory icon 
indicates a true hit, and so reduces the amount of time spent playing "chase 
the trashcan." 
Finally, when the object is dropped (Figure 4D), the sound of shattering 
dishes is played. This sound provides satisfying feedback that the object has 
been successfully marked for deletion. When the deletion actually occurs, a 
crunching sound is played to indicate the destruction of the object. 
This sample interaction illustrates a number of aspects of the SonicFinder. 
First, many sounds accompany the use of this interface, so that even such a 
simple sequence as trashing a file involves at least four sounds. This means 
that a fairly constant ambient auditory environment is created when using the 
SonicFinder, so no single sound is particularly incongruous or distracting. 
Second, the sounds seem to fit well with the events they represent. The 
. 
- 
analogies between computer and everyday events are obvious, and the sounds 
used seem intuitive and natural (I explain why this is so in Section 6). This 
extends to the mapping between secondary qualities of the events, so that size 
and location are easy to encode and interpret. Finally, even in this example 
auditory icons convey information that the graphic portion of the interface 
either does not display (e.g., about file size), displays less effectively (e.g., 
about dragging over a container), or in a less satisfying way (e.g., about 
trashing). In the following sections, I discuss the lessons to be learned from the 
SonicFinder at some length. 
82 
GAVER 
5. ASSESSING THE SONICFINDER 
The SonicFinder is a working system and has been distributed informally 
within Apple Computer, Inc. For technical reasons, current versions do not 
work well on all machines. Nonetheless, there are a number of people, 
including myself, who use it as their standard interface as of this writing, more 
than a year after it was developed. One of the most telling pieces of evidence 
in favor of the addition of sound in this interface is that users complain of 
missing it when they use a quiet Finder. For these people, at least, the 
addition of sounds is valuable, and for this reason alone, the SonicFinder must 
be counted as a success. 
Similarly, when the SonicFinder is demonstrated, the audience reaction is 
typically quite favorable. It seems that little justification is needed for the 
addition of sounds. The ways sound works within the interface seem natural 
and obvious to those who encounter it. 
This is so despite the fact that the SonicFinder is a somewhat limited 
example of what auditory interfaces might be like. The auditory icons used in 
the interface seldom present valuable information that is not already effec- 
tively conveyed by the graphic portion of the interface. When auditory icons 
do convey new information (e.g., about the size of files) it is not clear that this 
information is necessary. So, with exceptions discussed here, the major 
function of sound in this interface is to provide redundant information to 
users. Provision of redundant information is likely to be an important role for 
sound, both in allowing more flexible and less attention-demanding interac- 
tions with the interface and in increasing feelings of direct engagement with 
the computer. But equally important is the largely unexplored potential for 
sound to convey relevant information that is not effectively conveyed by visual 
means. 
The use of sound in the SonicFinder is limited partially because of 
constraints on the manipulations of sound that could be made. The auditory 
portion of the interface was implemented using the SoundManager, a recent 
addition to the Macintosh Toolbox (Apple Computer, Inc., 1988). The 
SoundManager made the implementation of the SonicFinder a relatively 
simple endeavor, but also constrained the sounds that could be used. In 
particular, sophisticated manipulations of sound, such as those involving 
filtering or reverberation, cannot be made by the SoundManager. In 
addition, technical problems less related to manipulations of sound were also 
encountered in implementing the SonicFinder. The most serious of these 
relate to the amount of memory required to store and play the sounds. 
Sampled sounds tend to be quite large (16 sampled sounds are used in the 
current version; their average size is about 14 Kbytes). Reducing the number 
and sizes of the sounds used was an important constraint on the design of the 
SonicFinder. 
Figure 5. Copying is indicated by the sound of pouring water; the frequency of the 
sound is continuously increased to indicate its process by analogy with the sound 
a container makes as it is being filled. In current versions of the Finder, the 
progress of the copy operation is also visually displayed using a "dial bar," shown 
in the upper center of the figure. 
Despite its present limitations, the SonicFinder is successful in demon- 
strating some of the potential of auditory icons. Two major advantages of this 
interface are apparent after using it. First, the addition of auditory icons 
increases feeling~~of 
direct engagement with the model world of the computer. 
Hearing as well as seeing the objects and events of the computer world makes 
that world much more tangible. Once accustomed to the SonicFinder, using 
quiet Finders is comparable to wearing earplugs in everyday life. Direct 
engagement as a quality is difficult to specify, and, I suspect, even more 
difficult to reveal through user testing. Experience with the SonicFinder, 
however, has convinced me that direct engagement is an important aspect of 
the user's experience. 
The second major gain associated with the addition of auditory icons in the 
SonicFinder has to do with the increased flexibility it offers users. As has 
already been discussed, the use of sound to indicate when an object has been 
dragged over a container into which it might be dropped seems more useful 
than the visual feedback provided in this situation. The display of size 
information in several of the interactions may be useful in certain circum- 
stances, for instance, in judging whether a file or group of files may be copied 
onto a nearly full disk. These are both examples where auditory feedback 
seems useful, whether or not it is redundant with graphic feedback. 
The auditory icon that accompanies copying may illustrate this increase in 
84 
GAVER 
flexibility more clearly (see Figure 5). When an object or group of objects is 
copied, the sound of pouring water accompanies the event. As the process 
continues, the frequency of the sound is continuously increased to indicate its 
progress by analogy with the sound a container makes as it is being fiHed. In 
current versions of the Finder, the progress of the copy operation is visually 
displayed using a "dial bar," a horizontal rectangle in which the proportion of 
filled area indicates the percentage of the copy that is complete. The copying 
sound thus presents information that is completely redundant with the visual 
feedback. But the graphic indicator requires the user to attend to the screen, 
whereas the sound does not. During lengthy copy operations (e.g., when a 
large number of files are copied), the advantage of using an auditory icon to 
display progress is obvious and pronounced. 
Gains in direct engagement and flexibility make the SonicFinder an 
appealing interface. But such advantages appear difficult to demonstrate 
empirically, and no formal user testing has been done as of this writing. For 
the most part, increases in speed or accuracy associated with the addition of 
sound to this interface seem likely to be small or none. Instead, the auditory 
icons used in the SonicFinder are more likely to increatx user satisfaction, 
which is difficult to measure, but obviously importmt. Finding situations in 
which sound can convey information better than graphics is more likely to 
lead to measurable influences. So, for instance, it might be that subjects 
would be faster in hitting a target when sound indicates the hit than when only 
visual feedback is used; they might also perform better in a dual-task 
experiment involving copying if the auditory icon indicating status is present. 
In addition, the SonicFinder might also be expected to be of value to visually 
disabled - although not blind - users (see Edwards, this issue). In any case, 
the SonicFinder demonstrates the functionality of sound both in terms of its 
ability to increase the feeling of working with a virtual world and in freeing 
users to listen to, as well as hear, the events in this world. 
6. WHAT MAKES A DISPLAY INTUITIVELY 
ACCESSIBLE? 
If the SonicFinder is successful, then it is because it increases the reality of 
the computer world and allows more flexibility to users. My contention is that 
these advantages are not merely due to the addition of sound to the interface, 
but rather to the particular strategy used in adding sounds. That is, I claim 
that the intuitive mappings between auditory icons and the events that they 
represent account for much of the increase in direct engagement, as well as the 
ease of obtaining the information offered by sounds. But this assertion raises 
several issues: What makes a mapping intuitively obvious? Auditory icons are 
based on literal-minded metaphors between events in the computer and those 
of the everyday world. This is valuable in that, being built on existing skills, 
their significance can be understood by the user with minimal training. 
However, will this sort of mapping limit the kinds of information that can be 
provided by auditory icons, and if so, how might these limitations be 
overcome? 
In using sound to convey information from the computer, important 
qualities and quantities of the computer domain must be mapped to percep- 
tible attributes of sound. I have suggested that basing this mapping on the 
ways everyday sounds correspond to attributes of their sources should make 
the mapping intuitively obvious both in its creation and interpretation, 
because such mappings exploit the causal structure in terms of which everyday 
listening tends to be organized. Here I discuss the role and nature of these 
sorts of mappings in the interface to explain why I think this is so. 
6.1. Conceptual and Perceptual Mappings 
Our understanding of what computers do is built upon layers of metaphor 
(Hutchins, 1986). Most users, when concerned with performing some task, 
pay little attention to the computer as machine. Instead, they think of 
manipulating files, opening windows, accessing databases, and the like. All 
these tasks are based on a number of metaphors that lead from the domain of 
the computer hardware to that of the task. For instance, the configuration of 
a silicon gate at the hardware level might be seen as a bit of information at 
another level, as determining the value of a variable at a third, specifying a 
data structure at a fourth, or as giving rise to the behavior of a text file at an 
even higher level. These conceptual leaps from level to level are accomplished 
via metaphor, from electronics to information, information to variables, 
variables to structures, and structures to files. 
The purpose of using metaphors in describing the operations of computers 
is twofold. First, metaphors allow everyday knowledge to be generalized to an 
unfamiliar domain. Speaking of computer entities as "files" obviates the need 
to know of data structures, much less the state of silicon gates. Second, a 
metaphor allows knowledge about a group of entities at one level to be 
summarized in terms of an entity at the next: so a group of variables form a 
data structure, a data structure with the memory it points to forms a file, and 
so on. Metaphors give organization and structure to groups of disparate 
entities at one level, integrating them so they may be thought of as familiar 
units at a higher level. 
From this perspective, there are at least two mappings to be considered in 
any interface (see Figure 6). Most fundamental is a conceptual mapping between 
events in the computer and those in the model world in which some task is to 
be performed. The computer reality refers to the domain in which computer 
events are described, either by reference to the physical hardware of the 
system or its operations expressed in some programming language. When 
86 
GAVER 
Figure 6. Two mappings exist between the reality of the computer and the display 
to which the user has access. The first is a conceptual mapping between events in 
the computer and those in some model world (e-g., that of a desktop). The second 
is a perceptual mapping between events in this model world and their perceptible 
manifestations, be they visual or auditory. 
Computer 
Reality 
Model 
World 
Display 
metaphors are used to allow events in the computer reality to be understood 
in terms of a task domain, a model world is created. The conceptual mapping, 
then, is that which links corresponding aspects of the computer reality and the 
model world. The desktop metaphor, for instance, is the result of a conceptual 
mapping. 
Perceptual mappings are made between the model world of the computer and 
its perceptible display. The conceptual mapping translates the reality of the 
computer into a conceptualization of a model world, say that of a desktop, but 
it does not make that world accessible to users. Instead, the objects and events 
of the desktop must be mapped further to their perceptible forms, be they 
visible, audible, tactile, or even olfactory. Files, for instance, might be made 
apparent by listing or speaking their names, by iconic representation, or by 
specific auditory icons. The choice of how entities and events in the model 
world are to appear is the result of a perceptual mapping. 
The model world created by conceptual mappings is seldom a completely 
consistent one. Even in so-called desktop systems, the metaphor is usually 
mixed by the provision of menus, windows, and disks. This inconsistency may 
in part be because perceptual mappings are usually limited to the visual 
modality. Nonetheless, the model world by definition provides the most 
organization and integration with respect to the task domain. For this reason, 
perceptual mappings should be designed so they are consistent with this 
world. Conversely, the model world is seldom made explicit except through 
the displays that result from perceptual mappings. It is consistent to the 
degree that these displays indicate a consistent underlying metaphor. System- 
atic perceptual mappings that are consistent with a model world increase the 
organizational power of this world, whereas perceptual mappings that are 
incompatible with the model world can significantly disrupt its usefulness. 
6.2. Types of Perceptual Mapping 
The conceptual mappings that generate the model world of the computer 
are usually, perhaps always, metaphorical. Their purpose and power is to 
make the physical reality of the computer comprehensible in terms of some 
everyday task domain. Too literal or too arbitrary a mapping will produce a 
model world just as incomprehensible as the physical reality of the computer. 
The nature of perceptual mappings, on the other hand, may vary widely. 
This is because perceptual mappings are not between the computer reality and 
the outward manifestations that are accessible to users, but between these 
manifestations and the model world of the computer. Perceptual mappings 
can range in how closely they reflect this model world. I (Gaver, 1986) 
distinguished three kinds of mapping (using an amalgamation of concepts 
from Bates, 1979; Heil, 1983; Peirce, 1932). According to this account, the 
relation between a display entity and the model world of the computer can be 
symbolic, metaphorical, or iconic ("nomic" in Gaver, 1986). A symbolic mapping 
is essentially arbitrary, depending on convention for its meaning. Metaphor- 
ical mappings make use of similarities between the ehtites or relationships of 
their domains, and thus are more constrained than symbolic mappings. 
Finally, iconic mappings are based on physical causation- the display entities 
look or sound like the things they represent. 
This last kind of mapping, named after Peirce's (1932) use of the term, is 
that which gives rise to many sorts of visual icons (thus the name icon). An icon 
does not imply a literal, pictorial, or recorded mapping, instead its charac- 
teristics are causally related to the things it represents. So an icon may be a 
sketch, outline, or caricature; an auditory icon may be a recorded sound, or 
one synthesized to capture important features of an everyday sound. What is 
important is that the attributes of the representation convey information by 
virtue of their causal relations to the attributes they represent. 
A given entity of the model world might be related to its display by any of 
these three mappings. For instance, Figure 7 shows alternative visual and 
auditory representations that indicate the deletion of a file. A symbolic visual 
mapping for deletion might be a file icon with a "x" in it. A corresponding 
auditory display might use a distinctive tone both when the file is deleted and 
if the user tries to access it afterwards. Both sorts of displays depend on the 
user's having learned the meanings of these arbitrary symbols for their 
effectiveness. 
A metaphorical visual representation of deletion might use a faded file icon, 
relying on an analogy between deletion and disappearance. A corresponding 
auditory signal could involve a motif standing for the file which goes from loud 
to soft (see Blattner, Sumikawa, & Greenberg, this issue). An auditory signal 
such as this depends on an analogy between deletion and quieting or fading 
GAVER 
Figure 7. A conceptual file deletion may be mapped to a display in many different 
ways. Here six possibilities are shown, one visual and one auditory example each 
of symbolic, metaphorical, and iconic mappings between the event and the 
display. 
Metaphorical 
Deletion 
Model World 
1conic 
Visual 
Auditory I
Display 
into the distance. These kinds of metaphorical representations may effectively 
convey the notion of disappearance, but they are inconsistent with the desktop 
metaphor: Things on a desk do not simply fade away. 
Finally, an iconic representation might involve dragging the file icon to a 
trashcan and throwing it in: Conceptual deletion is indicated by perceptual 
disappearance, and the visual representation of this event is causally related to 
the conceptual events in the model world. An iconically related auditory icon 
might be a crashing noise, indicating the destruction of the file. 
Iconic mappings have several advantages over symbolic and metaphorical 
mappings. Iconically mapped displays are more closely related to the events in 
the model world they are meant to represent than either symbolic or 
metaphorically mapped representations. In Hutchins, Hollan, and Norman's 
(1986) terms, iconic mappings produce displays with a high degree of 
"articulatory directnessn: Their form echoes their function. Truly symbolic 
mappings are entirely unconstrained in terms of their form, whereas meta- 
phorical mappings are only partially constrained. Iconically mapped displays 
are in principle wholly constrained because they are based on the laws relating 
physical events in the world to their perceptible manifestations. Insofar as 
users have knowledge about the relations between events, sights, and sounds 
in the everyday world, they may be expected to understand iconic mappings. 
Iconic displays are based on the kinds of physical mappings that make the 
everyday world accessible to our senses, those that are described by physics. 
This implies not only that a single iconically mapped display will be 
interpretable, but that an entire group of displays, visual and auditory, will 
also be systematic. Visual and auditory icons can be related as visible and 
audible events are in the everyday world. That is illustrated in the examples 
of deletion displays shown in Figure 7: The iconic visual and auditory 
representations seem to fit together better than do either of the other pairs. 
An intuitive mapping, then, is one that is constrained as much as possible 
by the kinds of correspondences found in the everyday world, and thus reflects 
the model world of the computer closely. Because auditory icons are based on 
the ways events in the everyday world make sounds, they are likely to involve 
iconic mappings to the events they portray. At least, auditory icons are likely 
to involve metaphorical mappings between events, as opposed to between an 
attribute'of sound (e.g., loudness) and event. Because of this, their creation 
and interpretation are likely to be most constrained, both for a given auditory 
icon and for a system of auditory icons. Moreover, these constraints are 
usually the same as those that operate in the everyday world with which 
designers and users are most familiar. 
6.3. Beyond Literal Mappings: Sound Effects and Source 
Metaphors 
The constraints of using iconic mappings to create auditory icons are likely 
to help in making them intuitively appealing and systematically coherent. But 
such constraints also threaten to limit their application in computer interfaces. 
Where events in the model world correspond to sound-producing events in the 
everyday world, mapping information to auditory icons is not difficult. For 
instance, choosing a sound to accompany dragging is not problematic because 
dragging has an everyday world counterpart that makes sound. But what 
sound should accompany an event that does not exist in the everyday world - 
for instance, a disk-write error? What sound should be used to indicate an 
event whose everyday world counterpart does not produce sound, or where 
the sound it makes does not convey information relevant to the user? Iconic 
mappings between sonic events and computer events are desirable, as I have 
previously argued. But they are not always practical, because the computer is 
an artifact in which events do not always map neatly to events in the everyday 
world. If auditory icons are to be generally useful for computer interfaces, it 
must be possible to extend the mappings used to create them beyond the literal 
ones used for most of the auditory icons in the SonicFinder. Two ways of 
accomplishing this were found in developing the SonicFinder, both of which 
retain the intuitive mapping between display and event that characterizes 
auditory icons. 
The first kind of problem-developing an auditory icon for an event with 
no counterpart in the everyday world - was encountered in finding a sound to 
accompany opening and closing windows in the SonicFinder. The sound of a 
GAVER 
real window opening and closing seemed inappropriate, as did sounds made 
by other related events. The problem is that windows in this interface are not 
like windows in the everyday world: They do not slide open, they "zoom" 
open, expanding from their associated icon. In the end, a "whoosin~ sound 
seems much more appropriate to indicate opening windows. 
This example suggests that in many cases, auditory icons should be more 
like movie sound effects than like typical everyday sounds. Instead of using 
naturally occurring sounds, new sounds will have to be developed that "sound 
like" events that occur only in the model world of the computer. Note that 
sound effects are not arbitrarily related to their associated events. Instead, 
they seem to rely on the abilities of listeners to generalize their knowledge 
about everyday sound-producing events to new ones, even imaginary ones 
involving things such as light-sabers or transporters. Windows in the everyday 
world don't open as the ones in the SonicFinder do, but this event does 
resemble others in the everyday world, such as the rapid approach or sudden 
expansion of an object. Sounds made by these kinds of events are thus more 
appropriate as auditory icons for opening windows in the SonicFinder. 
Examining the ways sound effects are created seems to have great potential for 
extending auditory icons to situations in which literal analogies between 
computer events and events in the everyday world are impossible to find. 
The second kind of problem - finding a sound to accompany an event that 
does not make an informative sound in the everyday world - was encountered 
in creating an auditory icon to represent copying. Although xerographic 
reproduction might be used as an everyday-world counterpart to copying in 
the computer, using the sound of a copier seemed inadequate in this situation. 
First, copying in the computer is a more continuous process than using a 
copier, in which separate pages are copied in separate stages. Second, the 
sounds made by copiers in the everyday world do not change to indicate the 
amount completed, and this information is highly relevant to users (Myers, 
1985). So, because the analogy between these two forms of copying seemed 
inadequate, and because the everyday sound did not convey information felt 
to be relevant for the computer counterpart, a different sound-producing 
event was required for a useful auditory icon. In current versions of the 
SonicFinder, the sound of liquid pouring into a container is used to 
accompany copying. As pointed out earlier, such a sound is useful in that 
information about nearness to completion is highly salient. 
The pouring sound used to indicate copying is not a sound effect nor is it 
arbitrarily related to the computer event about which it provides information. 
Moreover, using pouring as an analogy for copying does not depend on a 
metaphorical mapping between sound and event. Instead, this auditory icon 
relies on an analogy between copying in the model world and pouring in the 
everyday world. The sound itself is iconicalIy related to its source, but this 
auditory icon is metaphorical in terms of the mapping between events. In fact, 
using a pouring sound to represent copying might perhaps change the 
conceptual mapping between the event in the computer reality and that in the 
model world. This is particularly plausible given that the dialbar used to 
indicate process is essentially a graph-like status indicator. There is no 
ongoing visual reinforcement of a particular model world representation of 
copying-although of course the result is that a copy is made. In any case, 
basing auditory icons on metaphors between events in the model world and 
others in the everyday world is another way to extend the range of auditory 
icons. 
Creating sound effects or developing metaphorical mappings between 
events in the model world and sound-producing events in the everyday world 
are two ways to overcome the limitations of auditory icons. Both are 
promising in that they seem to loosen the constraints implied by relying on a 
literal mapping between sounds and events in the model world, while 
retaining the intuitive accessibility of auditory icons. Sound effects may be 
developed for events that do not exist in the everyday world, and well- 
designed effects will still be based on causal relations to these events-that is, 
they will be iconic. When metaphorical auditory icons are used, they rely on 
analogies between sound-producing events, instead of analogies between 
events and attributes of sound. The perceptual mappings involved in such 
auditory icons are iconic, and the conceptual mapping may itself change to 
reflect the auditory event. Because they retain the intuitive accessibility that 
seems to accompany iconic mappings, these methods for extending auditory 
icons seems more promising than resorting to more arbitrary systems of using 
sound to convey information. 
7. FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
The SonicFinder demonstrates a number of the attractive characteristics of 
auditory icons. The sounds seem to be naturally integrated into the interface 
and appear intuitively accessible. They increase feelings of direct manipula- 
tion and provide flexibility in interacting with the model world of the 
computer. In some cases, they provide information that otherwise must be 
requested, and in others, they seem more appropriate than do graphical 
displays of identical information. Finally, auditory icons seem to add 
significantly to the satisfaction of using the interface. 
These advantages are important, but several potential benefits of auditory 
icons are not realized in the SonicFinder. Most notably, sounds in this 
interface convey little relevant information that is not redundant with that 
displayed visually. This is because the auditory icons used in the SonicFinder 
reflect the model world that had already been developed for the Finder. In the 
long run, auditory icons may be expected to influence the conceptual mapping 
that produces this model world. One of the most attractive possibilities for the 
92 
GAVER 
use of auditory icons is in reducing the clutter of visual displays, particularly 
in multitasking systems. In the future, sound might be used to indicate user 
accessibility of files or programs, their age or frequency of use, or the amount 
of memory associated with their use. Users might choose whether certain 
types of information (e.g., progress indicators) should be displayed graphi- 
cally or via auditory icons. Sound might also provide information about the 
status of background processes, the number of links in a networked environ- 
ment, and other factors of the computer environment. 
One important application for sound, as Edwards (this issue) pointed out, 
is in modifying graphical interfaces so that they are accessible to the visually 
impaired (a problem that has more general implications, e.g., in using such 
interfaces over the telephone). The perspective on everyday listening I 
suggested here may be usehl in addressing this problem. Consider, for 
instance, the issue of finding ones way around the screen if it is not visible. 
This is analogous to navigating in the everyday world if one is blind. The 
problem here should probably not be formulated as one of knowing one's 
position in Euclidean space, bus: instead as one of knowing how to get to 
objects or locations of interest. A number of auditory cues seems to be useful 
to visually disabled people in accomplishing this task. Perhaps most important 
are what Jenkins (1985) called "auditory landmarks." These include relatively 
continuous sounds such as those of busy streets or ventilator fans as well as 
environments that modify sounds in reliable ways, such as echoing hallways 
or enclosed areas. 
Such cues might be used in the interface in several ways. For instance, the 
cursor might be treated as a microphone which can sample sounds made by 
objects in the interface or by a number of single-purposed auditory landmarks 
placed by the user. In addition, the amount and kind of reverberation applied 
to any auditory icon might be used to indicate parameters of the environment 
that would be useful in navigation, such as the size of the local environment 
or the proximity to a boundary. Such approaches, based on the ways visually 
impaired people navigate in their daily lives, may be useful in providing 
spatial cues about the model world that are not only visual. 
Applications that realize the full potential of auditory icons will certainly 
depend on a careful analysis of the interface as well as a good understanding 
of everyday listening. They are also likely to require the ability to make fairly 
complex manipulations of sound and an imaginative use of sound effects and 
source metaphors. The SonicFinder seems a promising start towards demon- 
strating the potential of auditory icons, but however satisfying it may be, it is 
only a beginning. 
Acknow-ts. 
Many thanks go to Sara Bly, Bill Buxton, Don Norman, and 
Anne Schlottmann for their advice and encouragement. I also thank John Meier, 
Mark Lentzcner, Jon Worthington, Joy Mountford, and the Human Interface Group 
of Apple Computer, Inc. for their help and support in creating the SonicFinder. 
Support. 
This research was supported by a grant to Donald A. Norman and David 
E. Rumelhart from the System Development Foundation. Support was also provided 
by funds from the Affiliates of Cognitive Science of UCSD and by contract 
N00014-79-C-0323, NR 667-437 to Donald A. Norman from the Personnel and 
Training Research Programs of the Office of Naval Research. The SonicFinder was 
developed while I was an employee of Apple Computer, Inc. 
REFERENCES 
Apple Computer, Inc. (1988). Inside Mac (Vol. 5). Menlo Park, CA: Addison Wesley. 
Ballas, J. A., Dick, K. A., & Groshek, M. R. (1987). Failure to identify "identifiablen 
sounds. Proceedings of the 31st annual meeting of the Human Factors SocieQ. Santa Monica: 
Human Factors Society. 
Ballas, J. A,, & Howard, J. H., Jr. (1987). Interpreting the language of environmental 
sounds. Environment and Behavior, 19, 91 -1 14. 
Ballas, J. A., & Sliwinski, M. J. (1986). Causal uncertainty in the identijication of 
environmental sounds (Tech. Rep. No. ONR-86-1). Washington, DC: Georgetown 
University, Department of Psychology. 
Bates, E. (1979). The emergence of symbols: Cognition and communication in infancy. New 
York: Academic. 
Bly, S. (1982). Sound and computer infonation presentation (UCRL-53282). Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and University of 
California, Davis, CA. 
Buxton, W. (1986). There's more to interaction than meets the eye: Some issues in 
manual input. In D. A. Norman & S. W. Draper (Eds.), User centered system design: 
New perspectives on human-computer interface (pp. 319-337). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
Freed, D. J., & Martins, W. L. (1986). Deriving psychophysical relations for timbre. 
Proceedings of the International Computer Music Conference (pp. 393-405). The Hague, 
The Netherlands: Computer Music Association. 
Gaver, W. W. (1986). Auditory icons: Using sound in computer interfaces. Human- 
Computer Interaction, 2, 167- 1 77. 
Gaver, W. W. (1988). Everyday listening and auditory icons. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, University of California, San Diego, CA. 
Heil, J. (1983). Perception and cognition. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Hutchins, E. L. (1986). Metaphors for interface design. Paper presented at NATO 
Workshop on Multimodal Dialogues Including Voice, Venaco, Corsica, France. 
Hutchins, E. L., Hollan, J. D., & Norman, D. A. (1986). Direct manipulation 
interfaces. In D. A. Norman & S. W. Draper (Eds.), User centered system design: New 
perspectives on human-computer interaction (pp. 87- 124). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
Jenkins, J. J. (1985). Acoustic information for objects, places, and events. In W. H. 
Warren & R. E. Shaw (Eds.), Persistence and change: Proceedings of thefirst international 
conference on event perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
Laurel, B. (1986). Interface as mimesis. In D. A. Norman & S. W. Draper (Eds.), User 
centered system design: New perspectives on human-computer interface (pp. 67-85). Hillsdale, 
94 
GAVER 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc 
Loy, G. (1985). Musicians make a standard: The MIDI phenomenon. Computer MUSK 
Journal, 9(4), 8-26. 
Mansur, D. L., Blattner, M. M., &Joy, K. I. (1985). Sound-graphs: A numerical 
data analysis method for the blind. Proceedings of the 18th Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences, 18, 163- 174. 
Mezrich, J. J., Frysinger, S., & Slivjanovski, R. (1984). Dynamic representation of 
multivariate time series data. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 79, 34-40. 
Myers, B. A. (1985). The importance of percent-done indicators for computer-human 
interfaces. Proceedings of the CHI '85 Conference on Human Factorr in Computer Srstrm, 
11-17. New York: ACM. 
Peirce, C. S. (1932). In C. Jartshorne & P. Weiss (Eds.), Collected Papers of Charles 
Sanders Peirce. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Vanderveer, N. J. (1979). Ecological acoustics: Human perception of environmental 
sounds. Dissertation Abstracts International, 40/09B, 4543. (University Microfilms No. 
8004002) 
Warren, W. H . ,  & Verbrugge, K. R. (1984). Auditory perception of breaking and 
bouncing events: A case study in ecological acoustics. <Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 10, 704-7 12. 
HCZ Editorial Record. 
First manuscript received June 13, 1988. Revision 
received November 2, 1988. Accepted by William Buxton. - Edzto7 
