The need for basic research
in industry
Industries will have to spend more to make up for the 36% decrease
in federal support over the last decade—to maintain their expertise,
and to survive the transition to post-industrial society.
I
E. Goldman
Why should there be any basic research
in industry? How have recent shifts in
our priorities—from defense and space
towards energy, health and the environ-
ment—changed the outlook for indus-
trial research? How badly has industry
been hit by cutbacks in research sup-
port and how can it overcome them?
It has been eleven years since I have
spoken or written on the subject of
basic research in industry. In writing1
on this in 1964,1 had some comments in
answer to first of these questions. I re-
peat them here because they are as ap-
plicable today as then, but changes in
the environment and in my experience
prompt me to add below some com-
ments on the other two questions.
Here is what I said then:
"At least four significant reasons
can be given for carrying on research
in industry. One is purely defensive:
If you want to stay in business at a
time when technology is marching
rapidly, you cannot risk the chance
that somebody else will beat you to
the new technology. 
If somebody,
somewhere is about to make a major
contribution—a 
contribution 
that
could obsolete your product—you
must have people who will know
about this, who will know what is
happening. If your people are truly
productive scientists, original scien-
tists, creative scientists, then they
will be sought out. They will be in-
vited to give seminars. They will in-
vite their friends to give seminars.
They will attend meetings and con-
ferences and be in touch with the sci-
entific community. They will know
what is going on. It is not very likely
that an important development will
take place somewhere in the world
without their knowing about it.
"If you are to tap the world's
J. E. Goldman is group vice-president for Re-
search and Development and chief scientist of
Xerox Corporation, Stamford, Connecticut.
science and technology, you have to
create some science. Your admission
ticket to the club is to have some-
thing of your own to talk about.
"The second reason for doing re-
search comes right out of the first: If
you have those good people—if you
are at the frontier—you maximize the
probability of doing some of the inno-
vating yourself. 
This clearly is a
competitive advantage.
"Third: research is increasingly an
important source of management
personnel. Many of today's best col-
lege people are youngsters who want
to go into research. This is true in
science, in engineering, in economics
and so on—and this is an excellent
way to get people into a company.
Start them off on the research road.
Top management today needs techni-
cally oriented people and one of the
best means of finding them and keep-
ing them is through the research lab.
"The fourth reason is that research
provides you with possibilities for di-
versification. 
A high-quality re-
search program will invariably lead
into new fields. It can create those
new fields. Moreover, the company
that is amenable to diversification
can the better justify intensive re-
search areas and programs which may
be too costly to justify on the basis of
relevance to existing business alone."
As we look now—eleven years later—at
the responsibilities of industry to re-
search, and of research to industry, we
might well ask, has there been any
change in our environment and sur-
roundings to warrant a rethinking of
the question? The answer has to be,
yes!
For one thing there has been signifi-
cant change in the patterns of support
of basic research both quantitatively
and qualitatively. Whereas a decade
ago the diversity and multiplicity of
support for basic research assured near-
ly adequate support for all good
science—and this includes the healthy
infusion of basic research dollars from
the research-conscious military and
space agencies—today such support
tends to be more monolithic and con-
stricted. 
The rationale for research
support by government has shifted in
emphasis. The Mansfield amendment2
has narrowed considerably the degrees
of freedom available to the once munifi-
cent military agencies; the space pro-
gram has been winding down and, as is
inevitable in a budgetary downturn,
basic research support is the first to go.
Meanwhile the remaining supporters of
basic research, such as the National
Science Foundation and the National
Institutes of Health have been gravitat-
ing to an increasing extent towards the
doctrine of so-called "relevance."
Some numbers will underscore this
hypothesis, particularly as it relates to
physics. Between 1965 and 1975, the
total amount of federally-funded basic
research has shrunk from $1.78 billion
to an estimated $1.68 billion (constant
dollars). [See PHYSICS TODAY, Novem-
ber, page 102.] Allowing for additional
costs of doing research in today's envi-
ronment not attributable to inflation,
this shrinkage is even greater. On the
other hand, the Departments of Health,
Education and Welfare and Agriculture,
which in 1965 represented 22% of feder-
al basic research support, will account
for 43% of the federally supported basic
research budget in 1975.
Identity problem
This doctrine of relevance points up
what I think is another issue with over-
tones affecting the support of basic re-
search. 
In the 1950's and 60's the
major national goals around which were
marshalled all the available forces of
the Nation's economic and industrial
power and know-how, including R&D,
were defense and space. It is probably
superfluous for me to elaborate in this
article on the impact these two major
PHYSICS TODAY/DECEMBER 1975 
2 3
"The oil prospects for the world are so very dim that the auto industry must have an important, inspired
breakthrough within the next 25 years ..."—from 
a 1956 speech.
goals had on the research community.
There are probably few physicists who
do not owe their start in research to the
Office of Naval Research, the Office of
Scientific Research in the Air Force, the
Army Research Office, the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration
or, if he or she is younger, the National
Science Foundation. In an earlier arti-
cle,3 I referred to OXR (where X = N,
S or A) as the "the greatest philanthro-
pist of all." The goals of defense and
space were well defined and their pur-
suit clear-cut. We knew precisely how
to approach them, define their specifi-
cations, put in place the systems for
their 
implementation 
and 
manage
them. Thanks to wise and foresighted
leadership, we were able to put the pre-
cise roles of R&D, including basic re-
search, into proper perspective. More-
over, responsibility for the implementa-
tion of these goals was assigned without
ambiguity—notwithstanding the brief
polemic between the Army and the Air
Force as to who had the responsibility
for missiles.
In the 1970's, however, the doctrine
of relevance is preached in an entirely
different context.
The preoccupation of our society is
with crisis problems: the economy, en-
ergy, the physical environment, urban
blight, health care and transportation.
This creates an identity problem for
both the scientist and the supporter of
science. The role of technology in the
solution of military and space problems
was clear and defined. The thread that
links basic research to the technological
goals was not a difficult one to compre-
hend—either for the scientist who
sought to identify it or for the manager
or bureaucrat who faced the need to ra-
tionalize and understand it. The strat-
egies for new military systems have not
been qualitatively different from those
in communications that led Bell Labs to
support solid-state physics in the
1930's. But how do you turn loose a
scientific community that is inherently
discipline-oriented to worry about the
infusion of science into a technology for
transportation, for urban waste dispos-
al, for energy conservation and so on,
but for the application of which the
sponsor agency has no responsibility?
To illustrate this dilemma, let us take
the case of energy research. At first
blush one might assume that the cre-
ation of the Energy Research and De-
velopment Agency would play the role
in the energy R&D area that, say,
NASA fulfilled in the space mission.
But there is a difference between those
two that I believe is very significant.
NASA (like ONR and the former Atom-
ic Energy Commission) was the ulti-
mate customer, as well as the provider,
of resources. NASA (again like ONR
and AEC) had the infrastructure and
the apparatus, including in-house labo-
ratories, to carry forward programs
from the spark of generation to the ulti-
mate utilization of the product. It thus
becomes the coupling agency to tie
science and technology to ultimate
needs.
This is true of ERDA only insofar as
nuclear energy is concerned. With re-
spect to the rest of the energy spectrum,
it is just an institution for the support
and stimulation of R&D; the utilization
of results falls within the province of
other agencies and institutions. 
For
example, the Department of Transpor-
tation has responsibility for transporta-
tion, which constitutes 25% of the ener-
gy utilization. The bond that connects
ERDA with the Electric Power Re-
search Institute, General Electric or
Con Ed is thus too loose for the proper
stimulation of basic research focussed
on the parameters appropriate to spe-
cific needs of an industry.
Kiss your car goodbye?
It is here that industry must play a
role because industry is basically mis-
sion-oriented and links within its pur-
view the entire spectrum of application
from research to product. 
And ulti-
mately it will be industry that will plan,
design and build a product.
Let us make the example even more
specific by citing the transportation
sector, particularly the automobile in-
dustry. 
Forgive me if I once again
quote from my writings3 on the subject—
this time from a banquet speech that I
gave at an American Physical Society
meeting in Chicago in 1956:
". . . this I must say a propos of fun-
damental research in our industry:
If there is any industrial area in the
United States where an important
new idea is absolutely necessary for
survival, it is in the automobile in-
dustry. 
The oil prospects for the
world are so very dim that this largest
of all American industries must have
an 
important, 
original, 
inspired
breakthrough sometime within the
next 25 years, for by then, we shall
have to kiss goodbye to any means of
[economic] locomotion which requires
for its use the internal combustion of
fossil fuels. What we must have is
something that is so new, so radical
and so unanticipated that it would be
folly to compartmentalize our think-
ing into how to go about pursuing
this."
I repeat these comments not to demon-
strate my clairvoyance, but rather to
emphasize all the more that the indus-
try that hopes to stay in business and
keep relevant technologies up to date
has the ultimate responsibility to do
basic research. I do not think it is at all
fortuitous that the communications in-
dustry and the information and com-
puter industries are the most advanced:
They do their own research while the
transportation industry, which does
not, has got itself into a mess.
"Your admission ticket to the club is to have something of your own to talk
about."
1 BASIC RESEARCH Cjj4
"Can you tell me in what room is the symposium on 'The
Application of the Group C^h to Can-Opener Technology'?.
2 4 
PHYSICS TODAY/DECEMBER 1975
"/ suggest that basic research in the industrial scheme of things has a specific mission to perform:
that of keeping the company honest—in the poker sense."
This is the qualitative problem; the
quantitative problem is illustrated by
reference to another set of figures that
relate to basic research spending. Be-
tween 1964 and 1974, the total expendi-
ture in the US on basic research is esti-
mated by the NSF to have grown from
$2.6 billion to $4.6 billion—an increase
of 77% in the decade. But in constant
dollars this increase shrinks to 10%.
The part of this basic research that is
done by industry has gone from $549
million to $770 million, an increase of
40%. But in constant dollars this actu-
ally represents a shrinkage of 14%,
which means that industry is actually
doing less basic research today than ten
years ago. But here is the real kicker:
Federally supported basic research in
industry has decreased by 36% in con-
stant dollars.
Other things being equal, it seems
clear from the foregoing that any rela-
tionship between industrial basic re-
search and innovativeness and econom-
ic growth says that we are under-re-
searched. More particularly, industry
must make up the shortfall in federal
support if it is to survive and grow. I
think it is fair for me to assume that, for
the readers of PHYSICS TODAY, one
need not go through the litany that
traces the thread of industrial innova-
tion back to basic research; you are all
familiar with many examples.
Now let us consider briefly the na-
tional interest. In the two decades fol-
lowing World War II, the US was clear-
ly preeminent in the pursuit of re-
search. This meant, in fact, that dur-
ing those two decades we were export-
ing technology and, more importantly,
the fruits of technology: products.
Today the situation is quite different.
Coupled with the intensification of re-
search activity abroad has been the rise
of industrial multinationalism, which
infused the concept of industrial re-
search into geographical areas and en-
tities where it had only limited practice
before. But the most powerful interna-
tional language (other than broken En-
glish) has been and remains the lan-
guage of science. Therefore, for an in-
dustrial enterprise to participate in the
new worldwide dynamism and produc-
tivity of R&D in timely fashion, it must
learn to talk this international lan-
guage—and this can be done most effi-
caciously through direct participation
in science.
Research unlocks the storehouse
Finally I find, not only as a scientist
but as an industrial manager as well,
one subtle but nonetheless real divi-
dend to be derived by the industrial
practitioner of basic research. One of
the most critical problems within indus-
try is the acute need for self-analysis.
The time it takes for information on the
intellectual health of a company to feed
back through its market performance is
much too long, and the process is too
complex and cumbersome to be useful.
It is a fact of industrial life that those
who live it are inward-looking—I would
use the word "parochial" but that word
"Federally supported basic research in industry has decreased by 36 % in
constant dollars."
"Since your last visit, Professor Clumpp, our basic-research
department 
has been moved into less spacious quarters . . . "
has too many pejorative connotations.
I do not intend to cast such negative
implications on its practitioners, but
rather I wish to suggest that this is nec-
essarily a way of life for the industrial-
ist. He or she is much too preoccupied
with corporate goals and his or her out-
put is much too sensitive in terms of
company security to permit scrutiny by
the outside world.
As a result, industrial institutions
tend to get inbred, and the management
has no ready, continuing means for self-
analysis to determine how good they
really are. The output of the applied
scientist, the engineer, the manufactur-
ing specialist, the economist, the finan-
cier, and so on, is confined within the
system. As a result, every organization
tends to think of itself as being good, a
sort of defensiveness born of necessity.
I suggest that basic research in the in-
dustrial scheme of things has a specific
mission to perform: that of keeping the
company honest—in the poker sense.
It is a sort of calibration point of the
company's expertise. 
After all, the
basic researcher receives prompt and
thorough evaluation from his peer
group, which by definition exists out-
side the confines of his organization.
You learn pretty quickly who is good
and who is not; who is creative and who
is not, and you also learn who is pedes-
trian and who is not. The scientific in-
house establishment then becomes a
standard with which much of the rest of
the organization can be calibrated.
This constitutes a useful resource to
management, if it wishes to use it.
Daniel Bell has stated4 that the
knowledge resource is the key to the
post-industrial society. To carry that
thought further, I submit that basic re-
search is the key that unlocks the store-
house of knowledge to those industries
" that hope to survive the transition into
that society.
-This article is an adaptation of an address
given at the annual meeting of the Corpo-
rate Associates of the American Institute of
Physics, which was held 2-3 October 1975 in
Washington, D.C. The theme of the meet-
ing was "The adequacy of today's physics
for tomorrow's technology."
References
1. J. E. Goldman, International Science and
Technology, Dec. 1964, page 38.
2. PHYSICS TODAY, Feb. 1970, page 63; May
1970, page 61; Sept. 1971, page 61.
3. J. E. Goldman, PHYSICS TODAY, July
1957, page 25.
4. D. Bell, PHYSICS TODAY, to be published;
see also page 70 of this issue. 
D
PHYSICS TODAY/DECEMBER 1975
25
