~9~i'8 A ~ 3[ T~ring Leer'tare 
, 
~ 
- 
r Science 
One 
Man s View 
of Con~pute 
[L W. HAMMING 
B dg Tdephene Laboratories, Inc., Murray Hill, New Jersey 
~x~s'r~.xv'r, A nvtmber of observations and comments are directed toward suggesting that more 
~ha*~ die usual engineering flavor be given to computer science. The engineering aspect is 
imv~rt~at because most present ditficulties in this field do not involve the theoretical question 
r~f whe*,her ccrte~in things can be done, but rather the practical question of how can they be 
accomplished well and simply. 
The teaching of computer science could be made more effective by various alterations, for 
example, the i~elusion of a laboratory course in programming, t~he requirement for a strong 
minor ia something other than mathematics, and more practical coding and less abstract 
theory, as well as more seriousness and less game playing. 
~:eY -wogi)$ ~kN[) Pt~gASES: computer science, computer engineering, practical programming, 
mathematical g~me~playi~g, computer teehniciat~, computer professional, true-to-life pro- 
tramming, comtmtcr science curriculum, software, basic research, undirected research, pro- 
grammars' ethical standards, programmers' soziat responsibility 
i,et me begin with ~ few personal words, When one is notified that he has been 
(~lected t:he ACM Turing lecturer for the year, he is at first surprised--especially 
is the ,~o~academic person surprised by an ACM award. After a little while the 
s~rprise is replaced by a feeling of pleasure. Still later comes ~ feeling of "Why me?" 
With aI1 that has been done and is being done in computing, why single out me and 
my work? Well, I suppose that i~ has to happen to someone each year, and this 
time [ am the lucky person. Anyway, let me thank you for the honor you have given 
~o me mid by inference to ~he Bell Telephone Laboratories where I work and which 
has made possible so much of what I have done. 
The topk:: of my Turing lecture, "One Man's View of Computer Science," was 
picked because "What is computer science?" is m'gued endlessly among people 
in the field. Furthermore, as the excellent Curriculum 68 report ~ remarks in its 
introduct;ioa, "The Committee believes strongly that a continuing dialogue on the 
process and goals of education in computer science will be vital in the years to come." 
I,as~ty, it is wrong to think of Turing, for whom these lectures were named, as being 
exclusively interested in Taring machines; the fact is that he contributed to mm~y 
aspects of the field and would probably have been very interested in the topic, 
though perhaps not in what I say. 
The question "Whag is computer science?" actually occurs in rnatly different 
A Report of the ACM Curriculum Committee on Computer Science; Comm. ACM 11, 3 (Mar: 
1968), 151--197. 
JouraM of Q~e Association for Computing )&uehin,ery V'ol. lfl, No. [, Juau~ry 1969, DP. 8-12. 
R, W, HAMMING 
forms, among which are: What is computer science currently? What can it deveI¢):p 
into? What shouht it develop into? What, will it develop into? 
A precise answer cannot be given to any of the:~e, Ma~y :,'ears ago aa erni~er~:t 
mathematician wrote a b~ek What is Malkemagics and >.owhere did he try to de~ 
firte mathematics, rather he simply wrote :mathematics, While you will ~(,~- arid 
then find some :~spect of mathematics defirmd rather sharply, the only geaeralty 
agreed upon definition of mathematics is "2\[athematics is what mathematician,s 
do", which is followed by "Mathematicim~s are people who do nmthematics." What 
is true about defining raathematics is also true about ma~.v other fields: ~chere is 
often no dear, sharp definition of the field. 
In the face of this difficulty many people, i~mludir~g myself ag times, flee[ ~' t~a:~: 
we should ignore the discussion and get on with doi~g it. But a.s George I:~rs3 the 
points out so welP in a recent article, it does matter what people in Wash ~ gt(~n 
D. C. think computer science is. According to him, they tend to feel that it is a 
part of applied mathernatics and therefore turn to the mathematiciat~s for advice 
in the granting of funds. And it is not greatly different elsewhere; in both t dustry 
and the universities you can often still see traces of where computing first sta:rted, 
whether in electrical engineering, physics, mathematics, or even busi~ess, ti;vi- 
dently the picture which people have of a subject can significantly afl'ect its subse.. 
quent development. Therefore, although we cannot hope to set, tle the questioa 
definitively, we need fre(luently to examine and to air our views on what ~,ur su~> 
jeer is and should become. 
In many. x(~, 
p(.cts,"s~"' for me it would be more satisfactory, t(: give a talk (m s,ome 
small, technical point in computer science---it would certainly be easier. But ~.hat~ 
is exactly one of the things that I wish to st, ress--the danger of gettir~g h)st i~ (.he 
details of the field, especially in the coming (lays when there will t:e a veritable 
blizzard of papers appearing each month in the journals. We nmst give a good deal 
of ~ttention to a broad training in the field--this in tim face of the increasing .... ~ 
sity to specialize more and rnore higMy in order to get a thesis problem, pubt:ish 
many papers, el;(',. We need to prepare our students for the year 2000 whet~ ms:my 
of them will be at the peak of their career. It seems to me to be more true ia corn.. 
puter seience than in many other fields that "specialization leads to triviality." 
I am sure you have all heard that our scientific knowledge has been doubli~g : 
every 15 to 17 years. I strongly suspect that the rate is now much higher .in com~. 
puter science; certainly it was higher during the l:)~vst 15 years. In all of our plans 
we must take this growth of information into account and recognize that in a very: 
real sense we face a "semi-infnite" amount of knowledge. In many respects the 
classical eoneept of a seholar who knows at least 90 percent of the relevant knowb. 
edge in his feld is a dying eoneept. Narrower and narrower specialization is 
the answer, since in part the difficulty is in the rapid growth of the ir~terrelatio~> : 
ships between fields. It is my private opinion that we need to put relatively more 
stress on quality and less on quantity and that the careful, critical, eor~sidered 
survey m'tieles will often be more significant in advancing the field than new, non ~: 
essential material. 
We live in a world of shades of grey, but in order to argue, indeed even to think,. 
it is often necessary to dichotomize and say "blaek" or "white". Of course in doing 
FoasY~'~, G. E. 
What to do till the computer scientist comes. Am. Math. Mo~lhly 75, 5 
(May 1968), 454-461. 
Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, Vol. 16, No. I, January 1969 
..... 
':4 Co,~zpufer ~bcience 
5 
~,~ we do viole,,~ce W the truth, but there seems to be no other way to proceed. I 
~:~g t}-~ere~'ore, that you will take many of my small distinctions in this light--in 
a s~q:~:< ~, I do no*~ bdieve them m:,-seIg but there seems to be no other simple way of 
di.<~>.s:b~g the matter. 
F~ e~ampte, let me make a.~ arbitrary distinction between science and engineer- 
i~g by sayi~g that science is con.cerned with u'hat is possible while engineering is 
~>~eemed with &oozi'ng, from among the many possible ways, one that meets a 
m~mber of often poorly stated economic and practical objectives. We call the field 
~,~:~>mputer scie~ce" but I believe that it. would be more accurately labeled "com- 
p~:~er e~gb~eeri~g" were not thk roe likely to be misunderstood. So much of what 
~:~:, do is ~:ot> a question of can it be done as it is a question of finding a practical 
~y. i~; is ~ot usually a quetetiou of can %ere exist a monitor system, algorithm, 
;~%:.<iuler~ or compiler, rather it: is a question of finding a practical working one 
,~i~.h a reas,:mable expenditure of time and effort. While I would not change the 
m~.me k'c,m "comput, er science" W "computer engineering," I would like to see 
fe~g" mitre of a practical, engineeri~g flavor in what we teach than I usually find in 
Th#ere is a seceded reason for e.aking: that we stress the practical side. As far into 
~{e f~aure as I can see, computer science departments are going to need large sums 
{.,i ~ money, Now society usually, though not always, is more willing to give money 
~,,hca it. can see practical returns than it is to invest in what it regards as impracti- 
<:~l a~ {ivi~.ie:~, amusing games, etc, If we are to get the vast sums of money I believe 
we ~ii! ~:~eed, tt~en we had better ~ive a practical flavor to our field. As many of you 
~J'e v-.ell aware, we have already acquired a bad reputation in many areas. There 
5 ~,~ b~e~ ~~x(eptio~s, of' course, but all of you know how poorly we have so far 
r~~e~ {he ~e~:ds for software. 
.... 
~{,~rt of computer science lies a technological device, the computing 
m ~hk~e. Without the machine almost all of what we do would become idle specula- 
{i~m, ha~-diy diffe~.e~t from that. of the notorious Scholastics of the Middle Ages. 
The ~<a~:de~.s of the ACM clearly reeognized that most of what we did, or were 
~>i~g t~ do, *'elated (m rids {eeh~:mlogieal device, and they deliberately included 
tt:e werd "machi~mry" in the title. There are those who would like to eliminate 
~{~e ~:~*i, ia a s(mse to symbolically free the field from reality, but so far these ef- 
:f~: ~*~s have failed. I do ~mt regret the initial choice. I still believe that it is important 
hit ,a.:~ ~.~) re~:oguize that the computer, the information processing machine, is the 
~i>m~datic, n of our field. 
f:[~v :si:~alI we produce this flavor of practicality that I am asking for, as well as 
tl~e ~epu~at, i(m for deliveri,~g what society needs at the time it is needed? Perhaps 
n>st important is the way we go about our business and our teaching, though the 
research we do will also be very important. We need to avoid the bragging of useless- 
v'a~:::~u and the game-playing that the pure mathematicians so often engage in. Whether 
<,r ~ot ae plate mathematician is right in claiming that what is utterly useless 
~o<l~y will be useful tomorrow (and I doubt very much that he is, in the current 
itu~ioa), it is simply poor propaganda for raising the large amounts of money 
w~ ~eed to support the continuing growth of the field. We need to avoid making 
com~ u{er seie~:,ce look like pure mathematics: our primary standard for acceptance 
si~outd be experience in the real world, not aesthetics. 
f:iere I setting up a computer science program, I would give relatively more 
Ja~r~t of the As.~ociation for Computi.ug ~'~aehlnery, Vol. 16, No. I, January 1969 
6 
n.w. 
HAM~a-NO 
emphasis to laboratory work than does Curriculum 68, and in particular I would 
require every computer science major, undergraduate or graduate, to take ~ l~bor~- 
tory course ir~ which he designs, builds, debugs, and documents a reasonably sized 
program, perhaps a simulator or a simplified compiler for a particular m~chi~e. 
The results would be judged on style of programming, practical efficiency, fr~edona 
from bugs, and decurnentation. If any of these were too poor, I would rroL 
let 
the candidate pass. In judging his work we need to distinguish clearly be t~o'~een 
superficial cleverness and genuine understanding. Cleverness was essential irr the 
past; it is rio longer sufficient. 
I woukl also require a strong minor ilr some field other than computer science 
o~r*d 
mathematics. Without real experience in using the computer to get useful results 
the computer science major is apt to know all about the marvelous tool except 
how 
to use it. Such a person is a mere technician, skilled in manipulating the tool 
but 
with little sense of how and when to use it for its basic purposes. I believe w~o should 
avoid turning out more idiot savants--we have more than enough "eomputniks" 
now to last us a loi,g time. What we need are professionals! 
The Curriculum 68 recognized this need for "true-to-life" programming by 
sa~y- 
ing, "This might be an'anged through summer employment, a cooperative work- 
study program, part-time employment in computer centers, special projects courses, 
or some other appropriate means." I am suggesting that the appropriate meter, s 
is a stiff laboratory course under your own control, and that the above suggestions 
of the Committee are rarely going to be effective or satisfactory. 
Perhaps the most vexing question in planning a computer science currieulurxl 
is 
determini,~g the mathematics courses to require of those who major in the 
field. 
Many of us came to computing with a strong background in mathematics and 
tend 
automatically to feel that a lot of mathematics should be required of everyone. 
All too often the teacher tries to make the student into a copy of himself. But 
it is 
easy to observe that in the past many highly rated software people were ign_orant 
of most of formal mathematics, though many of them seemed to have ~ n~Gural 
talent for mathenlati(:s (as it is, rather ttmn as it is so often taught). 
In the past I have argued that to require a strong mathematical content for com- 
puter science would exclude many of the best people in the field. However, "v~ith 
the coming importance of scheduling and the allocating of the resources of 
the 
computer, I have had to reconsider my opinion. While there is some evider~ee tha~; 
part of this will be incorporated into the hardware, I find it difficult to believe that 
there will not be for a long time (meaning at least five years) a lot of sehedutling 
and allocating of resources in software. If this is to be the pattern, then we 
n_eed 
to consider training in this fiekl. If we do not give such training, then the compute 
r 
science major will find that he is a technician who is merely programrair, g 
What 
others tel1 him to do. Ii'urthermore, the kinds of programming that were regarded 
in the past as being great often depended on cleverness and trickery and reqlt:m.ired 
little or no formal mathematics. This phase seems to be passing, and I am. forced; 
to believe that in the future a good mathematical background will be n~e,c:le(::[ if 
our graduates are to do significant work. 
History shows that relatively few people can learn much new mathernatie~ 
in 
their tl:firties, let alone later in life; so that if mathematics is going to play tx sigrd~. 
cant role in the future, we need to give the students mathematical trainir~g vvl-~.ile 
they are in school. We can, of course, evade the issue for the moment by PrOviding 
Journal of the A~sociation for Computing Machinery, Vol. 16, No. 1, January 1969 
On~ Ma~',~ View of Computer Science 
t~vo parallel ps~ths, one Mth and one without mathematics, with the warning that 
t[~ ~o~mathe:maticaI path leads to a dead end so far as further university training 
is c(mcerr~ed (assuming we believe that mathematics is essential for advanced 
traipsing iI:~ computer science). 
Once we grant the need for a lot of mathematics, then we face the even more 
difficult task of saying specifically which courses. In spite of the numerical analysts' 
c{~:ims for t, he fundamental importance of their field, a surprising amount of com- 
~)uter science activity requires comparatively little of it. But [ believe we can de- 
fe~:~d the requirement that every computer science major take a~ least one course 
in the/ield. Our difficulty lies, perhaps, in the fact that the present arrangement of 
(osmal mathematics courses is not suited to our needs as we presently see them. We 
seem to ~lecd some abstract algebra; some queuing theory; a lot of statistics, in- 
cludh~g the design of experiments; a moderate amount of probability, with perhaps 
some elements of 5;Iarkov chains; parts of information and coding theory; and a 
iittle (m ba,~dwidth and signalling rates, some graph theory, etc., but we also know 
tohat the field is rapidly changing and that tomorrow we may need complex variables, 
topoh)gy, and other topics. 
As I said, the planning of the mathematics courses is probably the most vexing 
part of the curriculum. After a lot of thinking on the matter, I currently feel that 
if our gr~Lduates are to make significant contributions and not be reduced to the 
levet of technicians running a tool as they are told by others, then it is better to 
give ~hem too much mathematics rather than too little. I realize all too well that 
t}~is will exclude many people who in the past have made contributions, and I am 
~o¢ happy about my conclusion, but there it is. In the future, success in the field 
~,t ° computer science is apt to require a command of mathematics. 
One of the complaints regularly made of computer science curriculums is tha~ 
~hey seem to almost totally ignore business applications and COBOL I think that 
i~ is r~o~ a question of how important the applications are, nor how widely a lan- 
guage like Co~oL is used, that should determine whether or not it is taught in the 
cc~mputer science department; rather, I think it depends on whether or not the 
business administration department can do a far better job ~haa we can, and whether 
~r ~ot what is peculiar to the business applications is fundamental to other aspects 
of computer science. And what I have indicated about business applications applies, 
t believe, to most other fields of application that can be taught in oilier depar~- 
~ne~xts. I strongly believe that with the limited resources we have, and will have for 
a long time to come, we should not uttempt ~ teach applications of computers 
i~ the computer science department~rather, those applications should be taught 
i~,~ their natural environments by the appropriate departments. 
The problem of the role of analog computation in the computer science curricu- 
lum is not quite the same as that of applications to special fields, since there is really 
s~() place else for it to go. There is little doubt that analog computers are eeonomi- 
~tly important and will continue to be so for some time. But there is also little 
doubt that the field, even including hybrid computers, does not have at present 
~he k~ellectual ferment ~hat digital computation does. Furthermore, the essence 
<'ff good analog computation lies in the understanding of the physical limitations 
oi the equipment and in the peculiar art of scaling, especially in the time variable, 
~'hich is quite foreign to the rest of computer science. It tends, therefore, to be 
ignored rather than to be rejected; it is either not taught or else it is an elective, and 
Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, VoL 16, No. I, January 1969 
8 
~: 
R.w. 
tMs is probably the best we can expect at present when the center of interest is the 
general purpose digital computer. 
' 
At present there is a flavor of "game-playing" about many courses in computer 
science. I hear repeatedly from friends who want to hire good software people that 
they have found the specialist in computer science is someone they do not want. 
Their experience is that graduates of our programs seem to be mainly interested 
in playing games, making fancy programs that really do not work, writing trick 
programs, etc. and are unable to discipline their own efforts so that what they say 
they will do gets done on time and in practical form. If I had heard this complaint
merely once from a friend who fancied that he was a hard-boiled engineer, then 
I would dismiss it; unfortunately I have heard it from a number of capable, intel: 
ligent, understanding people. As I earlier said, since we have such a need for 
support for the current and future expansion of our facilities, we had better con~ 
sider how we can avoid such remarks being made about our graduates in the coming::
years. Are we going to continue to turn out a product that is not wanted in many:
places? Or are we going to turn out responsible, effective people who meet the real
needs of our society? I hope that the latter will be increasingly true; hence my 
emphasis on the practical aspects of computer science .
.
.
.
.
 
One of the reasons that the computer scientists we turn out are more interested:
in "cute" progranuning than in results is that many of our courses are being taught
by people who have the instincts of a pure mathematician. Let me make another
arbitrary distinction which is only partially true. The pure mathematician starts
with the given problem, or else some variant that he has made up from the given 
problem, and produces what he says is an answer. In applied mathematics it is:
necessary to add two crucial steps (1) an examination of the relevance of the mathe: 
matical model to the actual situation, and (2) the relevance of, or if you wish the 
interpretation of, the results of the mathematical model back to the original situai :
tiom This is where there is the sharp difference: The applied mathematician must 
be willing to stake part of his reputation on the remark "If you do so and so you 
will observe such and such very closely and therefore you are justified in 
ahead and spending the money, or effort, to do the job as indicated," wMle the 
mathematician usually shrugs his shoulders and says, "That is none of my responsi~ 
bility." Someone must take the responsibility for the decision to go ahead on one 
path or another, and it seems to me that he who does assume this responsibility 
will get: the greater credit, on the average, as it is doled out by society. We needs 
therefore, in our teaching of computer science, to stress the assuming of responsi~ 
bility for the whole problem and not just the cute mathematical part, This is another 
reason why I have emphasized the engineering aspects of the various subjects and 
tried to minimize the purely mathematical aspects. 
The difficulty is, of course, that so many of our teachers in computer science are 
pure mathematicians and that pure mathematics is so much easier to teach than 
is applied work. There are relatively few teachers available to teach in the style 
I am asking for. This means we must do the best we can with what we have, bus 
we should be conscious of the direction we want to take and that we want, where 
possible, to giv ma practical flavor of responsibility and engineering rather than: 
mere existence of results. 
It is unfortunate that in the early stages of computer science it is the talent and: 
ability to handle a sea of minutiae which is important for success, But if the student 
Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, Vol. 16, No. 1, January 1969 
One Man's View of Computer Science 
9 
is to grow into someone who can handle the larger aspects of computer science, 
then he must have, and develop, other talents which are not being used or exer- 
cised at the early stages. Many of our graduates never make this second step. The 
situation is much like that in mathematics: in the early years it is the command 
of the trivia of arithmetic and formal symbol manipulation of algebra which is 
needed, but in advanced mathematics a far different talent is needed for success. 
As I said, many of the people in computer science who made their mark in the 
area where the minutiae are the dominating feature do not develop the larger 
talents, and they are still around teaching and propagating their brand of detail. 
What is needed in the higher levels of computer science is not the "black or white" 
mentality that characterizes so much of mathematics, but rather the judgment 
and balancing of conflicting aims that characterize engineering. 
I have so far skirted the field of software, or, as a friend of mine once said, "ad 
hoc-ery." There is so much truth in his characterization of software as ad hoc-ery 
that it is embarrassing to discuss the topic of what to teach in software courses. 
So much of what we have done has been in an ad hoc fashion, and we have been 
under so nmch pressure to get something going as soon as possible that we have 
precious little which will stand examination by the skeptical eye of a scientist or 
engineer who asks, "What content is there in software?" How few are the difficult 
ideas to grasp in the field! How much is mere piling on of detail after detail without 
~ny careful analysis! And when 50,000-word compilers are later remade with per- 
haps 5000 words, how far from reasonable must have been the early ones! 
I am no longer a software expert, so it is hard for me to make serious suggestions 
about what to do in the software field, yet I feel that all too often we have been 
satisfied with such a low level of quality that we have done ourselves harm in the 
process. We seem not to be able to use the machine, which we all believe is a very 
powerful tool for manipulating and transforming information, to do our own tasks 
in this very field. We have compilers, assemblers, monitors, etc. for others, and yet 
when I examine what the typical software person does, I am often appalled at how 
little he uses the machine in his own work. I have had enough minor successes 
in arguments with software people to believe that I am basically right in my in- 
sistence that we should learn to use the machine at almost every stage of what we 
are doing. Too few software people even try to use the machine on their own work. 
There are dozens of situations where a little machine computation would greatly 
aid the programmer. I recall one very simple one where a nonexpert with a very 
long FORTRAN program from the outside wanted to convert it to our local use, so 
he wrote a simple FORTRAN program to locate all the input-output statements and 
all tile library references. In my experience, most programmers would have per- 
sonally scanned long listings of the program to find them and with the usual human 
fallibility missed a couple the first time. I believe we need to convince the computer 
expert that the machine is his most powerful tool and that he should learn to use 
it as much as he can rather than personally scan tile long listings of symbols as I 
see being done everywhere I go around the country. If what I am reporting is at 
all true, we have failed to teach this in the past. Of course some of the best people 
do in fact use the computer as I am recommending; my observation is that the run- 
of-the-mill programmers do not do so. 
To parody our current methods of teaching programming, we give beginners 
a grammar and a dictionary and tell them that they are now great writers. We 
Journal of the Association for Computing Yiachlaery, VoL 16, No. 1, J~nu~ry 1969 
10 
R.W. HAMMING 
seldom, if ever, give them any serious training in style. Indeed I have watched for 
years for the appearance of a Manual of Style and/or an Anthology of Good Program. 
ruing and have as yet found none. Like writing, programming is a difficult and 
complex art. In both writing and programming, compactness is desirable but in 
both you can easily be too compact. When you consider how we teach good writing 
--the exercises, the compositions, and the talks that the student gives and is graded 
on by the teacher during his training in English--it seems we have been very remiss 
in this matter of teaching style in programming. Unfortunately only few program- 
mers who admit that there is something in what I have called "style" are willing 
to formulate their feelings and to give specific examples. As a result, few program- 
mers write in flowing poetry; most write in halting prose. 
I doubt that style in programming is tied very closely to any particular machine 
or language, any more than good writing in one natural language is significantly 
different than it is in another. There are, of course, particular idioms and details 
in one language that favor one way of expressing the idea rather than another, 
but the essentials of good writing seem to transcend the differences in the Western 
European languages with which I am familiar. And I doubt that it is much different 
for most general purpose digital machines that are available these days. 
Since I am apt to be misunderstood when I say we need more of an engineering 
flavor and less of a science one, I should perhaps point out that I came to computer 
science with a Ph.D. in pure mathematics. When I ask that the training in software
be given a more practical, engineering flavor, I also loudly proclaim that we have 
too little understanding of what we are doing and that we desperately need to de- 
velop relevant theories. 
Indeed, one of my major complaints about the computer field is that whereas 
Newton could say, "If I have seen a little farther than others it is because I have 
stood on the shoulders of giants," I am forced to say, "Today we stand on each 
other's feet." Perhaps the central problem we face in all of computer science is 
how we are to get to the situation where we build on top of the work of others 
rather than redoing so much of it in a trivially different way. Science is supposed 
to be cumulative, not almost endless duplication of the same kind of things. 
This brings me to another distinction, that between undirected research and 
basic research. Everyone likes to do undirected research and most people like to 
believe that undirected research is basic research. I am choosing to define basic 
research as being work upon which people will in the future base a lot of their work. 
After all, what else can we reasonably mean by basic research other than work upon 
which a lot of later work is based? I believe experience shows that relatively few 
people are capable of doing basic research. While one cannot be certain that a 
particular piece of work will or will not turn out to be basic, one can often give
fairly accurate probabilities on the outcome. Upon examining the question of the 
nature of basic research, I have come to the conclusion that what determines
whether or not a piece of work has much chance to become basic is not so much 
the question asked as it is the way the problem is attacked. 
Numerical analysis is the one venerable part of our curriculum that is widely
accepted as having some content. Yet all too often there is some justice in the re- 
mark that many of the textbooks are written for mathematicians and are in fact 
much more mathematics than they are practical computing. The reason is, of
course, that many of the people in the field are converted, or rather only partially 
Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, Vol. 16, No. 1, January 1969 
One Man's View of Computer Science 
11 
converted, mathematicians who still have the unconscious standards of mathe- 
matics in the back of their minds. I am sure many of you are familiar with my 
objections 3 along these lines and I need not repeat them here. 
It has been remarked to me by several persons, and I have also observed, that 
many of the courses in the proposed computer science curriculum are padded. Often 
they appear to cover every detail rather than confining themselves to the main 
ideas. We do not need to teach every method for finding the real zeros of a function: 
we need to teach a few typical ones that are both effective and illustrate basic con- 
cepts in numerical analysis. And what I have just said about numerical analysis 
goes even more for software courses. There do not seem to me (and to some others) 
to be enough fundamental ideas in all that we know of software to justify the large 
amount of time that is devoted to the topic. We should confine the material we 
teach to that which is important in ideas and technique--the plodding through a 
mass of minutiae should be avoided. 
Let me now turn to the delicate matter of ethics. It has been observed on a 
number of occasions that the ethical behavior of the prog]'ammers in accounting 
installations leaves a lot to be desired when compared to that of the trained account- 
ing personnel. 4 We seem not to teach the "sacredness" of information ~bout people 
~md private company material. My limited observation of computer experts is 
that they have only the slightest regard for these matters. For e×ample, most 
programmers believe they have the right to take with them any program they wish 
when they change employers. We should look at, and copy, how ethical standards 
are incorporated into the traditional accounting courses (and elsewhere), because 
they turn out a more ethical product than we do. We talk a lot in public of the 
dangers of large data banks of personnel records, but we do not do our share at 
the level of indoctrination of our own computer science majors. 
Along these lines, let me briefly comment on the matter of professional standards. 
We have recently had a standard published ~ and it seems to me to be a good one, 
but again I feel that I am justified in asking how this is being incorporated into 
the training of our students, how they are to learn to behave that way. Certainly 
it is not sufScient to read it to the class each morning; both ethical and professional 
behavior are not effectively taught that way. There is plenty of evidence that 
other professions do manage to communicate to their students professional stand- 
ards which, while not always followed by every member, are certainly a lot better 
instilled than those we are presently providing for our students. Again, we need 
to examine how they do this kind of training and try to adapt their methods to our 
needs. 
Lastly, let me mention briefly the often discussed topic of social responsibility. 
We have sessions at meetings on this topic, we discuss it in the halls and over coffee 
and beer, but again I ask, "How is it being incorporated into our training program?" 
The fact that we do not have exact rules to follow is not sufficient reason for omit- 
ting all training in this important matter. 
I believe these three topics--ethics, professional behavior, and social responsi- 
bility-must be incorporated into the computer science curriculum. Personally 
HAMminG, R.W. 
Numerical analysis vs. msthematics. Science 148 (Apr. 1965), 473-475. 
4 CAREY, J. L., AND DOHERTY, W.A. 
Ethical Standards of the Accounting Profession. Am. 
Inst. CPAs., 1906. 
Comm. ACM 11, 3 (Mar. 1968), 198-220. 
Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, Vol. 16, No. 1, January 1969 
12 
R.W. HAMmNG 
I do not believe that a separate course on these topics will be effective. From what. 
little I understand of the matter of teaching these kinds of things, they can best 
be taught by example, by the behavior of the professor, They are taught in the 
odd moments, by the way the professor phrases his remarks and handles himself. 
Thus it is the professor who must first be made conscious that a significant part of 
his teaching role is in communicating these delicate, elusive matters and that he is 
not justified in saying, "They are none of my business." These are things that must 
be taught constantly, all the time, by everyone, or they will not be taught at all. 
And if they are not somehow taught to the majority of our students, then the field
will justly keep its present reputation (which may well surprise you if you ask your 
colleagues in other departments for their frank opinions). 
In closing, let me revert to a reasonable perspective of the computer science
field. The field is very new, it has had to run constantly just to keep up, and there
has been little time for many of the things we have long known we must some day 
do. But at least in the universities we have finally arrived: we have established
separate departments with reasonable courses, faculty, and equipment. We 
now well started, and it is time to deepen, strengthen, and improve our field so that 
we can be justly proud of what we teach, how we teach it, and of the students we
turn out. We are not engaged in turning out technicians, idiot savants, and comput
niks; we know that in this modern, complex world we must turn out people who can 
play responsible major roles in our changing society, or else we must acknowledge 
that we have failed in our duty as teachers and leaders in this exciting, important
field--computer science. 
Journal of the A.~ociatlon for Compu~Lug Machinery, Vol, 16, No. I, January 19~9 
