Mathematics on a Distant Planet
Author(s): R. W. Hamming
Source: The American Mathematical Monthly, Vol. 105, No. 7 (Aug. - Sep., 1998), pp. 640-650
Published by: Mathematical Association of America
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2589247 .
Accessed: 18/06/2014 03:45
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 .
Mathematical Association of America is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
The American Mathematical Monthly.
http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 130.239.116.185 on Wed, 18 Jun 2014 03:45:25 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Mathematics on a Distant Planet 
R. W. Hamming 
The purpose of this talk is to get you to think seriously about the extent to which 
mathematics is arbitrary 
and the extent to which it is fixed, and about what you 
think mathematics is. 
This talk began in my mind long ago during the early SETI (search for extra 
terrestrial 
intelligence) 
when the giant radar dish at Arecibo was being used for the 
search. Now, many years later, we are searching with far more efficiency 
and still 
have no definite signs of life. 
There are three aspects to mathematics. First, there are the postulates, axioms, 
or assumptions, however you may wish to call them. The Bourbaki approach has 
tended to focus on them. Alternate postulates that describe the same mathematics 
are not to be considered as different 
mathematics. 
Second, there are the definitions; 
these determine a great deal of mathematics. 
For example, the current definition 
of a function allows a lot of peculiar things. If I 
have a continuous saw tooth function with alternating slopes of + 450 and rotate 
the coordinates 45? then the function is no longer continuous; it is not even a 
function! Neither Euler nor Fourier would have agreed with this! The idea of 
continuity 
arose from the concept of drawing the curve without lifting the (ideal) 
pen and had no relationship to the coordinates you happen to choose. To have 
distorted the primitive, 
intuitive idea of continuity 
so that it is now coordinate 
dependent seems to me to be foolish. Thus the idea of a function and the idea of a 
curve are now distinct concepts. 
Third, there are the kinds of logical deductions that are permitted. 
The patterns 
of reasoning are seldom examined these days and will be looked at briefly, 
and in 
only one direction. 
But before going farther I need to mention a few things in my life that have 
shaped my opinions. The first occurred at Los Alamos during WWII when we were 
designing atomic bombs. Shortly before the first field test (you realize that no small 
scale experiment can be done-either you have a critical mass or you do not), a 
man asked me to check some arithmetic 
he had done, and I agreed, thinking 
to fob 
it off on some subordinate. When I asked what it was, he said, "It is the probability 
that the test bomb will ignite the whole atmosphere." I decided I would check it 
myself! The next day when he came for the answers I remarked to him, "The 
arithmetic 
was apparently correct but I do not know about the formulas for the 
capture cross sections for oxygen and nitrogen-after all, there could be no 
experiments 
at the needed energy levels." He replied, like a physicist talking to a 
mathematician, 
that he wanted me to check the arithmetic not the physics, and 
left. I said to myself, 
"What have you done, Hamming, you are involved in risking 
all of life that is known in the Universe, and you do not know much of an essential 
part?" I was pacing up and down the corridor when a friend asked me what was 
bothering me. I told him. His reply was, "Never mind, Hamming, no one will ever 
blame you." Yes, we risked all the life we knew of in the known universe on some 
mathematics. Mathematics is not merely an idle art form, it is an essential part of 
our society. 
640 
MATHEMATICS ON A DISTANT PLANET 
[August-September 
This content downloaded from 130.239.116.185 on Wed, 18 Jun 2014 03:45:25 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Since that day I had often, especially while at Bell Telephone Laboratories, 
made similar, less dramatic to be sure, predictions based on conventional mathe- 
matics; if you make the wing size 1/3 as large, and give up the slant launch you 
will be much better off and can intercept the target much farther 
out; if you design 
a transistor this way instead of that you will see this much gain; this design of a 
central office will have less blocking than that design under the assigned load of 
traffic; 
etc. Many times I have made predictions about the physical world based on 
mathematics done at my desk. Surely Nature does not know nor care what I write, 
nor the mathematical postulates used, but the consequences can be serious. 
Therefore it is of significant 
importance to ask, "What kinds of mathematics 
can I 
depend on, and what kinds can I not?" That is the question! 
Back to the main story; remember that the underlying 
hypothesis is that we are 
in two-way communication 
with a distant civilization via radio waves. We believe 
their physical and chemical world is similar to ours, so they also have gravity, 
inertia, heat, conservation of energy, thermodynamics, 
entropy, and other details 
of our world. They have the same physical problems that we do, and they must 
survive them. If you believe in creationism, and hence in God, then of course He 
could have created them to be very much different 
from us, but if you believe in 
evolution then they too must have evolved with the same physical laws, with 
upward compatibility 
at all stages of their evolution, from simple beginnings to 
their current complexity. Galileo once said, "Mathematics is the language of 
Science." Hence, facing the same laws of the physical world, their mathematics 
must have a good deal of similarity 
to ours. 
The immediate question is, what kinds of communication could we expect to 
have with them-surely they will not speak English or any other Earthly natural 
language. I observe that on Earth while we have many different 
natural languages 
we seem to have essentially only one language for mathematics. Will they have 
essentially the same language? 
I soon began, on my two week visits each summer to Los Alamos Scientific 
Laboratories as a consultant, to ask these questions of physicist 
friends. With the 
hypothesis 
as given above, they all agreed that the aliens would have essentially the 
same mathematics. But the word "essentially" needs clarification. Physicists all 
know that quantum mechanics has three different 
descriptions, 
the wave form, the 
matrix form, and there is also a group theory approach, hence a given body of 
experimental data, or Nature itself if you prefer, need not have a unique theory. 
The argument was that the aliens must have some equivalent form for Maxwell's 
equations. But these equations implied the calculus, more or less, as we have it, 
etc. 
Highly imaginative people can imagine almost anything in this matter, and we 
have science fiction stories of gas clouds being sentient beings, but when you press 
them for probabilities and not mere idle conjectures a lot of this fancy imagination 
fades. Indeed, with regard to the Moon landings, some people claimed that the 
surface might be 17 feet of dust and the vehicles would be smothered in it when 
they landed. It turned out that the surface was pretty much as we had 
expected-our expectations allowed for more erosion from particles and solar 
wind, and less from water and wind erosion, all because of the very, very small 
amount of atmosphere on the Moon. Hence I tend to ignore the wild, far out, 
suggestions. Indeed, when they are all added up then the sum of all the probabili- 
ties assigned to the far out proposals was so small that we ignored them and 
assumed that the Moon was reasonably similar to the Earth. 
1998] 
MATHEMATICS ON A DISTANT PLANET 
641 
This content downloaded from 130.239.116.185 on Wed, 18 Jun 2014 03:45:25 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
You get nowhere 
with idle speculations; 
you need a base for starting. 
Recalling 
that Descartes, when he began to think about the world, once he realized that 
much of what he had been taught 
was not true, began with, "I think, 
therefore 
I 
am." I decided to begin with Kronecker's 
classic remark, 
"God made the integers, 
the rest is the work of man." You can pretend 
to believe in other than this, but the 
necessity 
of living, 
surviving, 
and of distinguishing 
one thing 
from 
another 
means to 
me that you will probably 
have a discrete 
counting 
system, 
and unlimited 
in extent 
-the integers are finite and linearly ordered, but the system of integers is 
unbounded. 
The Peano postulates 
for the integers 
are amusing, 
but surely no one really 
thinks 
that these postulates 
gave rise to the integers; 
indeed if it turns 
out that they 
are inadequate then we will alter them to get what we want. Our ideas of the 
integers 
are independent 
of the Peano postulates! 
Euclidean geometry 
is tied up with the continuous. 
The Greeks finally 
faced the 
difficulty 
of the two approaches, 
the continuous 
and the discrete, 
and in truth 
came out poorly, about as badly as we have. There were then two schools of 
philosophers-those 
who clung to no change (a thing that was itself could not 
change and still be itself), 
and those who believed in change being the basis of the 
universe 
(Heraclitus: 
all is in a state of flux, 
and you cannot step in the same river 
twice). The Zeno paradoxes were, I believe, a dramatic attempt to show the 
inherent 
troubles 
that arise between the discrete and continuous 
points of view. 
Take only one, the flying 
arrow paradox. If time is composed of instants, 
much as 
the real line is said to be composed of points, then at any instant 
the arrow is in 
some position and hence it is never moving. 
We say the same sort of thing about 
the line; it is composed of points that have no dimension 
but the unit line has 
dimension! 
Is that reasonable? On the other hand those who believed in the 
change had to say, finally, 
that there is a limit to the ability 
to subdivide, 
and hence 
the world was composed of indivisible 
atoms. The discrete 
position 
was stuck with 
the logic that no change was possible; change was all illusion, since otherwise 
nothing 
would be definite 
and fixed. 
The continuous 
and discrete 
do not mix, they 
are like oil and water. 
I am inclined 
to believe that on the imagined 
distant 
planet they too would have 
found the same sort of logic we use even if their life were based on silicon rather 
than carbon compounds; 
after all they apparently 
have to deal with the same sort 
of physical 
universe 
that we have locally, and hence they would have the same 
troubles that Zeno dramatized. 
Again, as Galileo observed, 
mathematics 
is the 
language of Science, and since the physical 
world they face has the same laws as 
ours, they cannot deviate too far from the mathematics 
we have. Or can they? 
From the integers 
the Greeks came to the fractions, 
the rational numbers, 
the 
ratio numbers, 
and I believe the distant 
planet would too. But the Greeks, when 
recognizing 
that the diagonal of a unit square is not a rational 
number, 
decided it 
is not a number at all, at best it is a magnitude, 
and we have a lot of Euclid's 
Elements, 
beginning 
in Book 5, trying 
to deal with the Eudoxean theory of 
magnitudes. 
Somewhere 
in the Middle Ages, with the rise of the decimal system 
of 
notation, 
we seem to have decided that our irrational 
numbers 
are numbers. 
Need 
the aliens have done so? Probably, 
or else, like Euclid, they carried on with two 
parallel theories. The transcendentals 
such as ir, y, and e are probably not 
avoidable, and they on their planet will have had to deal with them in some 
manner. 
In 1957 Turing 
introduced 
into logic the (paper, not physical) 
Turing 
machine 
to 
meet Hilbert's desire for mechanical 
proofs, which Hilbert supposed would be 
642 
MATHEMATICS ON A DISTANT PLANET 
[August-September 
This content downloaded from 130.239.116.185 on Wed, 18 Jun 2014 03:45:25 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
perfect proofs valid for all time. In so doing Turing changed the definition of 
numbers! Before that time numbers were, apparently, regarded as being their 
representations (almost always in their decimal form as if God had five 
fingers! 
-rarely in binary form). Turing concentrated on what a machine could 
produce using programs, which were supposed to be a finite string of instructions 
(binary digits for convenience), and which when run on the corresponding 
comput- 
ing machine would halt so you knew when you had the answer. Thus a computable 
number is a number for which there is some program to compute it on some 
Turing machine to as many (necessarily finite) digits as you specify. Thus Turing, in 
trying to get (ideal to be sure) mechanical proofs, changed the concept of a 
number from its representation 
to the corresponding process of getting as many 
digits as you please. The number q- is now a program, say the program that 
generated some 6 billion digits of it, and is no longer the original infinite 
representation. 
Thus Turing introduced another modest step away from the actual 
infinite and back to the finite, but unbounded: the potential infinite 
of Aristotle as 
opposed to the actual infinite 
of Cantor. Most mathematicians 
seem to be unaware 
of this change, but those in computing find it natural. This change in the definition 
will ruin some old proofs and results, and at the same time make possible other 
proofs of other things. 
This change from the infinite 
to the finite is in the direction of many other parts 
of mathematics; for example the delta-epsilon process. Again, I do not see how 
they on their planet could have avoided facing the problems of the discrete and 
continuous, and the consequent troubles with infinity. 
In one form or another, they 
probably had their Zeno with his paradoxes, as well as other troubles. After all we 
apparently live in a finite universe and the old idea of 1/3 = 0.3333... out to 
infinity, 
flies in the face of our own beliefs and probably their beliefs too! 
Without attempting 
a proof, and I will get to this matter of mathematical rigor 
and proof in a little while, you can see, since a program is defined to be a finite 
sequence of instructions, 
that the possible computer programs are necessarily each 
finite but the set of all programs is unbounded, and hence would be countable, 
indeed by a suitable ordering even enumerable, hence the computable numbers, 
being a subset, are also countable. Note that this subset of programs of the 
enumerable set of strings of instructions 
is not well defined in the sense, to be 
shown later, that you cannot tell if an arbitrary 
string is a program or not. But most 
of you believe, because you were told so, and shown some kind of proof of it, that 
the numbers from 0 to 1 are not countable. 
Now there is the well known Lowenheim-Skolem theorem in logic, that any 
finite set of postulates has a countable realization-and again with no proof 
offered by me you can still sort of see why that would be true; we simply do not 
accept infinitely 
long proofs as yet. But if so, how from the finite number of 
postulates could you prove the non-countability 
of the numbers defined by the 
postulates, since surely what you can prove from the postulates alone must apply to 
every realization of them? So you recall the proof Cantor gave, and his diagonal- 
ization process, which used the representations 
of numbers. Which do you prefer, 
the intuitively 
obvious proof that any finite number of postulates has a countable 
realization or the diagonalization process used to prove the non-countability? 
What would they, on their planet, have done since sooner or later it would come 
up? I am inclined to believe that they would have confined Cantor in his old age to 
an insane asylum. I will return to his diagonalization process later. 
It will be noticed that I have avoided going deeply into conventional logic. As a 
graduate student I found, and studied, Boole's Laws of Thought, and I found it 
1998] 
MATHEMATICS ON A DISTANT PLANET 
643 
This content downloaded from 130.239.116.185 on Wed, 18 Jun 2014 03:45:25 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
interesting, 
relevant, and believable. But when I examine even introductions 
to 
mathematical logic I find the hair splitting that goes on unbelievable; I cannot 
believe that any one, or even all the fine distinctions 
together, could ever change a 
prime number into a composite number, undo Cauchy's contour theorem, or cause 
a missile, instead of hitting the target, to miss by a mile. The logician's activities 
seem to be irrelevant 
to mathematics as I understand it, but rather logic is an ideal 
game played by pure mathematicians 
for their own amusement. 
So long as you confine yourself to ordered sequences and ordered sets then the 
natural way of computing the density of, say, the even integers, is to take the 
limiting ratio of those having the property to the total number examined, and of 
course you get 1/2 for the density of the even integers, and you avoid the 
paradoxical statements that at first confuse people until it becomes clear to them 
that you have chosen one particular, rather unnatural, way of comparing the sizes 
of ordered sets. Even Galileo noted the paradox that arises when you try the 
method of 1 to 1 pairing off with the integers; in particular he observed that the 
pairing off way gave an equal number of perfect squares and positive integers. You 
get no such strange results when you stick with ordered sets and densities in 
intervals; it was because Cantor wanted to deal with infinite unordered 
sets that he 
used the 1 to 1 definition 
of equal size of sets. I am by no means sure that on the 
distant planet they would have so chosen, and this has serious consequences for 
Lebesgue integration, 
which assigns a measure 0 to each countable set, hence to all 
the computable numbers, hence in my opinion, all of reality that you can ever 
name or talk about! Indeed, for more than 40 years I have claimed that if whether 
an airplane would fly or not depended on whether some function that arose in its 
design was Lebesgue but not Riemann integrable, then I would not fly in it. Would 
you? Does Nature recognize the difference? 
I doubt it! You may, of course, choose 
as you please in this matter, but I have noticed that year by year the Lebesgue 
integration, 
and indeed all of measure theory, seems to be playing a smaller and 
smaller role in other fields of mathematics, 
and none at all in fields that merely use 
mathematics. Recently people have shown that the Henstock integral, which is a 
simple, reasonably natural extension of Riemann integration, 
is more general than 
Lebesgue integration 
with all its peculiar properties. 
I know that the great Hilbert said, "We will not be driven out of the paradise 
Cantor has created for us," and I reply, "I see no reason for walking in!" Indeed, in 
time, as more and more people get used to computers, 
I am inclined to believe that 
we here on this Earth will decide that the computable numbers are enough. 
Apparently you never need a non-computable number! Take, for example, the 
classic real line from 0 to 1, and remove the computable numbers. You have a 
non-countable number of numbers left, no one of which you can ever describe 
(how can you describe a number adequately if you cannot give, at least implicitly, 
a 
way of finding it)! Yet the axiom of choice says you can select one! Can you? 
Which one, if you can never describe it so another person knows what you are 
talking about? Is the axiom of choice reasonable? Is it safe to depend on this 
axiom in this real world? Just as the physicists finally decided, after years of 
arguing about properties of the ether that it turned out could not be measured, I 
too believe it is better to ignore entirely what you cannot talk about or measure! 
Some things do not arise naturally! 
Many years ago, as I was picking up a paper to read on the non-computable 
numbers, I suddenly realized that no one could ever come into my office and ask 
for a non-computable 
number. If they never can occur, why bother? So I threw the 
article in the waste basket unread! 
644 
MATHEMATICS ON A DISTANT PLANET 
[August-September 
This content downloaded from 130.239.116.185 on Wed, 18 Jun 2014 03:45:25 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
At this point it should become apparent that I do not think that theorems are 
really proved. As G. H. Hardy said long ago, we emit some symbols, another 
person reads them, and they are either convinced or not by them. To simple 
people who believe whatever they read and do not question things for themselves, 
a proof is a proof is a proof, but to others a proof merely supplies a way of thinking 
about the theorem, and it is up to the individual to form an opinion. Formal 
proofs, where there is deliberately no meaning, can convince only formalists, 
and 
of the results obtained they themselves seem to deny any meaning. Is that to be the 
mathematics 
we are to use in understanding 
the world we live in? 
When Shannon first published his Information Theory (1947), most people 
recognized that the theorems were true but the proofs were inadequate. Professor 
Doob at Illinois took the strict view of proofs, and openly doubted, in his Math 
Review, Shannon's mathematical integrity! 
Thus, again, there are two quite differ- 
ent views of what mathematics 
really is, and I have no way of deciding if one or the 
other won out on the distant planet, or perhaps, as on Earth, both flourish side by 
side with little mutual understanding 
between them. For me theorems are true or 
false pretty much independent of their corresponding 
proofs; my internal beliefs 
must be the final arbiter of whether I accept or reject the mathematics I see. But 
the purists believe that the postulates, definitions, 
and the accepted logic deter- 
mine such things! 
Coming back from fancy, mystical theories, which seem uncheckable in reality, 
to Euclidean geometry 
and its postulates, there is a standard proof, using accepted 
methods, that all triangles are isosceles, and the corollary follows that all triangles 
are equilateral. The proof rests, as you no doubt know, on an improperly 
drawn 
figure. Hilbert recognized that Euclid had assumed, but had not proved, things 
about intersections 
and betweenness, and to cope with such proofs Hilbert added 
many more postulates than Euclid had started with! I first read up on this as a 
graduate student, and I discovered the remarkable fact that not one of the 400-odd 
theorems in Euclid was thereby shown to be false! After a lot of thought I realized 
that Hilbert made the added postulates so this would be true-meaning that the 
theorems were being viewed as true independent of the inadequate proofs (begin- 
ning with Theorem 1)-and from there I soon realized that Euclid had been in the 
same position; he had a lot of theorems he "knew were true," including the 
Pythagorean theorem, and he had to find postulates that would support them. 
Mathematics is not simply laying down some arbitrary 
postulates and then making 
deductions, it is much more; you start with some of the things you want and you try 
to find the postulates to support them! Bourbaki to the contrary, 
notwithstanding! 
We now get to the questions of proofs and rigor. I have long argued that given a 
rising standard of rigor we cannot now be sure of any proofs. Surely, most of our 
current proofs will have to be fixed up, much as in my time I have found that I had 
to fix up proofs of some of the greatest mathematicians. Thus Gauss, in his 
doctoral thesis, after showing how previous proofs of the fundamental theorem of 
algebra were not reliable, gave a proof himself-indeed he gave several different 
proofs over his lifetime-but probably all of them would be found to have holes in 
them by a modern topologist! Did Gauss ever prove the fundamental theorem of 
algebra? In what sense do you mean he proved it? In an argument 
with a very good 
mathematician 
in the Mathematics Department's common room at Bell Telephone 
Laboratories, I sprung the rising level of proof problem on him. He was driven to 
asserting that we had at that time (1960's) reached the ultimate of rigor in proofs 
and there would be no more need for patching up old proofs! Of course later, with 
time to calm down and collect his thoughts, 
he might well have changed his mind! 
1998] 
MATHEMATICS ON A DISTANT PLANET 
645 
This content downloaded from 130.239.116.185 on Wed, 18 Jun 2014 03:45:25 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Perhaps it is not true that a theorem can ever either be definitively 
proved or 
disproved! 
Well, I face the same problem with respect to the distant planet. Could they 
have found a certain, sure mathematics 
that does not need the continual reproving 
of theorems that we have? Can such mathematics exist? I wish I knew! 
Back to geometry again. On this Earth we have chosen carefully to ignore 
anti-symmetry; 
two plane triangles are congruent even if we have to flip one over 
in three dimensions to get the match. It seems probable to me that the distant 
planet might have preferred to admit orientation in the first place and not force 
most users of geometry to tack it on later. In our classical Euclidean geometry 
we 
cannot have the important theorem that in three dimensions there are only two 
orientations, 
those of left- and right-handed 
threads. 
Now, consider one of the most widely cited theorems of Euclidean geometry, 
that you cannot trisect an arbitrary 
angle with straight 
edge and compass. It is true, 
in a sense, but if you allow two marks on the straight edge then it is false (that was 
known to Archimedes)! In practical use it is a trivial difference! 
Would they have 
had a Plato who was so obsessed with the ideal that he wanted no physical 
instruments 
in geometry outside the straight edge and compass? Not even two 
marks on the straight edge! That mathematicians 
should so often cite the theorem 
whose truth or falsity hangs on such a trivial difference 
in definition is unreason- 
able! It is not a theorem relevant to the real world. 
Along these lines I leave it to you to consider the matter of how we conveniently 
count multiple zeros of a function as being multiple (deliberately confusing 
factors 
and zeros!), so you can then extend the reasoning to dual graphs, justify counting 
self-dual graphs twice, and thus obtain the theorem that there are six regular solids 
in three space and not five. After all, six is a perfect number! Mere words to be 
sure; nothing has changed, the world is still as it was, but the statement of the 
theorem is quite different! 
Well, much of our mathematics is like that, and hence we cannot assume that 
the aliens would have followed the same narrow path as we did. Without defining 
it, I will claim that the "robust" parts of mathematics can generally 
be depended 
on when care is taken in the identification of the parts of reality and the 
corresponding mathematics (along with a careful inspection of the underlying 
assumptions, general structure, and its usefulness in other places), and that the 
"non-robust" 
parts are useless to us, as useless as the idea of the ether was to the 
physicists, 
best forgotten! 
By now you are probably wanting me to say what I believe so you can attack me 
for all the outrageous things I have pointed out about your mathematics. I will 
begin with Hermite who said, "We are not the master of Mathematics, we are the 
servant." I have often said the opposite, "We are the master of Mathematics, not 
the servant; it shall do as we want it to do." In truth, I seem to believe in a blend 
of the two remarks; at times we are driven and at times we are in control of 
mathematics. So too, the aliens will find themselves, and because they live in the 
same kind of physical world and have established radio contact with us, their 
"robust," useful mathematics will have a reasonable analogy with ours, but the 
"non-robust" 
parts could be very different. 
Would they even know or care about all 
of our trivial theorems? Although it is widely assumed to have been proved with 
our assumptions, definitions, and methods of reasoning, is the famous Fermat 
theorem true in their mathematics? Is it not necessary to consider what they 
regard as a proof and as no proof, or even what are meaningful 
statements 
to them 
and to us? 
646 
MATHEMATICS ON A DISTANT PLANET 
[August-September 
This content downloaded from 130.239.116.185 on Wed, 18 Jun 2014 03:45:25 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Before you think that I am excluding much of higher mathematics let me 
observe another thing I have long said. If you come into my office and show me 
that Cauchy's contour theorem is false, I will be very interested, but in the end I 
will say to you that you should go back and find other assumptions so that it is true 
because I "know" it is "true"; it is too needed in some form, perhaps only Green's 
theorem, not to have it be true. It gives the potential function behind vector fields, 
among other things, and it is the basis of our complex variables work, though we all 
know that there are at least three distinct approaches to complex variables: 
(1) Cauchy's contour theorem, (2) the power series approach of Lagrange and 
Weierstrass, and (3) the approach via harmonic functions, which never uses 
i= 
- 1. This again, illustrates a point I have made several times; the theory 
need not be unique to provide the support for actions that we are postulating the 
aliens have been able to carry out; there could be very different 
mathematical 
foundations, 
as well as surface details, so long as these support the results needed 
for the real world. 
Finally, it is not only the postulates and definitions 
that need to be examined 
but also the logic used in mathematics. 
I cannot in a short time discuss most of the 
troubles in logic, hence we now come to consider just the role of self-reference 
in 
mathematics. 
You all know the statement, 
"This statement is false." It is grammat- 
ically correct, and there is nothing wrong with it until you apply it to itself, when if 
it is true then it is false, and if it is false then it is true! There are many other 
examples, such as the classic, "Moderation in all things." But the word "all" means 
an extreme, again a self-contradiction 
when you work it out. A friend of mine kept 
a notebook of such common statements. 
Russell's paradox is the usual example used in logic to illustrate the dangers of 
using self-reference 
in definitions, 
and Russell developed an hierarchical theory of 
types as an escape from such problems, but later seemed to have rejected it! So far 
as I can see, his theory of types has not been widely accepted, and we are still in 
the quandary of contradicting ourselves in our assumptions via self-reference, 
possibly fairly remote. 
As another kind of self-reference 
that may be dubious, consider the self-refer- 
ence in the logic used in a proof. I will first choose Turing's main result for the 
halting problem, which states that there can be no program that can determine if 
an arbitrary 
program will halt or not. To prove it Turing starts by assuming that he 
has this program, which of course he does not believe exists! Since he can know 
nothing- 
about the insides of the program all he can do is tinker with the input and 
output, and he simply reverses the outputs, "halt" and "does not halt." Next he 
applies one program, the unaltered, to altered one (or has it really been?), and 
comes out with a contradiction! 
Hence he claims the nonexistence of the program. 
Is that an acceptable form of proof? Does it convince you? 
In impossibility 
proofs we often use the initial assumption that what we are 
going to prove does not exist, does exist! For example, in the classic proof that the 
square root of 2 is not a fraction, 
we assume we have a fraction in its lowest terms, 
square both sides, and get a contradiction involving the divisibility 
by 2. On the 
distant planet they might well prefer the broader theorem that no fraction when 
raised to any integer power can be an integer. On Earth, at present, both the 
Turing theorem and the irrationality 
of the square root of 2 are usually considered 
as proven, though one of them is rather self-referential. 
Next we look at the Cantor diagonalization process, which seems to fall between 
the two examples. Again, he opens by assuming that if the numbers were count- 
able then you could list them in some order, and he then makes a change in the 
1998] 
MATHEMATICS ON A DISTANT PLANET 
647 
This content downloaded from 130.239.116.185 on Wed, 18 Jun 2014 03:45:25 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
first digit of the first number, the second in the second, etc. down the infinite list 
to the end! Then he claims that the altered digits form a number that is not in the 
list. Hence there could be no such list, and the numbers between 0 and 1 are not 
countable (enumerable). Again, in the proof he deals with the actual infinite and 
not the potential infinite of Aristotle. After all he had no conception of com- 
putable numbers, so it is hard to blame him too much; he was using the traditional 
number representation 
of his time and we (at least some of us) have changed the 
ground under him! 
It is a question of how much self-reference 
is acceptable in a self-reference 
proof. We know that some simple self-references 
can give self-contradictory 
results. We tend to feel that the simple square root proof, which algebraically 
rewrites the expression without other alterations, is a safe argument. I, at least, 
have my doubts of the validity of the Turing proof as it is usually given, and I am 
saying nothing about the truth of the theorem itself. The Cantor diagonalization, 
which does some alteration in the objects being discussed, supposes that we can 
cope with the actual infinity, 
and uses a much weaker degree of self-reference 
than 
Turing, hence falls in between the two, and I am ambiguous as to my belief in the 
safety of relying on the result. The Lowenheim-Skolem paradox does seem to 
undercut the non countability 
argument Cantor gave. Indeed, how would you test 
it? Remember we seemed to have shifted the definition of a number from its 
possibly infinite representation (using Dedekind cuts for example) to a finite 
process that will generate another digit. Is the Cantor diagonalization process still 
valid? Turing's theorem, quoted earlier (if you believe it), shows that there can 
exist no definite way to choose the programs that lead to computable numbers, so 
how could Cantor's initial listing be made for even the computable numbers when 
there can be no mechanical method of recognizing a program? Even if you do not 
believe Turing's theorem just how is the listing to be done? Would you risk your 
life on its truth in the real world, or is it merely an artifact of contemporary 
mathematics having nothing to do with reality? If the latter then it seems to me 
impossible to make a serious pronouncement 
on whether or not the aliens would 
have such mathematics. Any argument about the agreement of our mathematics 
with theirs must be based on having the same physical world to explain, and not on 
wild imaginations. 
It seems to me that there are degrees of self-reference 
in such proofs, since 
some of the proofs convince me and some do not. Could the aliens on the distant 
planet have found some objective method of discrimination 
in self-reference 
so 
that they would not put me in the ambiguous position I find myself, 
believing some 
and not others with no sharp line between them? When you return to the 
contradiction 
I offered about the noncountability 
of the numbers on the real line, 
the classic proof you were raised on is the Cantor diagonal process. Suppose I 
offer to put the binary numbers in the order, all the one-digit numbers, then the 
two-digit numbers, then the three, etc., thus: 0, 1, 00, 01, 10, 11, 000, 001, 010, 
011, .... You give me any string of binary digits, and in this Universe it must be a 
finite string since the Universe is apparently finite, and I can name where it 
occurs! Alter any digit of any entry in any finite string and I can tell you where the 
altered one occurs! Of course this is not what Cantor did! He seized the infinite 
immediately, 
and supposed he could do what no program can do, whereas I am 
sticking with the attitude that a number is a process and you can give me only 
another digit of the number representation, 
not the string of all of the digits in its 
infinite representation. 
How would the aliens have chosen? Indeed, how do you 
wish to choose when perhaps your life is going to depend on the result? 
648 
MATHEMATICS ON A DISTANT PLANET 
[August-September 
This content downloaded from 130.239.116.185 on Wed, 18 Jun 2014 03:45:25 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
I would not have you believe that I think of mathematics solely as being useful, 
that the artistic aspect is not useful-especially in teaching where beauty can add 
to the understanding. 
But with the doubling of mathematical results every 17 years 
or so, we are now at well over 100,000 new theorems each year, extrapolating 
from 
an estimate made long ago by Ulam (see The Mathematical 
Experience, 
Davis and 
Hersh, pp. 20-21). And there is the remark made by Ralph P. Boas when he was 
an editor of Math Reviews, that of the new results in the papers reviewed most are 
true but the corresponding proofs are perhaps half the time plain wrong! Some 
people claim that the great increase in the volume of published results is due to 
republication, in some disguised form that is hard to recognize in the new jargon, 
and is not new mathematics-still we have to cope with it. Again, try explaining 
this on the basis of the concept of the mathematics of Platonic idealism. 
In the Platonic world that most mathematicians 
seem to think mathematics is, 
one "discovers" theorems that apparently 
were already there immediately 
after the 
big bang occurred. Opposed to that view is the view that I "create" the result when 
I find it. When I try to examine my own beliefs, without any prior conventional 
beliefs, I find that if the result seems to be important then I found it, but if it 
seems to be rather trivial then I created it! Their view on their distant planet? 
Mathematicians on this Earth generally realize that the Platonic view is not 
defensible logically, but stick to it anyway, except when pressed as to what 
mathematics 
is when they shift to a defensible position and claim that mathematics 
is an idle game of symbol manipulation with no inherent meaning. To paraphrase 
Hilbert, "When rigor enters, meaning departs." After all, they on their planet will, 
like us, want outside financial support to continue, indeed to increase. I fear that 
they will have similar logical troubles about defining mathematics and what it is. 
Both here and there, it must be more than meaningless symbol manipulations if it 
is to result in communication 
via the radio waves predicted by Maxwell's equations, 
but what it is in a more positive sense is hard to say. 
In writing one book (Methods of Mathematics 
Applied to Calculus, Probability, 
and Statistics) I was forced to say that the essence of mathematics is extension, 
generalization, and abstraction. These are three similar, but distinct, attributes of 
mathematics, 
and I think they are the essence of mathematics, 
both here on Earth 
and there on their planet. But perhaps mathematics is "merely clear thinking," 
and nothing more. 
When we teach mathematics 
we should at all times be aware of this dual nature; 
its abstract beauty and its practicality, 
which is necessary to help us to cope with 
the Universe we find ourselves in. But we need to avoid the old Greek belief that 
mathematics is sure, certain knowledge. The aliens must also face the similar 
problem on their planet. 
The purpose of this talk was to explore and sensitize you to the arbitrary 
elements in our accepted mathematics, 
as well as to the extent that we are forced 
to have the mathematics 
we have, since it is of use to explain the real world. 
I also want to suggest strongly 
that if in the future you want government 
grants 
and support, then the latter kind of mathematics should get a good deal of your 
attention, but not to the complete neglect of elegance. The argument that in the 
past, pure, as opposed to directed, research has led to much useful mathematics 
is 
true, but until you can also seriously estimate the mathematics that was not done, 
because they did the pure mathematics instead of useful mathematics, then the 
argument has no validity, and mathematicians should be ashamed to use it. 
Furthermore, 
with the enormous growth of results, at well over 100,000 new (?) 
theorems every year (look at all the volumes of relevance to your own field alone 
1998] 
MATHEMATICS ON A DISTANT PLANET 
649 
This content downloaded from 130.239.116.185 on Wed, 18 Jun 2014 03:45:25 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
that come out each month), then the chance of a new piece of pure mathematics 
being spotted by you and also being at hand when you need it, and not have to be 
recreated when needed, is increasingly 
small; instead we will more often create the 
mathematics we need as we need it. Regeneration is increasingly easier than 
retrieval. In fact, even now it is often easier to reinvent some sort of concept than 
it is to find its description in the literature-which helps in the proliferation 
of 
''new results" 
! 
You should not believe everything 
I have said; the talk is only a stimulus and a 
guide for you to examine your thoughts on what mathematics is and should be in 
near the future, as opposed to what the books and experts tell you it is. I found the 
search very illuminating and worthwhile. As I regularly tell my students, "In 
science and mathematics we do not appeal to authority, but rather you are 
responsible 
for what you believe." I leave you to consider what you believe about 
mathematics. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT. 
The author thanks 
Peter Renz for his careful, 
very helpful 
remarks 
that have 
improved 
the presentation 
greatly. 
R. W. HAMMING worked at Los Alamos during 
WWII in the computing 
group for the design of the 
atom bomb. He then went to Bell Telephone Laboratories 
for 30 years, 
retired, 
and went to the Naval 
Postgraduate 
School to teach various 
courses for 21 years. As a consequence 
he is acutely 
aware of the 
need to have our predictions 
based on our mathematics 
agree, as best we can, with the real world we 
live in. This paper is based on a luncheon 
talk given by Professor 
Hamming 
at a Northern 
California 
Section Meeting 
in San Francisco, 
February 
22, 1997. He was able to prepare the paper for publication 
before his death on January 
7, 1998-Editor 
Cyclone 
98e 
A revolutionary 
way of viewing 
graphs 
"By far the fistest 3D implicit 
surface 
plots I've ever seen. Rotate, 
zoom, at-id 
change parameters 
on the fly. Perfect 
for real-time 
classroom explorations. 
C. Henry Edwards, The University 
of Georgia 
"That's nice ... that's nice, I'm certainly 
going to order one." 
Thomas Banchoff, 
Brown University 
- 
MNathWare's 
Cyclone 98, programmed 
by David Parker, 
is a world class program 
that 
can create mathematical 
images from implicit 
statements 
in three variables 
like x2 + y2 + z2 = 9 which produces 
a sphere of radius 
three. 
No need to transform 
the equation into a function 
of z and be graphed 
twice with an upper and lower 
part. Besides rotating 
and zooming, 
you can slice a surface 
and move the slice using a scroll bar. The value of 
parameters 
can be changed in real-time, 
you can graph 3D inequalities, 
as well as create intersections 
of 3D 
regions. 
Cyclone 98 supports 
OLE so it will work with your other favorite 
programsl(such 
as Mathematica, 
Maple, Microsoft 
Word). Runs on Windows 95 or Windows NT (version 
4 or later) 
Price $99 
Demo available on the internet 
(wwwunmathware.com) 
MathWare P.O. Box 3025, Urbana, IL. 61803 
(800)255-2468, Fax (217)384-7043 
650 
MATHEMATICS 
ON A DISTANT PLANET 
[August-September 
This content downloaded from 130.239.116.185 on Wed, 18 Jun 2014 03:45:25 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
