 
- 1 - 
 
 
 
Historical objections against the number line 
 
Abstract 
Historical studies on the development of mathematical concepts will help mathematics teachers to relate 
their students‟ difficulties in understanding to conceptual problems in the history of mathematics. We argue 
that one popular tool for teaching about numbers, the number line, may not be fit for early teaching of 
operations involving negative numbers. Our arguments are drawn from the many discussions on negative 
numbers during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries from philosophers and mathematicians such as 
Arnauld, Leibniz, Wallis, Euler and d‟Alembert. Not only does division by negative numbers pose problems 
for the number line, but even the very idea of quantities smaller than nothing has been challenged. Drawing 
lessons from the history of mathematics, we argue for the introduction of negative numbers in education 
within the context of symbolic operations. 
 
Keywords: negative numbers, number line, obstacles 
 
My enthusiasm for mathematics was based principally perhaps on my horror of hypocrisy; 
hypocrisy as I saw it, was my aunt Séraphie, Mme Vignon and their priests. In my opinion 
hypocrisy wasn‟t possible in mathematics and, in my youthful simplicity, I thought the same 
went for all the sciences in which I had heard it said they were applied. What then when I 
realized that no one could explain to me how it is that a minus times a minus equals a plus? 
(From The Life of Henry Brulard, pseudonym for Marie-Henri Beyle, better known as 
Stendhal, 1890,  ed. 2002, pp. 363-4) 
1. 
Introduction 
The number line is currently one of the important tools for teaching basic arithmetical 
concepts such as natural and real numbers in primary and secondary education. Hans 
Freudenthal (1983, 101) calls this mental object a “device beyond praise” and considers it 
a preferred vehicle to teach negative numbers (ibid, 437). In many countries the ordering 
of negative numbers by means of the number line is taught by the fifth grade (Howson, 
Harries and Sutherland, 1999).  
Despite its wide acceptance, the use of the number line in mathematics education is 
rather new. It seems to have originated in the 1950s.1 Max Beberman, credited for many 
innovations in math teaching, used the earlier term „number scale‟: “In teaching 
subtraction of signed numbers, I first draw a number scale” (Beberman and Meserve, 
1956).  
As pointed out by Susan Carey (2001) the number line should be considered as a 
cultural construction – and most probably as a Western construction – rather than an 
                                                 
1  A systematic study of the history of the number line in mathematics education still needs to be undertaken. 
However some web sites reconstructed its history: Jeff Miller, http://jeff560.tripod.com/mathword.html 
and Patt Ballew http://www.pballew.net/mathbooks.html are the most useful (retrieved 1 Nov 2010).  
 
- 2 - 
arithmetical model with ontogenetic foundations as proposed by naturalists such as 
Stanislas Dehaene (1997). 
However, not everyone is convinced of the benefits of using the number line for 
teaching negative numbers in primary education. In fact, the very teaching of operations 
on negative numbers is no longer allowed in education below the age of 12 in Belgium. 
Negative numbers can only be used in “concrete situations”. The examples provided are 
the floors of a building and the temperature scale. The concept of an isolated negative 
number is an intrinsically difficult concept. Negative numbers emerged in history within 
the context of symbolic algebra (Heeffer 2010). We share the view of some national 
education programs that the concept is best taught in secondary education and more 
specifically within an algebraic context. We will develop some arguments from the history 
of mathematics against the use of the number line for teaching on negative numbers. 
Even the question of the historical acceptance of negative numbers is problematic. The 
interpretation of negative solutions given in two accounts on the history of the subject 
(Sesiano 1985 and Gericke 1996) is challenged by others as not being cases of acceptance 
of negative quantities (Heeffer 2007). The algebraic practice of solving linear problems 
has led repeatedly to situations in which one arrives at “a negative value”. Before the 
sixteenth century, such solutions were consistently called „absurd‟ or „impossible‟. The 
abbaco master, convinced of the correctness of his algebraic derivations, could interpret 
the negative value in a merchant‟s context as a debt.2 This does not imply that he accepted 
the solution as a negative value. On the contrary, by interpreting the solution as a debt, he 
removed the negative. Only from the beginning of the sixteenth century onwards, we see 
the first step towards negative values in the form of algebraic terms affected by a negative 
sign. The fact that negative solutions were considered absurd for several centuries of 
algebraic practice is of significance to the teaching of mathematics. The arguments we will 
expound below were advanced and discussed by philosophers and mathematicians of the 
seventeenth and eighteenth century. The continuous struggle during that period to get a 
grip on such an elusive concept as that of a negative quantity exemplifies the intrinsic 
epistemic difficulty of some elementary concepts, now taught to ten year olds. The 
historical arguments and discussions are not trivial. They should be taken seriously by 
anyone teaching the subject. Questions arising in classroom practice may reflect historical 
concerns and positions taken by previous mathematicians. 
2. 
The number line as a model 
Many publications dealing with the number line in the history of mathematics or in 
mathematics education fail to give a definition (e.g. Thomaidis and Tzanakis, 2007). Let 
us here make clear how we will use the term. The number line is a representation of 
numbers on a straight line where points represent integers or real numbers and the distance 
between points matches the arithmetical difference between the corresponding numbers. 
The number line in Western culture is usually depicted horizontally with higher numbers 
                                                 
2  Abbaco masters or maestri d’abbaco were active in the commercial centers of Northern Italy between 
1300 and 1550, teaching boys between eight and fourteen arithmetic with the use of Hindu-Arabic 
numerals. Abbaco or abbacus mathematics is spelled with double „b‟ to distinguish it from the abacus as 
instrument. For a thorough introduction in abbaco mathematics, see Høyrup (2007).  
 
- 3 - 
shown at the right hand side. Negative numbers are conventionally shown left from zero. 
The transition from positive to negative over zero is taken for granted. 
Having defined the number line as a representation, it should be understood as a model 
for reasoning, teaching and understanding concepts and properties in mathematics. Models 
presuppose some kind of isomorphism between the model and what is modeled. Properties 
of a straight line can be exploited to model arithmetical properties. A straight line can be 
extended into infinity; so can natural numbers. A straight line has two directions; also 
negative integers can go to – ∞. The linear aspect of a line can be exploited as a scale, so 
that equal distances on the line always correspond to equal differences between numbers. 
This also applies to negative numbers. The fact that the distance between 2 and 5 on the 
number line is equal to the distance of 2 and – 1 is a property that allows children to 
appeal to spatial intuitions for an understanding of negative numbers. The number line 
also provides an excellent model to relate real numbers to natural numbers. While 4/3 is 
represented decimally by an infinite sequence of digits, it corresponds to exactly one point 
on the number line, located between 1 and 2. 
As with all models, they fail when the isomorphism breaks down. This happens as soon 
as we start operating on numbers. Basic arithmetical notions such as proportions, 
multiplication and division already present challenges to the model, especially when they 
involve negatives. Good models can cope with some disturbances. The question we would 
like to pose here is how good the number line is as a model to teach operations involving 
negative quantities. Or put differently: do the benefits of using the number line weigh up 
against the challenges that operations on negatives pose? Is the transition over zero as 
intuitive as it is considered to be? We will demonstrate that, from a historical viewpoint, 
this is not the case. Our objections thus focus on the use of the number line for teaching on 
negative quantities. This does not exclude the use of the number line for other purposes in 
mathematics education. There are certainly didactical situations for which the number line 
is an adequate model. 
3. 
Epistemological obstacles and conceptual barriers 
When discussing the historical objections against the number line we cannot pass by the 
„ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny‟-debate. Some authors have taken the position that 
there is a strong parallel between the historical development of mathematical concepts and 
the acquisition of mathematical notions and concepts in the cognitive development of 
children. The parallel can go in both directions. In Psychogenèse et histoire des sciences, 
Piaget and Garcia (1983) identify major transitional mechanisms in geometry and algebra 
and relate them to the three development stages in Piaget‟s theory of psychogenesis. Their 
account of the 3000 year history of algebra identifies major stages of its historic 
development with the three corresponding stages of cognitive development. The first (long) 
period was only concerned with “solutions to specific equations. The methods used were 
purely empirical, trial-and-error. Each equation was treated as a separate object. This is 
undoubtedly an intraoperational period” (ibid, 166). The second, interoperational period 
started in the eighteenth century and covers Lagrange and Gauss. This period is 
characterized by “transformations of equations that allow the reduction of an unsolvable 
form to one that is solvable” (ibid.). Finally, the transoperational period originates with the 
group theory of Galois (1811-1832), going from equations to more abstract structures. 
 
- 4 - 
This approach by Piaget has received little support from historians or scholars working on 
the crossover between history and pedagogy of mathematics.  
Far more accepted is the idea that conceptual difficulties in the historical development 
of mathematics may be reflected in mathematics education. The most common framework 
for approaching this parallel is that of epistemological obstacles, a term coined in 1938 by 
Bachelard within the context of history of science. The term originally refers to misleading 
elements blocking the rational process of advancement of science. The idea was adapted 
by Brousseau (1976) for use in mathematics education. Brousseau attributes a positive 
function to epistemological obstacles within his didactical project. He considers such 
obstacles more as a piece of mathematical knowledge rather than a lack of knowledge. He 
identifies them in the history of mathematics as well as students‟ spontaneous models. In 
classroom situations they do not appear as erratic or unexpected errors, but as predictable 
ones. In a reaction to Brousseau, Glaeser (1981) listed a number of epistemological 
obstacles including the “inability to manipulate isolated negative quantities” and “the 
difficulty of giving meaning to isolated negative quantities”. While the idea of 
epistemological obstacles is still at the forefront in the „ontogeny recapitulates 
phylogeny‟-debate, several authors have called for caution and warned that the parallelism 
should not be taken all too literally. Herscovics (1989) pointed out that the conditions 
under which concepts are thought in today‟s classroom are quite different from the 
historical conditions in which these concepts matured. Thomaidis and Tzanakis (2007) in 
a study on the use of the number line conclude that a strict parallelism is untenable and 
propose a more subtle one.  
While we believe in a strong parallelism between history and education for some 
intrinsic difficult concepts such as negative numbers, it is not necessary to resort to 
epistemological obstacles as a theoretical framework. We see two main objections against 
the concept. Within the context of history, epistemological obstacles are often viewed as 
blocking factors within a teleological evolution of mathematics. Such a view is considered 
dubious from a current perspective of mathematical practice which attributes a high degree 
of contingency to the development of mathematics. On the level of mathematics 
education, epistemological obstacles are mostly situated on the psychological level. 
Current scholarship takes into account a much broader contextual perspective including 
sociological and cultural conventions as well as norms and values. A useful alternative to 
epistemological obstacles is available from the history of science. An interesting 
phenomenon in scientific discovery is simultaneous discovery. A good example of this is 
the discovery of the sine law of refraction. As is now established, the sine law was 
discovered independently by Thomas Harriot around 1602, by Willebrord Snellius in 1621 
and by René Descartes between 1626 and 1628. Descartes was the first to publish the law 
in his Dioptrique of 1637. With accurate data available since Ptolemy (2nd century AD), 
why did it take fifteen centuries to come to the sine law? Furthermore, why did several 
individuals came to the discovery within a matter of a few decades? The barrier theory by 
Margolis (1993) provides a framework for the understanding of such historical cases. 
Habits of minds govern our cognitive processes and are similar to what Polanyi called 
„tacit knowledge‟. They can be considered critical intuitions within a community and are 
therefore constitutive of a paradigm. A barrier is an entrenched habit of mind that can 
block a cognitive breakthrough. In relation to our subject, negative quantities in 
mathematics, the cognitive barrier is symbolic reasoning. It took about two centuries from 
 
- 5 - 
a first acceptance of isolated negative quantities to a fully symbolic treatment of the 
operations involved. Particularly for symbolic reasoning, the conceptual barrier functions 
in two directions. The conceptual distance between the prevailing arithmetical 
interpretation of abbaco algebra and the conflicting new ideas about symbolic reasoning in 
the sixteenth century determined the long historical process of difficulties. In the reverse 
direction, we are now so accustomed to symbolic reasoning that it becomes equally 
difficult to understand non-symbolic reasoning in algebraic treatises before Descartes. 
In the discussion that follows, on the historical objections against the number line, we 
will consider the symbolic treatment of negative quantities and operations on negative 
quantities as a conceptual barrier. We would like to argue that it is not so much the 
concept of negative quantities in itself that has led to problems and conflicts but rather the 
idea that negative quantities and their operations should be considered on a symbolic and 
abstract level. This will lead us to the conclusion that operations on negative quantities are 
best introduced in mathematics education within the context of symbolic algebra. 
4. 
Numbers smaller than nothing 
4.1. Antoine Arnauld (1612–1694) 
Antoine Arnauld, who wrote an important philosophical work known as The Logic of 
Port-Royal (Arnauld, 1662) published also his Geometry (Arnauld, 1667). In the book he 
includes an example of symbolic rules that he considers to be against our basic intuitions 
on magnitudes and proportions. Although he did not devise the argument as a dispute 
against the number line, he did provide a strong argument against its use for teaching 
negative numbers. Take any point n on the line of natural numbers, the proportion of its 
neighbors n + 1 to n – 1 is always larger than the proportion of n – 1 to n + 1. This 
property disappears when you add negative numbers to the number line. 
He explains it as follows: Suppose we have two numbers, a larger and a smaller one. 
The proportion of the larger to the smaller one should evidently be larger than the 
proportion of the smaller to the larger one. But if we use 1 as the larger number and – 1 as 
the smaller one this would lead to  
1
1
1
1



 
 
 
 
(0.1) 
which is against the rules of algebra.3 Witnessing the multiple instances in which this 
discussion turns up during the seventeenth century, the clash between symbolic reasoning 
and classic proportion theory, taught within the quadrivium, was experienced as 
problematic. Schrecker (1935) was the first to describe the controversy on the topic 
initiated by Prestet in his Elemens des mathematiques of 1675. Both Mancosu (1996, 88-
91) and Schubring (2005, 52-61) describe the positions taken. Prestet‟s response was 
basically that quantities can only be positive and that the signs refer to operations. So it is 
                                                 
3  We take the liberty to represent proportions by fractions within an algebraic context. This is by no means 
anachronistic as is shown in a problem of Jacopo da Firenze (Høyrup 2007, 314, ms. f. 39v). The 
enunciation of a problem about the profit made on a business trip is stated in terms of proportions. 
However, as soon as Maestro Jacopo applies algebra to solve the problem, the proportions are treated as 
fractions involving the cosa (the unknown). The conflation of proportions and fractions is common in 
abbaco algebra. 
 
- 6 - 
perfectly possible to subtract a larger quantity from a smaller one. The negative result 
means just that: a larger quantity subtracted from a smaller one. And when dealing with 
geometrical ratios one should neglect the signs all together.   
4.2. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646 - 1716) 
Also Leibniz found it important enough to respond to Arnauld in an article (Leibniz, 1712, 
167) (see Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1: Leibniz’s response to Arnauld in Acta eruditorum of 1712 
Leibniz acknowledges the problem as a genuine one, but states that the division should 
be performed as a symbolic calculation, the same way as we do with imaginary numbers. 
Indeed, when blindly applying the rules of signs there is no problem at all. When dividing 
a positive number by a negative one, the result is negative, and dividing a negative number 
by a positive one, the result is also negative. Leibniz position can therefore be paraphrased 
as: 
1
1
1
1


 
 
 
 
(0.2) 
Leibniz‟s response to Arnauld exemplifies the evolution which had taken place in 
mathematics from the beginning of the sixteenth century. The operations of algebra, 
introduced in Europe mainly through Latin translations of Arabic works, were given new 
foundations by humanist mathematicians such as François Viète. By the end of the 
sixteenth century, new epistemic foundations were devised the basic operations of algebra. 
In his Isagoga of 1591, Viète constructed a new vocabulary for these operations, such as 
zetetics, poristics, exegetics, antithesis and hypobibasmo. Because of the strong belief in 
the correctness of these operations, the numerical results arrived at had to be accepted, 
even when they lead to anomalous results such as negative and imaginary numbers. The 
abstraction of the concrete numerical values in problem solving was one of the main 
achievements of symbolic algebra. That is where Leibniz is referring to. 
4.3. The abbaco tradition (1200-1500) 
It may be surprising when you follow the seventeenth-century discussions but the kind of 
symbolic reasoning proposed by Leibniz was well accepted within the abbaco tradition in 
Italy by the end of the fifteenth century. Although symbols were not used in any consistent 
way within this tradition we find that the maestri d’abbaco had no problems with such 
 
- 7 - 
kind of symbolic operations. It has been argued that the introduction of symbols such as 
the minus and plus signs is the result of a process toward symbolic thinking (Heeffer 
2008). The epistemic validity of operations on negative numbers within the abbaco 
tradition was derived from a belief in the correctness of generally accepted practices. Very 
early within the algebraic practice of the maestri d’abbaco we see „proofs‟ for the rules of 
sign. That was the kind of explanation Henry Brulard, or Stendhal, preferred (see quote at 
the beginning). The first of such proofs in European mathematics appears in a treatise of 
1344 by Maestro Dardi.4 It explains why a negative multiplied by a negative makes a 
positive. It is repeated in various other manuscripts dealing with algebra during the 
fifteenth century. The proof is derived from the well-know operations on binomials which 
often appear in the introductions of such manuscripts. The reasoning goes as follows: we 
know that 8 times 8 makes 64. Therefore (10 – 2) times (10 – 2) should also result in 64. 
One well known multiplication procedure is called per casella, (literally by the pigeonhole) 
meaning cross-wise multiplication in which you add all the sub-products (see Swetz 1987, 
201-205). You multiply 10 by 10, this makes 100, then 10 times – 2 which is – 20 and 
again 10 times – 2 or – 20 leaves us with 60. The last product is – 2 times – 2 but as we 
have to arrive at 64, this must necessarily be + 4. Therefore a negative multiplied by a 
negative always makes a positive. In modern terminology we would say that the proof is 
based on distributive law of arithmetic.  
By the end of the fifteenth century we see the rules of signs expressed in a more formal 
way. Luca Pacioli is the first to formulate them in an abstract form without referring to 
specific types of quantities (see Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2: Pacioli’s rules of sign for division from the Summa (1494, f. 113r) 
Importantly, Pacioli introduced these rules in Distinction 8, as a preparation to his 
treatment of algebra. In contrast with the discussion of the basic operations of arithmetic, 
the rules of signs are formulated in the most general way. Except for an illustrating 
example with numbers, the formulation of the rules does not refer to any sort of quantities, 
integers, irrational binomials or algebraic terms. The rules only refer to „the negative‟ and 
„the positive‟. Despite the absence of any symbolism, we consider this an early instance of 
symbolic reasoning. And as Leibniz said this is the way to deal with the apparent anomaly. 
Forget about the values but apply the rules correctly and you necessarily arrive at (0.2). 
                                                 
4 His treatise is titled Aliabraa argibra and his best known for its 198 rules for solving “algebraic 
equations”. There exist four extant copies of the manuscript, one of them published by Franci (2001, f. 5v, 
p.44). A critical edition based on the four manuscripts is being prepared by Warren Van Egmond. See also 
Høyrup (2010) for discussion of the proof. 
 
- 8 - 
4.4. Girolamo Cardano (1501 – 1576) 
Cardano made profound, albeit not well-
recognized 
contributions 
to 
the 
acceptance of negative numbers. He was 
the 
first 
to 
give 
a 
satisfactory 
argumentation for negative solutions to 
linear problems and the first to accept 
square roots of negative numbers. 5  A 
justification 
of 
the 
correctness 
of 
operations leading to solutions with 
negative numbers was important to the 
development 
of symbolism 
because 
symbolic algebra makes abstraction from 
the arithmetical contents of the objects it 
is dealing with.  We will further only 
sketch how Cardano formulated doubts 
about the rules of signs during his later 
writing career. 
Some years before his death Cardano 
wrote two treatises in which he reflects 
on his earlier treatment of negative and 
imaginary numbers in the Ars Magna 
(1545). The first one is titled De Aliza 
Regulae published in 1570 as part of the 
larger De Propotionibus and the second 
Sermo de plus and minus which was 
published posthumously in his collected 
works (Cardano 1663, IV, 435-439). Of 
particular interest is his „refutation‟ of 
the proof for the rules of signs as it was 
generally accepted by the abbacists. 
Using the same example as Maestro 
Dardi he concludes the contrary, that 
minus time minus makes plus could 
have the same validity as saying that 
plus times plus makes minus. 
The Aliza in the title of his treatise is derived from the Latin word a’izzā meaning 
„risky‟ or „doubtful‟ (Tanner 1980, 162). Therefore the conclusion should not be taken too 
literality. As the same argument was repeated in his Sermo we will only discuss the first. 
                                                 
5  Both these instances are discussed by Heeffer (2007) and appear in chapter 37 of the Ars Magna named de 
regula falsum ponendis, or the “Rule of Postulating a Negative”. Cardano adapts the rhetorical structure of 
abbaco treatises by posing – x for the quantity to be sought and arrives at a positive value. However, by 
posing a negative unknown for the sought quantity he finds the argument of accepting a negative quantity 
as a solution to a linear problem. A similar abductive reasoning strategy is used for imaginary numbers.  
Figure 3: Cardano's refutation of the rules of sign 
 
- 9 - 
The reasoning goes as follows (see his diagram in Figure 3). If we multiply 10 by 10 
we get a square with side ac equal to 10 and area 100. Given that bc and ag equal 2, the 
square egd thus has an area of 64. To get from 100 (square acef) to 64 (square egd) we 
therefore have to subtract the two rectangles cg and bf. But by doing so we have 
subtracted the square cd twice, so we have to add it one more time. Thus arithmetically we 
have 
100
(10 2)
(10 2)
(2 2)
64







.  
And this is the expansion of (10 – 2)(10 – 2) as we have seen it in the proof of Maestro 
Dardi. But Cardano argues that the + 4 is not the result of the multiplication of – 2 by – 2 
but an area we must add again because we had subtracted the square twice. He refers to 
proposition II.7 of Euclid‟s Elements and concludes: “And this shows the common error 
of those who say that minus times minus produces plus, lest indeed it be more correct that 
minus times minus produces plus than plus times plus would produce minus”.6 Thus 
Cardano points out that the above argument is purely geometric, and that from an 
arithmetic point of view there is no a priori reason to suppose that m ∙ m = p. 
While Cardano doubts the rules of signs for multiplication (and also for division, see 
Tanner 1980, 167) on this occasion he does not err on their application to algebraic 
problems. So why his fulmination against it? While Tanner believes that Cardano “appears 
unique only in putting into print something of a rebel trend of thought, entertained in 
private by the majority, but soon to be disavowed by silent suppression”, Schubring (2005, 
45) believes in epistemological motives as Cardano experienced the mixture of operations 
of subtraction with those of multiplication as problematic. For us, the curious use of the 
same example from the well known proof of Dardi suggests that Cardano‟s motivation 
stems from a lack of epistemic validity for the generally accepted rules of sign. The 
justification for the rules of signs given by Maestro Dardi and abbaco masters after him is 
not sufficient for Cardano. He wanted to show he can challenge these all too easily 
accepted rules. We can understand Cardano‟s enterprise in the Aliza as an exercise in 
subtlety. In his famous work, De Subtilitate (Cardano, 1550), he defines subtlety as “a 
certain mental process whereby sensible things are perceived by the senses and intelligible 
things are comprehended by the intellect, although with difficulty”. Subtlety thus explores 
the borders of human comprehension and negative quantities are situated at such border.  
By challenging the rules of signs he reacted against what Stendhal called “hypocrisy in 
mathematics”. 
5. 
Larger than infinity 
Several historians of mathematics have pointed out that some major mathematicians of the 
sixteenth and seventeenth century believed that negative numbers were larger than infinity. 
From our reading of the original sources we believe that such interpretations are 
unwarranted. Statements about numbers greater than infinity occur in early mathematical 
treatments of infinitesimals and summation of series. They do not refer to negative 
                                                 
6  Cardano 1663, IV, 399: “Et ideo patet communis error dicentium, quod m . in m. producit p. neque enim 
magis m. in m. producit p. quam p. in p. producat m.”, (this and subsequent translations are mine). Later 
Christian Wolff (1732, I, 240) uses the same diagram to prove the rules of sign for multiplication. 
 
- 10 - 
numbers as such but expressions in involving division by negative quantities. We will here 
discuss the two most important ones. 
5.1. John Wallis (1616–1703) 
While he was Savilian professor of geometry at Oxford, John Wallis wrote two of his 
most important works, one on conic sections and the other on infinitesimal quantities. In 
the latter one, titled Arithmetica Infinitorum of 1656 he advanced the idea that, when 
dividing a positive number by a negative one, the result is larger than infinity. The 
reasoning leading to this conclusion is found in proposition 104 (see Figure 4). A series of 
reciprocals 1/a grows to zero when a becomes very large and to infinity when a is 
becomes zero. Now, as you cross zero you get to negative denominators. Extending the 
reasoning, numbers divided by zero become infinite and if you go beyond that, you arrive 
at values larger than infinity. Although we have to understand this surprising conclusion 
within the context in which it appears – the quadrature of curves with equations having 
negative indices – the statement is nevertheless unambiguous: the ratio of a positive 
number to a negative one is a rationem plusquam infinitam, “a ratio greater than infinity”. 
 
 
Figure 4: Wallis arguing that when a number is divided by a negative it becomes larger than 
infinity (from the Arithmetica infinitorum, p. 78) 
 
- 11 - 
For some unknown reason several historians of mathematics misunderstood Wallis as if 
he claimed that negative numbers in themselves were greater than infinity. William Rouse 
Ball (1912, 293) writes “It is curious to note that Wallis rejected as absurd the now usual 
idea of a negative number as being less than nothing, but accepted the view that it is 
something greater than infinity”. We will see below that Wallis did not reject at all 
numbers less zero. In fact, Wallis can be considered as the inventor of the number line for 
negative quantities (see below). Morris Kline (1972; 1990, 253), possibly inspired by Ball, 
also completely misses the point: “Though Wallis was advanced for his times and 
accepted negative numbers, he thought they were larger than infinity but not less than 
zero”. Some years later in his Loss of Certainty he writes (1983, 116): “Though Wallis 
was advanced for his times and accepted negative numbers, he thought they were larger 
than ∞ as well as less than 0”. Such incongruous misrepresentations caution us to always 
check the original sources. 
5.2. Leonhard Euler (1707-1783) 
About one century later Euler came to the same conclusion as Wallis through reasoning 
with divergent series. The Latin text De seriebus divergentibus [E247] was written in 
1746, but not read to the Academy until 1754, and only published in 1760. Several 
English translations of the text have been published (Barbeau and Leah 1976; Kline 1983; 
Sandifer 2006).  
 
Figure 5: Fragment of Euler’s text discussing division by a negative number 
Euler‟s observations are based on the expansion posed by Leibniz in 1713 in which 
2
3
1
1
(1
)
x
x
x
x 




 
 
 
(0.3) 
Euler begins the paragraph by stating that those who defend the idea of summing 
divergent series can resolve this paradox in a subtle way by discriminating between 1) 
quantities that become negative, 2) that stay less than zero, and 3) that become more than 
infinity. He then makes a distinction between two kinds of negatives: “Of the first sort is – 
 
- 12 - 
1, which is the difference between a and its successor a + 1. Of the second sort is the – 1 
that arises as 1 + 2 + 4 + 8 + 16 + etc., which is equal to the number one gets by dividing 
+1 by –1. In the first case, the number is less than zero, and in the second case it is greater 
than infinity”. The first is a plain negative number as he later explains in his book on 
elementary algebra (Euler 1770). The second one is when you use x = 2 in (0.3). You then 
arrive at 
1
1 2
4
8
1 



  
 
 
(0.4) 
which according to Euler is greater than infinity. He then uses an argument analogous to 
Wallis:  
 
This can be confirmed by the following example of a sequence of fractions: 
1 1 1 1 1
1
1
1
, ,
, ,
,
,
,
,
4 3 2 1 0
1
2
3



 
where the first four terms are seen to grow, then grow to infinity, and beyond 
infinity they become negative. Thus the apparent absurdity is resolved in a most 
ingenious way. 
 
Now again the idea, that dividing a number by a negative one leads to something larger 
than infinity, has been systematically been misunderstood. Kline writes “Euler, the 
greatest eighteenth-century mathematician believed that negative numbers are greater than 
infinity” (Kline 1981, 52) and later he later repeated “Euler concluded that – 1 is larger 
than infinity” (Kline 1983, 144). Sandifer (2006, 179) “Euler is claiming that numbers 
greater than infinity are the same as numbers smaller than zero” and recently William 
Dunham (2007, 138) Euler “is willing to accept that „the same quantities which are less 
than zero can be considered to be greater than infinity‟”. Despite the last quote, Wallis or 
Euler never claimed that negative numbers are greater than infinity. The misunderstanding 
becomes apparent from an article by Kline (1983) on Euler. Instead of expression (0.4) 
Kline writes that Euler obtained: 
 
 
 
1 1 2
4 8

 
But that is taken already for granted that a positive divided by a negative is a negative, 
or 1
1
1 

, which is precisely the identity questioned by Wallis and Euler. In fact, Euler 
had no problems at all with negative numbers. In his book on elementary algebra he writes 
that “we may say that negative numbers are less than nothing” (Euler 1822, 5) and he 
explains so by enumerating the negative numbers from zero “in the opposite direction, by 
perpetually subtracting unity”, thus endorsing the idea behind the number line. Concerning 
the product of two negatives, Euler gives an argumentation for its positive result. Based on 
the proof that minus times plus is minus, therefore minus times minus should be different 
and therefore be plus. A second argument using the distributive law of multiplication (as 
Maestro Dardi), is added by the translator in the English edition. The rules for division by 
a negative are derived from the multiplication rules and thus pose no problem for Euler in 
his Algebra. 
 
- 13 - 
5.3. Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1717-1783) 
The discussion was not closed by Leibniz. Several eighteenth-century authors return to the 
question raised by Arnauld, such as Rolle (1690, 14-22). Maclaurin (1748, 6-7) does not 
refer to Arnauld but seems to be aware of the discussion. He considers – a and + a “equal 
as to quantity” but this does not mean that you can equate them in algebra as + a = – a. 
Their quality is the opposite of each other and “on account of this contrariety a negative 
quantity is said to be less than nothing”.  
Perhaps the most persistent in his struggle against the main presupposition of the 
number line – that negative numbers are smaller than zero – was d‟Alembert. On several 
occasions both in the Encyclopédie as well as in his Opuscules he goes on about the idea 
of numbers smaller than nothing. D‟Alembert was quite influential, not only through his 
work as a mathematician but also in his contacts with Royal circles. His contributions on 
mathematics in the Encyclopédie were printed and read long after his death. Under 
„négatif‟ he writes: “negative quantities are those which are affected by the minus sign and 
which are considered by several mathematicians as smaller than zero. This last idea is 
false, as will see in one moment”.7 His argumentation is based to some extent on the 
considerations of Wallis and Euler. One cannot just claim that negative numbers are 
smaller than zero because the passage from positive to negative does not always goes over 
zero. In the simple case of y = x – a, y goes from positive to negative over zero. But in the 
case of y = 1/(x – a) you will have y = ∞ when x = a.8 So in contrast with Wallis and Euler, 
d‟Alembert accepts that 
 
1
y
a
  
will be negative, but it becomes negative while passing ∞. He therefore concludes that it is 
wrong to say that negatives numbers are always smaller than zero. In his article on the 
„negative‟, d‟Alembert makes a distinction between addition and subtraction (for which 
the number line is perfectly adequate) and multiplication and division (for which it is not). 
Without naming Arnauld he also comments on the apparent anomaly where we started 
with: “Those who pretend that you cannot relate 1 to – 1 and think that the ratio of 1 to – 1 
is different from – 1 to 1 are making a double error. Firstly, we perform such algebraic 
operations every day and secondly the equality of the product of – 1 with – 1, and of +1 by 
+1, shows that 1 is to – 1 as – 1 is to 1”.9 
                                                 
7 Diderot and d‟Alembert, (1761-1790, 22, 289) : “quantités négatives sont celles qui sont affectuées du 
signe – et qui sont regardées par plusieurs mathématiciens comme plus petit que zero. Cette dernière idée 
n‟est pas juste, comme le verra dans un moment”. 
8  ibid. p. 300 : “Le passage du positif au négatif se fait toujours par zéro ou par l‟infini. Soit, par exemple, y 
= x – a on aura y positif tant que x > a, y négatif lorsque x < a et y = 0 lorsque x = 0 ; dans ce cas le 
passage se fait par zéro. Mais si y = 1/(x – a) on aura y positif tant que x est > a, y négatif lorsque x est < a 
et y = ∞ lorsque x = a; le passage se fait alors par infini”. 
9  ibid. p. 299 : “Ceux qui prétendent que 1 n„est pas comparable à -1, et que le rapport entre 1 et -1 est 
différent du rapport entre -1 et 1 sont dans un double erreur, 1) parce qu‟on divise tous les jours dans les 
opérations algébriques, 1 par – 1, 2) l‟égalité du produit de – 1 et – 1, et de +1 par +1, fait voir que 1 est à 
– 1 comme – 1 a 1”. 
 
- 14 - 
6. 
The first use of the number line 
Before we get to our conclusion we may ask the question where the idea of a number line 
showing negative numbers originated. We find the answer in Wallis (1685) (see Figure 6). 
Remarkably Wallis introduces the number line for the purpose of illustrating addition and 
subtraction involving negative numbers in his work on algebra. When a man advances 5 
yards from A and he returns 8, how far is he then from his starting point? Wallis gives the 
answer – 3, as it is taught now in middle school.10 
 
Figure 6: John Wallis introducing the number line in his Algebra 
So the person responsible for the idea that a proportion between a positive quantity and 
a negative results in something larger than infinity, is also the first one to use the number 
line in a printed book. The idea was followed up by many others including Newton. 
Newton makes a distinction between “affirmative quantities” and “negative quantities”.11 
A negative quantity arises when a large affirmative quantity is subtracted from a smaller 
one. And to illustrate the point Newton draws a line which amounts to a number line 
showing negative quantities. 
7. 
Conclusion 
We have shown that operations on negative quantities were a source of continuous 
controversy and discussion during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. John Wallis 
introduced the number line in his Treatise on Algebra while arguing that negative 
quantities are not absurd and that they can denote quantities in the physical world such as 
distances. He was the first to include a figure of the number line to illustrate addition and 
subtraction involving negative numbers. Arnauld raised the issue that our intuitions on 
proportions with smaller and larger quantities are contradicted by the division operation 
involving negative quantities. While he did not aim at the number line, his objections 
represent solid arguments against its use. The model of the number line breaks down once 
negative numbers are included in proportions. Leibniz considers Arnauld‟s objections as 
genuine ones and argued that negative quantities should be interpreted symbolically as we 
do with imaginary numbers. Leibniz was a master in mathematical symbolism who 
                                                 
10  In Flanders, Belgium, this is taught in grade 7. 
11 Newton (1707, 3): “Quantitates vel affirmativae sunt seu majors nihilo, vel negativae seu nihilo minors”, 
in the English translation of (1720, 3): “Quantities are either affirmative, or greater than nothing; or 
negative, or less than nothing”. 
 
- 15 - 
understood the power of symbolic representation (Knobloch 2010). His reaction to the 
ongoing discussion allows us to draw important lessons from history: negative numbers 
are best understood in a symbolic context. Rules of arithmetic, including the rules of signs, 
can be blindly applied as operations on negative quantities because they are well founded 
and justified by the logistica speciosa or the symbolic algebra of the seventeenth century. 
This becomes especially clear when dividing by negative quantities. In their aim to give an 
arithmetical interpretation to division by negatives, both Wallis and Euler believed that 
such operations lead to numbers larger than infinity. Such interpretation not only confused 
their contemporaries but even 20th century historians of mathematics who misunderstood 
Wallis and Euler in believing that negative quantities are larger than infinity.  
When operations on negative quantities lead to heated debates between great 
mathematicians some centuries ago, it should come as no surprise that it also raises 
questions and difficulties in today‟s classrooms. We have argued that the development of 
symbolic mathematics represented one of the most important conceptual barriers in Early 
Modern mathematics. By the beginning of the nineteenth century – when symbolic algebra 
became universally accepted as a universal language of mathematics – discussions on the 
nature of negative numbers and their operations lose their relevance. The parallel between 
history and education concerning negative numbers becomes clear: once the conceptual 
barrier of symbolic reasoning is taken, difficulties get resolved. A consequence for 
mathematics education would be that operations on negative quantities are best taught as 
part of symbolic operations. The number line as a model for learning about negative 
quantities has a limited scope in pre-symbolic mathematics. Its use is limited to the 
operations of addition and subtraction. It breaks down when dealing with proportions and 
division involving negative numbers. History may also show that certain didactic 
approaches have their potential pit falls. The use of the number line in teaching negative 
numbers is in direct conflict with d‟Alembert, who argues that most of the difficulties with 
Arnauld‟s identity arise from viewing negative numbers as smaller than zero.  
Barry Mazur in his highly enjoyable and philosophical book Imagining numbers, 
spends a lot of attention to the question why we accept that minus times minus equals plus. 
He concludes (Mazur 2003, 102-3) that “there is, in fact, only one way to extend the 
definition of multiplication to all whole numbers, negative as well as positive, if we wish 
(we do!) 1 times any number N equal N, and if we wish (we do!) the distributive law to 
hold”. So this is an argument in favor of a proof as we know from the abbacists, which 
appeals to the properties of the distributive law. However, d‟Alembert‟s definition of 
negative numbers: “those which are affected by the minus sign” is for us the most 
convincing. “Numbers affected with a sign” capture the way how negative numbers were 
introduced in history and how they fit within symbolic manipulations. We therefore 
believe that operations involving negative numbers, beyond addition and subtraction,  
should be taught within the context of early algebra. 
 
Acknowledgements 
The author is a fellow of the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO) Belgium and wishes to 
thank Jackie Stedall, Michael Matthews and several anonymous referees for their valuable 
comments on an earlier draft of this paper. The text was completed while the author was 
visiting fellow at the Sydney Centre for the Foundations of Science at Sydney University. 
All figures are cropped from digitized images of works in the public domain. Figures 1 
 
- 16 - 
and 5 are from the Gallica project of the Bibliothèque nationale de France, Figure 2 from 
Girolamo Cardano. Strumenti per la storia del Rinascimento, http://www.cardano.unimi.it, 
Figure 3 from the Archimedes project of the Max-Planck-Institut für 
Wissenschaftgeschichte http://www.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de , Figure 4 from Google books 
and Figure 6 from Early English Books Online. 
 
References 
Arnauld, A. & Nicole, P. (1662) La logique, ou, L‟art de penser contenant, outre les r gles 
communes, plusieurs observations nouvelles propres à former le jugement. Paris: 
Charles Savreux. English translation, Vance Buroker J. (Ed., Tr) (1996) Logic, or 
the Art of Thinking. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Arnauld, A. (1667) Nouveaux Éléments de géométrie. Paris: C. Savreux.  
d‟Alembert, J. le Rond, (1761-1780) Opuscules mathémathiques ou Mémoires sur 
différens sujets de géométrie, de méchanique, d‟optique, d‟astronomie. Paris: 
David : [then] Briasson : [then] C.-A. Jombert, 8 vols. in 7 books. 
Ball, W. W. R. (1912) A Short Account of the History of Mathematics. London: 
Macmillan and co. (Dover reprint, 1960) 
Barbeau, E. J. & P. J. Leah (1976) Euler‟s 1760 paper on divergent series. Historia 
Mathematica, 3, 141–160. 
Beberman, M. & Meserve, Br. E. (1956) An exploratory approach to solving equations. 
The Mathematics Teacher, January 1956. 
Brousseau, G. (1976) Les obstacles épistémologiques et les problemes en mathematiques. 
Recherches en didactique des mathématiques, 4/2, 165–198. Translated in N. 
Balacheff, M. Cooper, R. Sutherland and V.Warfield (Eds., Tr.) Theory of 
Didactical Situations in Mathematics. Didactique des mathématiques, 1970 – 1990, 
Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1983, 79-116. 
Cardano, G. (1545) Ars Magna. Nürnberg: Johann Petreius, (English translation by 
Witmer, R. T., (Ed., Tr) (1968) Ars Magna or the Rules of Algebra. Cambridge, 
Mass.: M.I.T. Press, Reprinted by Dover Publications, New York, 1993). 
Cardano, G. (1550) De Subititate, Libri XXI. Nuremberg: Ioannes Petreius. 
Cardano, G. (1663) Opera omnia (10 vols.), Lyon: Jean Antoine Huguetan and Marc 
Antione Ravaud.  
Carey, S. (2001) Cognitive foundations of arithmetic, evolution and ontogenesis. Mind 
and Language, 16, 37-55. 
Dehaene, S. (1997) The Number Sense: How the Mind Creates Mathematics. Oxford, 
Oxford University Press. 
Diderot, D. & d‟Alembert J. le Rond (Eds.) (1765) Encyclopédie ou Dictionnaire raisonné 
des sciences, des arts et des métiers (17 vols.), Paris: Briasson, (ed. 1779-82, 36 
vols., Lausanne: Sociétés typographiques). 
Dunham, W. (2007) The Genius of Euler: Reflections on His Life and Work. Washington: 
Mathematics Association of America. 
Euler, L. (1754/55) De seriebus divergentibus. Novi Commentarii academiae scientiarum 
Petropolitanae 5, (1760, p. 205-237), reprinted in Euler, L. Opera Omnia I, vol. 14, 
p. 585-617.  
Euler, L. (1770) Vollständige Anleitung zur Algebra, St.-Petersburg. 
 
- 17 - 
Freudenthal, H. (1983) Didactical Phenomenology of Mathematical Structures. Dordrecht: 
Reidel. 
Heeffer, A. (2007) Abduction as a strategy for concept formation in mathematics: Cardano 
postulating a negative. In Pombo O. & Gerner A. (Eds.) Abduction and the Process 
of Scientific Discovery. Colecçáo Documenta, Lisboa: Centro de Filosofia das 
Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa, 179-194. 
Heeffer, A. (2008) The emergence of symbolic algebra as a shift in predominant models. 
Foundations of Science 13 (2), 149-161. 
Heeffer, A. (2010) The Symbolic Model for Algebra: Functions and Mechanisms, in L. 
Magnani,; W. Carnielli, Walter & C. Pizzi (Eds.) (2010) Model-Based Reasoning 
in Science and Technology, Abduction, Logic, and Computational Discovery. 
Studies in Computational Intelligence, vol. 314, Heidelberg: Springer, 519-532. 
Høyrup, J. (2007) Jacopo da Firenze‟s Tractatus Algorismi and Early Italian Abbaco 
Culture. Science Networks Historical Studies, 34, Basel: Birkhauser.  
Høyrup, J. (2010) Hesitating progress:  the slow development toward algebraic 
symbolization in abbacus-and related manuscripts, c. 1300 to c. 1550. In A. 
Heeffer & M. Van Dyck (Eds.) Philosophical Aspects of Symbolic Reasoning in 
Early Modern Mathematics, Studies in Logic, 26, (pp. 3-56). London: College 
Publications.  
Franci, R. (Ed.), 2001, Maestro Dardi (sec. XIV) Aliabraa argibra. Dal manoscritto 
I.VII.17 della Biblioteca Comunale di Siena. Quaderni del Centro Studi della 
Matematica Medioevale, 26, Siena: Università di Siena. 
Gericke, H. (1996), Zur Geschichte der negativen Zahlen. In J. Dauben, M. Folkerts, E. 
Knobloch & H. Wuβing (Eds.) (1996) History of Mathematics. States of the Ar., 
New York: Academic Press, 279-306. 
Glaeser G. (1981) Epistémologie des nombres relatifs. Recherches en didactique des 
mathématiques, 2(3) 303–346. 
Herscovics, N. (1989) Cognitive obstacles encountered in the learning of algebra. In S. 
Wagner & C. Kieran (Eds.), Research issues in the learning and teaching of 
algebra (pp. 60–86). Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics; 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
Kline, M. (1959) Mathematics and the Physical World. New York: Crowell (Dover reprint 
1981). 
Kline, M. (1972) Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, (reprinted in 3 vols. 1990). 
Kline, M. (1980) Mathematics: The Loss of Certainty.  Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Kline, M. (1983) Euler on Infinite Series. Mathematics Magazine, 56 (5), 307-314. 
Howson, A. G., Harris T. & R Sutherland, R. (1999) Primary school mathematics 
textbooks. London: Qualifications and Curriculum Authority. 
Knobloch, E. (2010) Leibniz between ars characteristica and ars inveniendi: Unknown 
news about Cajori's 'master-builder' of mathematical notations. In Heeffer, A. & 
van Dyck, M. (eds.), Philosophical Aspects of Symbolic Reasoning in Early 
Modern Mathematics. London: College Publications, 289-302. 
Leibniz, G. W. (1712) Observatio, quod rationes sive proportiones non habeant locum 
circa quantitates nihilo minores, & de vero sensu methodi infinitesimalis. Acta 
eruditorum, 167-9. 
 
- 18 - 
Newton, I. (1707) Arithmetica universalis; sive de compositione et resolutione arithmetica 
liber. Cui accessit Hallieana Æquationum radices arithmetice inveniendi methodus. 
Cambridge: Typis Academicis. 
MacLaurin, C. (1748) A treatise of algebra in three parts: containing, I. The fundamental 
rules and operations, II. The composition and resolution of equations of all degrees, 
and the different affections of their roots, III. The application of algebra and 
geometry to each other: to which is added an appendix concerning the general 
properties of geometrical lines. London: A. Millar and J. Nourse. 
Mancosu, P. (1996) Philosophy of mathematics and mathematical practice in the 
seventeenth century. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Margolis, H. (1993) Paradigms & Barriers: How Habits of Mind Govern Scientific Beliefs. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Mazur, B. (2003) Imagining Numbers (particularly the square root of minus fifteen). 
London: Penguin. 
Piaget, J. & Garcia R. (1983) Psychogenèse et histoire des sciences. Paris: Flammarion. 
English translation by Feider, H. (Ed.) (1989) Psychogenesis and the History of 
Science. New York: Columbia University Press.  
Prestet, J. (1675) Elemens des mathematiques, ou Principes generaux de toutes les 
sciences, qui ont les grandeurs pour objet. Contenant vne methode covrte et facile 
pour comparer ces grandeurs   pour découvrir leurs rapports par le moyen des 
caracteres des nobres, & des lettres de l'alphabeth. Paris: A. Pralard. 
Rolle, M. (1690) Traité d‟algebre; ou, Principes generaux pour resoudre les questions de 
mathematique. Paris: Chez Etienne Michallet. 
Sandifer, E. C. (2006) How Euler Did It. Washington: Mathematics Association of 
America. 
Sesiano, J. (1985) The appearance of negative solutions in Mediaeval mathematic., 
Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 32, 105-50. 
Schrecker, P. (1935) Arnauld, Malebranche, Prestet, et la Theorie des Nombres Négatifs. 
Thalès, 2, 82-90. 
Schubring, G. (2005) Conflicts between Generalization, Rigor, and Intuition, Number 
Concepts Underlying the Development of Analysis in 17-19th Century France and 
Germany. Heidelberg : Springer. 
Smith, D. E.  (1959) A Source Book in Mathematics. New York: Dover.  
Stendhal (2002) Vie de Henry Brulard. Translated by John Sturrock, The Life of  Henry 
Brulard. New York: The New York Review of Books, 2002. 
Tanner, R.C.H. (1980) The Alien Realm of the Minus: Deviatory Mathematics in 
Cardano‟s Writings. Annals of Science, 37, 159-178. 
Thomaidis, Y. & C. Tzanakis (2007) The notion of historical „parallelism“ revisited: 
historical evolution and students‟ conception of the order relation on the number 
line. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 66, 165-183. 
Wallis, J. (1656) Johannis Wallisii, SS. Th. D. geometriae professoris Saviliani in 
celeberrimâ academia Oxoniensi, operum mathematicorum pars altera qua 
continentur de angulo contactus & semicirculi, disquisitio geometrica. De 
sectionibus conicis tractatus. Arithmetica infinitorum: sive de curvilineorum 
quadraturâ, &c. Ecclipseos Solaris observation. Oxonii: typis Leon: Lichfield 
academiae typographi, veneunt apud Octav. Pullein Lond. Bibl. 
 
- 19 - 
Wallis, J. (1685) A treatise of algebra, both historical and practical shewing the original, 
progress, and advancement thereof, from time to time, and by what steps it hath 
attained to the heighth at which it now is: with some additional treatises ... Defense 
of the treatise of the angle of contact. Defense of the treatise of the angle of contact. 
Discourse of combinations, alternations, and aliquot parts. Discourse of 
combinations, alternations, and aliquot parts. London : Printed by John Playford, 
for Richard Davis. 
Wolff. C. von (1732) Elementa matheseos universae Vol. 1: Qui Commentationem de 
Methodo Mathematica, Arithmeticam, Geometriam, Trigonometriam Planam, et 
Analysim, tam Finitorum quam Infinitorum complectitur. Genevæ: Apud Marcum-
Michaelem Bousquet & Socios. 
 
