Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
1
A MODELING METHOD
for high school physics instruction
Malcolm Wells, David Hestenes* & Gregg Swackhamer**
Abstract. The design and development of a new method for high school physics
instruction is described. Students are actively engaged in understanding the physical
world by constructing and using scientific models to describe, explain, predict, and to
control physical phenomena. Course content is organized around a small set of basic
models. Instruction is organized into modeling cycles move students systematically
through all phases of model development, evaluation, and application in concrete
situationsthus developing skill and insight in the procedural aspects of scientific
knowledge. Objective evidence shows that the modeling method can produce much
larger gains in student understanding than alternative methods of instruction. This
reveals limitations of the popular “cooperative inquiry” and “learning cycle” methods.
It is concluded that the effectiveness of physics instruction depends heavily on the
pedagogical expertise of the teacher. The problem of cultivating such expertise among
high school teachers is discussed at length, with specific recommendations for action
within the physics community.   1995 American Association of Physics Teachers.
Malcolm Wells is the primary author of this article, because it is about his
contribution to physics teaching. Malcolm has intended to publish an account of his work
since his doctoral dissertation was completed in 1987. But the writing was delayed, first
because he gave himself to conducting workshops for the benefit of other teachers, and
then, in the last few years, because Lou Gehrig’s disease has consumed his energy in
implacable decline. So it has fallen on his coworkers, DH and GS, to speak for and about
Malcolm Wells. We do this gladly to celebrate the life of a truly great teacher, but more
–– because Malcolm has elevated the craft of teaching, and we believe that his unique
contributions can help others surpass themselves and perhaps even Malcolm.
1. Malcolm’s  educational research.
The story of Malcolm's research is told by DH, who directed Malcolm's doctoral
work and continued to collaborate with him thereafter. The story has an unambiguous
moral: to upgrade high school physics, partnerships are needed between experienced
teachers and physicists involved in educational research.
By any conventional measure, Malcolm was a superior teacher before his
partnership with me. Yet his doctoral thesis documents a large improvement in the
outcomes of his teaching, and it clearly identifies the contribution of educational research
to the change. I have been active in theoretical physics research for the duration of our
partnership. Though my physics research has deeply influenced my educational research,
only the latter has been of direct benefit to Malcolm. Here is the story.
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
2
When Malcolm approached me about doctoral research, he was nearly 50, with a
long career in high school physics and chemistry teaching behind him. His career began
with a powerful boost from PSSC and Harvard Project Physics teacher workshops in the
heyday of Sputnik space-race fever. The influence was indelible. He has been a "hands-
on" teacher ever since, always eager to build his own apparatus, and always looking for
simple demonstrations of deep physics. He also retained a "spirit of adventure" in the
physics classroom and a "spirit of kinship" with other physics teachers. This "spiritual
imprint" of the PSSC workshops seems to have marked many of Malcolm’s generation
and sustained them through long careers as physics teachers. The lack of such spirit may
contribute to the disturbing dropout rate among the younger teachers. Malcolm has
always been sensitive to this problem. When he got the chance to conduct his own
workshops later on, he spared no effort to nourish camaraderie among the teachers ––
even to the extent of rising early every day to purchase fresh donuts, out of his own
pocket. He had the teachers bubbling at the coffee breaks in animated discussions about
the details of their craft. He had them grappling with practical problems in the workshop
sessions. True camaraderie comes from collaborative efforts on common problems; it is
the strongest kind of professional glue –– a source of professional pride and satisfaction.
Physics teachers need it to cope with the professional isolation most of them face in their
schools. They need it as a stimulus to improve; they need it for a sense of belonging. The
sporadic successes of teacher workshops in meeting this need demonstrates the
importance of permanent institutional mechanisms to support teacher interaction and
professional development. Malcolm's work will lead us back to this issue later on.
Since Malcolm's high school is close to Arizona State University, over the years
he was able to take every university course in science and education that was relevant to
his teaching. When he excelled in physics and chemistry courses, his professors
presumed that he would "leave teaching for a more challenging career" –– a sad
testament to the limitations of professors. College professors need time in classrooms or
workshops run by superior teachers like Malcolm to understand the depth and richness of
the teaching challenge.
With Malcolm's extensive academic background, he could have dashed off a
thesis and obtained his doctorate from the college of education in a few months. Instead,
he came to me looking for a doctoral research project that would count as a genuine
contribution to physics education. We discussed a variety of possibilities over several
years before settling on one that satisfied us both. During this period he became familiar
with the details of my educational research program, and I learned about his ceaseless
efforts to improve his teaching.
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
3
Malcolm was among the first to use computers in high school physics. He did not
wait for someone else to tell him how to do it. As soon as the Apple computer was
available, he was writing his own programs and designing activities for his students to
use on it. He had enough of this for a complete high school physics course when he came
to me, so it was a natural subject for his dissertation. The main issue in our discussions
was how to prove the pedagogical value of his activities and, more generally, how to
establish sound principles for using computers in the physics classroom. Malcolm was
hard pressed to come up with a suitable plan for his research until he was shocked by a
sudden revelation about his own teaching in 1983.
At that time Ibrahim Halloun was compiling the statistics from our Mechanics
Diagnostic test as part of his doctoral research. This test measures the difference between
Newtonian concepts and the students’ personal beliefs about the physical world. The
published results1 show that this difference is large, and conventional introductory
physics courses are not effective at reducing the gap. Furthermore, the results are
independent of the instructor’s qualifications and teaching style. These conclusions have
been supported by many other studies since. When examining the Mechanics Diagnostic
for the first time, most physics teachers think that the questions are too obvious to be
informative; then they are shocked by the post instruction scores of their own students.
Malcolm was no exception. In fact, he was the first high school teacher to be confronted
by such evidence.
Like many physics teachers, Malcolm is strict about maintaining high academic
standards, and he is hard-nosed about requiring students to assume responsibility for their
own knowledge. When confronted by an irate parent who demanded to know why his
son had received an "F." Malcolm replied, " Because there is no lower grade!" Even so,
Malcolm is realistic about student capabilities, and he assumes full responsibility for his
own role in what they learn. When confronted by the dismal scores of his students on the
Diagnostic, he soon concluded that the fault was in his teaching and set about doing
better. Thus, he was finally launched on his doctoral research.
In his own teaching, Malcolm had already abandoned the traditional lecture-
demonstration method in favor of a student-centered inquiry approach based on the
learning cycle popularized by Robert Karplus.2  He was thoroughly schooled in all
aspects of the learning cycle from a course in "methods of science teaching" by Anton
Lawson, who employed it extensively in his research and teaching.3  Despite all this, the
performance of Malcolm’s students on the Mechanics Diagnostic was poor. In fact, later
data shows that it was no better than the typical result from traditional instruction.
Malcolm did not try to rationalize this failure by pointing out that his method has many
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
4
other advantages which are obvious to anyone observing his classes –– that the students
are captivated by the classroom activities and their capacity for independent investigation
improves markedly over the course. Instead, Malcolm confirmed the results of the
Diagnostic by interviewing the students himself. He concluded that his instructional
method was missing something essential.
Malcolm soon saw how to improve his instruction by following the modeling
approach under development at ASU. At that time in 1983, I had just drafted a long
paper proposing a theory of physics instruction with modeling as the central theme.4
Physics professors have told me that the paper is difficult to read, but in my extensive
discussions with Malcolm I found that he had mastered every detail relevant to his
teaching. His real genius, though, appeared when he implemented the theory. That will
be discussed in a later section. Here we review the underlying ideas.
There are several reasons for adopting a modeling approach to physics
instruction: First, because it brings instruction closer to emulating scientific practice.
Second, because it addresses serious weaknesses in traditional instruction. Finally, as
documented below,  Malcolm's research gives it strong empirical support. The first two
reasons have been discussed at length elsewhere,4,5 but a brief review is in order here to
explain Malcolm's motivation.
To characterize the activity of practicing physicists as centered on the
development, testing and application of mathematical models for physical phenomena is
hardly controversial. It should be surprising, therefore, that the general concept of a
scientific model is scarcely recognized in physics textbooks, though their pages are
chock-full of specific examples. Change is in the winds, however. In recent blue-ribbon
proposals for wholesale reform of the K-12 science and math curriculum, modeling has
been explicitly identified as a major theme.6,7  It will be no easy task to implement this
theme, but Malcolm Wells has taken the lead.
From the pedagogical perspective, a major reason for adopting the modeling
approach is to help students develop a more coherent, flexible and systematic
understanding of physics. The knowledge that students acquire from traditional
instruction tends to be fragmented and diffuse. To most students the physics course
appears to be "one damn thing after another," so they are forced into rote methods to
learn it. Soon they are overwhelmed by the accumulation of rote fragments, with
disaffection as an inevitable consequence.
The modeling approach organizes the course content around a small number of
basic models, such as the "harmonic oscillator" and the "particle subject to a constant
force." These models describe basic patterns which appear ubiquitously in physical
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
5
phenomena. Students become familiar with the structure and versatility of the models by
employing them in a variety of situations. This includes applications to explain or predict
physical phenomena as well as to design and interpret experiments. It also includes the
construction of more complex models by modification of the basic models. Explicit
emphasis on basic models focuses student attention on the structure of scientific
knowledge as the basis for scientific understanding. Reduction of the essential course
content to a small number of models greatly reduces the apparent complexity of the
subject.
Box 1: Model Specification
Object / system
Descriptors
x, v
System Schema
Laws of interaction
Laws of change
Model
II. Basic properties
III. Structure (internal/external)
IV. Behavior (temporal structure)
I. Organization
object variables
state variables
interaction variables
composition
environment
connectivity
(internal) constituents
(external) agents
connections
intrinsic
interactive
 (Examples)
m, q, I
...
...
...
..
F = GmM/r 2
mv = F,  L = T
.
.
F,  T
Besides a general plan for organizing course content, modeling theory supplied
Malcolm with many other ingredients for instructional design. Without going into details
given elsewhere,4 three ingredients are worth mentioning here:
First, an analysis and explicit definition for the concept of model. The models in
physics are conceptual representations of physical systems and processes. Specifications
for defining a complete model are outlined in Box 1.
Second, an extensive discussion of qualitative reasoning and representational
tools, especially force diagrams and motion maps. The main point being that such tools
are essential for competent modeling and problem solving. The failure of students to
learn this from conventional instruction has been established.
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
6
Third, a detailed analysis of the procedural knowledge involved in constructing
and deploying scientific models, including a characterization of specific modeling stages.
This provided Malcolm with the key to his chief instructional innovation, the modeling
cycle. It enabled him to identify clearly what the learning cycle was missing, namely,
detailed specification of the modeling processes and techniques involved. The modeling
cycle is discussed in section 4.
While Malcolm was getting started on his dissertation in 1983, Halloun and I
were conducting a pedagogical experiment in the University Physics course at ASU.
Although a detailed account of the experiment has been published,8 reiteration of the
main idea will put Malcolm’s work in a broader context.
A primary objective of University Physics is to develop student problem-solving
skills. The bane of traditional instruction is that most students cling to a "plug-and-chug"
problem-solving strategy that severely limits their skill development. "Well-grounded"
teachers are keenly aware that the key to effective problem-solving is in the initial
qualitative analysis of the problem, including the construction and use of suitable
diagrams. Employing the traditional didactic approach, they demonstrate good technique
in solving many problems, and they can explain their reasoning clearly when necessary.
In my experience, such teachers are often nonplused or even angered by evidence
suggesting that their approach is ineffective for the vast majority of students –– insisting
that their presentations are clear and thorough, so any failure reflects on the intelligence,
attitude or preparation of the students.
A different conclusion comes from considering the student viewpoint. The
student sees that the "answer" to a problem invariably comes from plugging numbers into
equations and chugging a little arithmetic. All that fluff about diagrams and "physical
intuition" can be ignored. The key to problem solving is finding the "right equation" in
which to plug the "given numbers." If the teacher is "fair" and the course is "well-
organized," the right equation is easily extracted from a short list of equations for the
"current topic." Exam preparation is reduced to memorizing the list for each topic to be
covered. The effectiveness of this strategy is abundantly confirmed by good grades on
homework and exams. It fails only when the teacher gets tricky. Tricky teachers are a
pain!
Tricky teachers try to tell students that there is a better way than plug-and-chug.
But what is it, exactly? They don't even have a name for it!
Modeling theory enables us to do better. My pedagogical experiment with
Halloun instructed students in a sharp alternative to plug-and-chug called the modeling
method. We take the position that the complete solution to every physics problem is
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
7
actually a model, not, as often supposed, a mere number, the answer to some question
posed in the problem. The model supplies the context which makes the answer
meaningful. Without the model the significance of the answer (its numerical value, for
instance) cannot be evaluated –– which explains why plug-and-chuggers seldom question
their unreasonable answers. We maintain that expert physicists always presume some
model in their answer to a physics problem, though they may be unaware of that fact and
seldom explicate the model fully. This suggests that problem-solving performance can be
improved by instruction which insists on making the model in every problem explicit.
With the modeling method, every physics problem is solved by creating a model
or, more often, adapting a known model to the specifications of the problem. Most
problems in introductory physics are solved by deploying a small number of basic
models. For example, all the standard projectile problems are solved by deploying a
single kinematic model: the particle with constant acceleration. Students are thrilled
when they realize this  and thrilled again when they understand how all the models in
mechanics can be generated by a single theory.
Our modeling method for problem-solving is accompanied by a "modeling
method" for teaching it. Implementation of the method in our pedagogical experiment8
was constrained by the large course, lecture-recitation format at the university. My
lectures deviated considerably from standard practice by expounding the modeling
perspective exclusively, concentrating on thorough analysis of a small number of
exemplary models and illustrating their deployment to solve problems. More subtle
aspects of the method were implemented by Halloun in an experimental recitation
section. He engaged students in group problem solving with the instructor as mediator.
The critical role of the instructor in this process need not be described here, because it is
so similar to Malcolm's approach. Results of our experiment will be compared with
Malcolm's in section 2.
We think that the emphasis on solving textbook problems in physics courses is
often excessive and misguided. It may even promote a distorted view of physics, because
textbook problems are so artificial. In the modeling approach to instruction, problem-
solving is secondary to modeling. The modeling of physical systems raises all sorts of
problems –– problems which are more meaningful in the context of modeling than when
they have been extracted and presented as textbook exercises –– and problems which
don't appear in textbooks at all. The modeling method may facilitate the solution of
textbook problems by providing deeper physical insight. But it also supports a de-
emphasis on textbook problems.
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
8
Malcolm developed a quite different or, rather, a complementary version of the
modeling method –– one which is laboratory-based and adapted to scientific inquiry. It
emphasizes the use of models to describe and explain physical phenomena rather than
solve problems. It aims to teach modeling skills as the essential foundation for scientific
inquiry. To accomplish this in a systematic fashion, Malcolm developed the modeling
cycle, to be described in section 3.
In the implementations by both Halloun and Wells, the modeling method has a
student-centered instructional design. This is believed to be critical to its success,
because students must be actively engaged in the right kinds of activities to develop
modeling skills. In both problem-solving and laboratory activities, students are required
to articulate their plans and assumptions, explain their procedures and justify their
conclusions. The modeling method is unique in requiring the students to present and
defend an explicit model as justification for their conclusions in every case. The
instructor must be well prepared to consistently guide this process to a timely and
satisfying closure. Specifically, the instructor must be (1) fully conversant with all
aspects of the relevant models and (2) acutely aware of likely student misconceptions or
knowledge deficiencies.
At last we are prepared to understand how Malcolm corrected the deficiency in
his instructional method which was exposed by the Mechanics Diagnostic. As students
are led to articulate their reasoning in the course of solving a problem or analyzing an
experiment, their naive beliefs about the physical world surface naturally. Rather than
dismiss these beliefs as incorrect, Malcolm learned to encourage students to elaborate
them and evaluate their relevance to the issue at hand in collaborative discourse with
other students. In the context of modeling activities students have a framework for testing
and correcting their own ideas, especially in regard to relevance and coherence with
other ideas.
To sharpen his skills for dealing with student misconceptions, Malcolm mastered
the taxonomy developed by Halloun and Hestenes,9 a systematic classification of naive
beliefs about mechanics. He used the taxonomy for planning, to insure that class
activities would provide repeated opportunities for confronting all the serious
misconceptions. He prepared an agenda of misconceptions to be addressed in connection
with each activity. This preparation sensitized him to opportunities for addressing
misconceptions in the course of student presentations and discussions.
Halloun made a similar use of the taxonomy in the limited domain of problem-
solving, but Malcolm had much more freedom to extend the modeling method in his high
school course. He concentrated on developing techniques for improving the quality of
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
9
student discourse about scientific subjects. Modeling theory supplied a clear goal:
scientific discourse featuring the formulation, elaboration, evaluation and application of
well-defined models; discourse exhibiting a suitable mixture of qualitative and
quantitative elements. In pursuit of this goal, Malcolm expanded the class time allotted to
oral presentations by students. The time for student postmortems of laboratory activities
was increased to a third of the total activity. The postmortem is devoted to analyzing and
consolidating what the students have learned from the experiment. It seems likely that the
most significant learning occurs in this period –– at least, when the activity is guided
with the skill of a teacher like Malcolm Wells.
To facilitate postmortems and other student presentations, Malcolm experimented
with a variety of techniques. For example, he tried having students outline their
presentations on "butcher paper" to be hung up for other students to see, but that proved
to be awkward. Finally, he hit on a brilliant idea. He equipped student groups with "white
boards." A whiteboard is a 24"× 32" section of "kitchen and bath" paneling. It is easy to
write and draw on it with colored dry markers, and it is easily erased. The whiteboard
soon became an integral part of Malcolm's method.
Teaching students how to use the whiteboard effectively became an important
subgoal. For Malcolm the whiteboard is an instrument for improving the quality of
student discourse. In preparation for a presentation, student groups are encouraged to
outline their model and supporting argument on the whiteboard. Evaluation of the
presentation then includes an evaluation of the whiteboard display.
Besides the design and implementation of the instructional innovations
already mentioned, Malcolm's research included a careful evaluation of actual results in
the classroom. To that we turn next.
2. Evidence for effectiveness of the Modeling Method
In creating his version of the modeling method, Malcolm incorporated every good
idea he could find –– some from his own long experience, some from educational
research. When evaluating educational innovation it is important to ascertain what the
various factors contribute to improvements. This is difficult, not only because there are
so many variables and practical constraints severely limit the possibilities for controlling
them independently, but because a significant effect may come from combining separate
factors which do not appear to contribute much alone. Fortunately, the unusual
circumstances of Malcolm's doctoral research made it possible to achieve an
exceptionally clean separation of the major factors contributing to his instructional
results.
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
10
MW 
Inq
MW 
Mod
20
40
60
80
100
HS 
Trad
CP 
Trad
UP 
Trad
UP 
Mod
Figure 1
Score (%)
31
38
53
44 45
37
52
57
53
45
49
66
64
57
75
72
Fig. 1.  Mean scores on the Mechanics Diagnostic for three high school classes (on
the left) and three university classes (on the right). The bar chart shows the pretest
score (at the beginning of the course) below the posttest score (at the end of the
course). The dark bars are mean class scores on problem solving tests. See text for
explanation.
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
11
 
Figure 1 shows the impact of Malcolm’s teaching in comparison with that of other
teachers as measured by the Mechanics Diagnostic. Data on the high school courses
comes from Malcolm’s thesis. The remaining data comes from references 1 and 8, which
also provide an extensive analysis of the validity and implications of Diagnostic data. To
interpret the data in Fig. 1, distinguishing features of the various instructional approaches
must be identified. The three high school courses employed distinctly different
approaches, which we describe by the terms "cooperative inquiry," "modeling method,"
and "traditional" We discuss each in turn and then compare their results.
Cooperative Inquiry has become increasingly popular in recent efforts to reform
K-12 science education, and it is strongly advocated by educational researchers. The term
is generally applied to any method of instruction with the following characteristics: It is
student-centered, activity-oriented and often laboratory-based; students are actively
engaged in investigating real phenomena in collaboration with their peers and under
guidance by the instructor. Investigations are frequently organized into learning cycles by
the teacher. All this fairly describes Malcolm's method in 1982-83 –– He was ahead of
his time in this.
To be more specific about the content of Malcolm's inquiry course: 70% of class
time was devoted to lab activities, which were either developed by Malcolm or modified
from the Harvard Project Physics handbook. The lab activities targeted concepts involved
in Newton's Laws. 30% of class time was devoted to in-class study groups utilizing the
PSSC fourth-edition textbook. Problems for class and homework were selected from the
textbook or designed by Malcolm to reinforce and expand on concepts developed in the
lab activities.
Modeling Method. Malcolm's method at the close of his doctoral work (1986-
87) can be described as cooperative inquiry with modeling structure and emphasis. He
retained the general features of his original cooperative inquiry approach, including all
the lab activities, to which he again devoted 70% of class time. The instructional
difference resided in the systematic emphasis on models and modeling. The learning
cycle was elaborated into a modeling cycle. Though it remained unobtrusive, teacher
guidance was strengthened by focusing on a modeling agenda informed by the
"misconceptions taxonomy." Consequently, student investigations and presentations were
more coherently structured. The net result was an increase in the coherence of the whole
course and its subject.
Traditional Method. The high school teacher who agreed to using his 1986-87
honors physics course as a control for comparison with Malcolm's course was well
matched to Malcolm in regard to age, experience, training and dedication. He utilized a
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
12
standard textbook (Elements of Physics, 9th edition). His course consisted of lectures and
demonstrations (80% of class time), with homework questions and problems selected to
reinforce important concepts from lecture and to provide practice in problem solving.
There was a heavy emphasis on problem solving, with many examples worked out in
lecture. Lab activities (20% of class time) were designed and/or selected to emphasize
important concepts from lectures and/or to develop laboratory skills. In short, the course
was quite traditional.
Comparisons. All three high school courses (inquiry, modeling, traditional) were
honors courses with about 24 students in each. By prior agreement between the teachers,
all three covered the same topics in mechanics on nearly the same time line (from early
September until mid-March), so the total instructional time was the same.
The data in Fig. 1 strongly supports the conclusions that Malcolm’s modeling
method is a considerable improvement over his cooperative inquiry method and clearly
superior to the traditional method. In Diagnostic posttest score, the modeling class (MW
Mod) surpasses the inquiry class (MW Inq) by 19% and the traditional class (HS Trad)
by 15%. This is a large effect, because the standard deviation of student scores does not
exceed 16% for any of the classes in Fig. 1. The inquiry class pretest score is
exceptionally low for an honors physics class. However, it may be doubted that this
accounts for any difference in the posttest scores. The pretest scores for both classes are
so low (20% is a random score) that the difference cannot be attributed to more than
superficial knowledge. For the same reason, the data does not show much difference
between the inquiry and traditional methods, although inquiry produced a 9% greater
gain.
These results should serve as a warning that the general approach of cooperative
learning is not likely to improve student learning by itself. Improvement depends
critically on the structure of the activities and the guidance by the teacher, so much so
that, even for a superior teacher like Malcolm, results can be greatly improved by careful
instructional design.
For comparison with Malcolm’s score, Fig. 1 gives Diagnostic scores for
traditional (algebra-based) College Physics (CP) and (calculus-based) University Physics
(UP) courses. These courses were taught by the traditional lecture-demonstration method
to classes with hundreds of students. One of the instructors has many awards for superior
teaching. Nevertheless, as measured by the pre-post Diagnostic gains, neither course is
more effective than the traditional high school course and both are far less effective than
Malcolm’s modeling course. Even on the final postest Malcolm’s high school students
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
13
perform much better than the university students. Only Halloun’s experimental modeling
class (UP Mod) achieves a comparable result –– which should not be surprising.
Problem solving. The modeling course was also compared to the traditional
course with respect to student competency in traditional-type problem solving. For this
purpose, a test was constructed consisting of 24 mechanics questions and problems from
the 1983 NSTA–AAPT standardized examination, and 16 questions from PSSC and
Harvard Project Physics tests. The problems were carefully selected to require some
reasoning and some understanding of physics concepts, as opposed to being solvable by
blind substitution into a formula. In this respect, it could be regarded as a "hard test."
Otherwise, physics teachers would regard the test as fairly ordinary.
Since the traditional class had far more conventional problem solving practice, it
might be expected to do better on the test. However, as Fig. 1 shows, Malcolm's
modeling class outperformed the traditional class by 21%. How could this happen?!
We have a definite answer which we can assert with much more confidence than
Malcolm could in his thesis, because the result has been replicated many times since and
detected with the more refined instruments described below.
The lower posttest score on the Mechanics Diagnostic (Fig. 1) means that the
traditional class has a much weaker grasp of basic Newtonian concepts than the modeling
class. In fact, at least half the class can be classified as preNewtonian (see discussion of
Fig. 3). This means that those students are seriously deficient in basic concepts required
for effective problem solving. Without those concepts, the students are forced to fall back
on rote learning and plug-and-chug problem solving. Therefore, most of their problem
solving practice is a waste of time. Malcolm's approach concentrates on a thorough
grounding in basic concepts first. Thereafter problem solving skill develops more easily
and surely. More evidence for this below.
Halloun's results in Fig. 1 support our conclusions about Malcolm's results.
Although he was teaching problem solving directly, Halloun concentrated on identifying
and correcting weaknesses in student grasp of basic concepts. Halloun's (UP Mod) class
surpassed the traditional (UP Trad) class by 12% on a common problem-solving final
exam (scores represented by dark bars in Fig. 1). More noteworthy is Halloun's success
with underprepared students:8 All such students in his recitation section passed the
course with grade C or better, while 80% of the underprepared students in the traditional
class failed to achieve at least a C grade, though there was a common grading system for
both. This is comparable to Malcolm's achievement with high school students. It strongly
supports the conclusion that traditional instruction fails miserably with underprepared
students, though much better results are possible.
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
14
20
40
60
80
100
Figure 2
HS 
Reg
HS 
Hon
MW 
Reg
MW 
Hon
UP 
Reg
27
48
32
33
56
37
28
42
64
78
62
42
63
52
48
Score (%)
Fig. 2.  Mean scores on the Force Concept Inventory and the Mechanics Baseline test.
Pretest scores are displayed below the posttest scores for the inventory. The dark bars
represent Baseline scores.
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
15
DH was so impressed with the results of Malcolm’s thesis that he collaborated
with Malcolm on an NSF grant to continue improving the method and develop
workshops to pass it on to other teachers. The high school teacher who had acted as
Malcolm’s control was equally impressed and eagerly signed up for the first workshop.
The experience revolutionized and rejuvenated his teaching, so he postponed his
retirement.
The first task on the NSF grant was to improve the evaluation instruments. For
this task Malcolm’s intensive experience examining and applying the Mechanics
Diagnostic and the "misconceptions taxonomy" was invaluable. The first result was the
Force Concept Inventory,10 which can be regarded as an improved version of the
Mechanics Diagnostic. The second result was the Mechanics Baseline test,11 which can
be regarded as a greatly improved version of the problem solving test that Malcolm used
in his thesis. Details about the tests are given in the references. Here we are only
interested in using test results for further documentation of Malcolm’s achievements as a
teacher.
The Inventory and Baseline tests provide a thorough and systematic evaluation of
basic conceptual understanding and problem solving competence in mechanics. They
were published along with extensive data that has made it possible to compare the
mechanics competence of physics students at every level from high school into graduate
school. An enormous and rich body of data has accumulated since, and efforts are
underway to analyze and organize it for informative publication. It can be asserted,
however, that the new data is generally consistent with the original data and so supports
the original conclusions.
Fig. 2 is constructed from data in the original Inventory and Baseline papers. The
scores for the traditional high school regular and honors physics courses are averages for
more than 700 students and 17 different teachers. The dispersion of scores among the
teachers is negligible, because it is much smaller than the dispersion among students in a
single class. Unpublished data from other teachers gives about the same result. We are
quite confident in asserting that the scores in Fig. 2 are typical for traditional physics
courses throughout the nation. Moreover, the small dispersion of scores for different
teachers leads to the surprising conclusion that these typical scores are essentially
independent of the teacher’s experience and academic background. Data on university
physics leads to much the same conclusion.1,10 The scores for University Physics in Fig.
2 are for a single course. Again, consistent with our broader knowledge of the data, we
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
16
regard these scores as typical for traditional University Physics courses at large state
universities.
To summarize, the scores for traditional classes in Fig. 2 are typical and firm.
Moreover, large variations in teacher expertise produce insignificant variations in student
performance on the Inventory and Baseline tests. Results of traditional instruction are
uniformly poor for all teachers. This suggests that instructional methodology is a more
serious problem than teacher competence. The good news is that the firm numbers in Fig.
2 provide a reliable baseline from which to measure the success of instructional
innovation.
60
Fig. 3.  Student competence after instruction in Malcolm’s honors physics course.
Posttest Inventory score is plotted against Baseline score for each of the 27 students.
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
17
It should now be obvious that the scores in Fig. 2 document a remarkable
achievement by Malcolm Wells, fully confirming the results of his thesis. Malcolm’s
superiority on this measure is so decisive that there is no need to describe the many other
virtues of his method to be sure of its overall superiority. Malcolm’s scores in Fig. 2 are
for a single year, but unpublished data shows that he achieved similar scores consistently
year after year –– with one exception. The scores fell one year when he was spending a
lot of time on an experimental course at ASU. On seeing the results, he lamented "I
wasn't minding the store!" This is indicative of his intense personal commitment to
teaching.
Though Malcolm contributed heavily to the construction of the Inventory and
Baseline tests, he scrupulously avoided teaching to the tests in his own courses. His
scores were about the same, whether the tests were given immediately after the
mechanics portion of the course or at the end of the spring semester. Thus, the retention
of his students is strong.
Fig. 3 gives the distribution of scores for students in Malcolm's honors course. A
comparable figure for the University Physics course at Harvard is published in Ref. 10.
Remarkably, the distributions for the two courses are very similar, though the Harvard
course has four times as many students. Their mean scores on both tests are also about
the same. Even for a group of first year physics graduate students at ASU, the mean
scores are about the same as Malcolm's. Malcolm is in very good company indeed! He
has given us an existence proof that high school physics students just about anywhere can
be competitive with Harvard! There is no reason to believe that Malcolm had a special
breed of student in his classes.
The details of Fig. 3 tell us more about Malcolm's impact. First note that all the
data points lie above the diagonal. The reason for this is that the basic physics concepts
(measured by the Inventory) are necessary but not sufficient for problem solving
(measured by the Baseline). We refer to scores below 60% on the Inventory as
PreNewtonian, because they indicate serious conceptual deficiencies, such as inability to
discriminate reliably between velocity and acceleration. As data on the figure suggests,
PreNewtonians are unable to score better than 60% on the Baseline. Scores in the box at
the upper right hand corner indicate genuine mastery of basic Newtonian mechanics. The
"mastery box" is contained in a slightly larger near mastery box. Near mastery students
are likely to be top physics students at any university they attend. More than a quarter of
Malcolm's students fall within the near mastery box. Remarkably, this is more than the
number of near mastery students from all 700 students in the traditional high school
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
18
physics classes contributing to the data in Fig. 2. Malcolm’s regular physics class also has
several students in the near mastery box, though the full data will not be presented here.
Malcolm’s regular physics class differs from his honors class mainly in having a larger
number of students stuck in the PreNewtonian box.
We have discussed Malcolm’s case in such detail because there is a dearth of
objective evidence for truly exceptional teaching and a lot of doubters that any such
evidence exists. To our knowledge Malcolm's combined Inventory–Baseline scores have
never been surpassed by any other high school teacher. But others are getting closer, and
a few college teachers have surpassed him in absolute score, though not in fractional
gain. Malcolm's mark is worth shooting at. We are sure that no one would be happier
than Malcolm to see himself surpassed!!
3. Malcolm’s Classroom
GS had the unique privilege of observing Malcolm's classroom in action over
many months. GS had become intrigued with the possibilities of "modeling instruction"
from published articles by DH, so he arranged to spend sabbatical leave from his own
high school physics teaching, with DH at ASU. He arrived just when Malcolm and DH
had completed a preliminary version of the Force Concept Inventory, whereupon he was
invited to join them in completing the job. His main task was to investigate the validity
of the test through extensive interviews of high school students. This brought him to
Malcolm's classroom for many hours, and he remained there for many more out of
fascination. Here are his recollections of Malcolm's classroom, admittedly transmogrified
by subsequent reflection and experience.
It was a November morning when I first visited Malcolm Well's classroom. The
class was discussing a problem about the motion of an object subject to several forces.
One student was holding up a "whiteboard" with a solution sketched on it. The board
displayed clearly drawn diagrams with a few algebraic equations and some numbers. The
class was gathered round as he explained his solution. An occasional question from
another student was answered crisply. Relations between the diagrams and the algebraic
statements were explained clearly. Substitution of the numbers into the algebraic
statements was explicit. But Malcolm challenged the student further.
"Why did you do that?"
The student replied that he had identified and added all the forces along one dimension.
"Why did you do that?"
"So I could find the net force."
"Why did you do that?"
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
19
"Because a = F/m."
"How do you know that?"
Because that’s Newton’s Second Law."
It was the first time that I had heard a student account for everything he had done in
solving a problem, explaining why he had done it, and ultimately appealing to theory
developed on the basis of experiments that had been done by the students. These students
were explicit in their understanding. Malcolm did not take correct statements for granted.
He always pressed for explicit articulation of understanding.
The students in Malcolm’s class explained their solutions to problems publicly,
and he made sure that they could justify them. He was uncanny in his ability to expose
deficiencies in student explanations with questions. Many times I would have joyfully
accepted a student’s correct answer as sufficient. But Malcolm would again ask one more
question, and, much to my surprise, the student would falter. This ability, as I gradually
came to understand it, arose from his mastery of modeling in Newtonian physics. His
understanding extended beyond the content of Newton’s Laws to an acute awareness of
the techniques for applying the laws in practice.
Malcolm was alerted when a student failed to mention the procedures required to
be faithful to Newtonian physics. He would ask for elaboration at the very point where I
was satisfied that the student had achieved the desired result. His deep understanding of
scientific explanation and justification enabled Malcolm to be a remarkable Socratic
guide. He had clear knowledge of what students had to make explicit to be assured that
their understanding is adequate. His line of questioning was unfailingly purposeful.
Students were required to present an explicit model to account for the physical situation
in question and explain how the model had been obtained from overarching theory and/or
experimental data. His students became accustomed to supplying not just answers and
clear explanations of how they got them, but also full justification for their approach. The
students’ solutions to physics problems were superior.
The students were busy in Malcolm’s classes. Working in groups of three they
performed experiments, solved problems, explored activities. Regularly, Malcolm would
assemble them to present accounts of their work orally with the aid of whiteboards or
join in questioning the presenters. Whiteboards were new to me. Student groups prepared
them with care and pride. With colorful dry markers they dressed the whiteboard with
diagrammatic, graphical and mathematical representations of physical situations from
problems or lab activities. By the time I visited the class, students were consistently
referring to these representations as models. They were using these models to solve
problems or interpret experiments, and they could explain how the various
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
20
representations cohere in their interpretations. The dialog during oral presentations was
potent, whether the presentation was consistent with Newtonian physics or not. Students
found holes in their understanding and honed their arguments, both by questioning one
another and providing answers. Malcolm served as Socratic guide to keep the dialog
moving in a profitable direction.
Another feature of Malcolm’s teaching that was new for me was the solid
experimental underpinning for all theoretical constructions that followed. Malcolm had
adapted and designed experiments which were conceptually clean, with equipment
enabling students to generate good data reliably. The students were given no instructions
for doing these experiments. Rather, Malcolm would introduce the class to the physical
system to be investigated and engage the students in describing the system until a
consensus was achieved. Malcolm would stealthily elicit from his students the
appropriate dependent and independent variables to characterize the system. After
obtaining reasoned defenses from the students for the selection of these variables, he
divided the class into groups of three and set them loose to design their own procedures
with the apparatus available.
The students had to make sense of the experiment themselves. Malcolm would
allow them to fail. The apparatus would be around for several days should they need it.
After allowing time to prepare whiteboards, Malcolm would select one person to present
an oral account of his group’s experimental procedure and interpretation. Typically, the
interpretation consisted of graphical and mathematical models for the system
investigated. For Malcolm, the class’s interpretation of experimental data was the origin
of principle and the end of argument.
I was struck by Malcolm’s responses to student questions. He invariably sought to
elicit the answer from the students themselves, and to induce them to assume
responsibility for their own explanations. Sometimes, when students were thoroughly
nonplused, he would suggest that they find out what other students were doing. Malcolm
assiduously avoided the role of authority –– this was a matter of principle with him. The
belief that learning science is acceptance of what the text or teacher declares was
regarded by Malcolm as an obstacle to valid understanding by the students. In this
respect he stands with Feynman, who said that "science is a belief in the ignorance of
experts." The struggle for understanding was fostered and facilitated by Malcolm, but
never mitigated.
Computers played a prominent role in Malcolm's classroom, but that role was
defined by Malcolm's pedagogy. Computers became tools for analyzing experimental
data and for simulating physical systems when real, clean, and reliable experiments were
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
21
not available. Computers helped students create good models of physical systems and
generalize their results into theoretical statements. They helped provide the physical
theory developed in the course with a firm experimental foundation to which the students
continually had to appeal to justify their work. Computers were not just a nice addition to
the course, they were indispensable. The foundational experiments that Malcolm used to
span the desired dimensions of physics could not have been done without them. Never
had I seen computers used so effectively and frequently to facilitate the struggle for
understanding.
As exhibited in his classroom, Malcolm’s method has a clear moral: Teaching by
telling is ineffective. Coherent understanding cannot be transferred from teacher to
student by lucid explanations or brilliant demonstrations. Students construct their own
understanding. The teacher is a facilitator. Malcolm labored to guide students to a
coherent and, therefore, lasting understanding of physics. He sought to change their view
of learning from collectors of information to expectant creators of this coherent
understanding. He was more concerned with what students would think about his course
five years later than with what they thought about it during the school year. To Malcolm
it must have been the ultimate tribute when one of his former students gave thanks not
for teaching him what to think but how to think!
4.  Modeling Cycle
The atmosphere in Malcolm’s classroom was not simply the product of a talented
teacher doing his stuff. It was the result of careful preparation, planning and deliberate
execution of a definite method. Let us describe his method in more detail.
A synopsis of the modeling method is enclosed in Box 2. The instructional
objectives are appropriate for any implementation of a modeling approach to instruction.
The instructional design is more specific to Malcolm’s inquiry approach. The centerpiece
of this design is the modeling cycle, which organizes class activities into coherent units
with similar procedural structure.
The modeling cycle can be regarded as a refinement of the learning cycle
developed by physicist Robert Karplus for the Science Curriculum Improvement Study
(SCIS). It greatly elaborates the role of models and modeling in the cycle. We have
recently learned from an insider that there was unresolved debate among scientists on the
SCIS development team as to whether models or theories should play the central role in
the curriculum. There was even confusion about the distinction between "a theory" and
"a model." Such confusion is common among scientists, and it is not merely a problem of
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
22
defining terms. Consequently, these concepts need to be carefully analyzed to avoid
muddling the physics curriculum.4,5 The issue cannot be addressed here.
BOX 2:  MODELING METHOD Synopsis
The Modeling Method aims to correct many weaknesses of the traditional lecture-demonstration
method, including the fragmentation of knowledge, student passivity, and the persistence of naive
beliefs about the physical world.
Coherent instructional objectives
• To engage students in understanding the physical world by constructing and using scientific
models to describe, to explain, to predict, to design and control physical phenomena.
• To provide students with basic conceptual tools for modeling physical objects and processes,
especially mathematical, graphical and diagrammatic representations.
• To familiarize students with a small set of basic models as the content core of physics.
• To develop insight into the structure of scientific knowledge by examining how models fit into
theories.
• To show how scientific knowledge is validated by engaging students in evaluating scientific
models through comparison with empirical data.
• To develop skill in all aspects of modeling as the procedural core of scientific knowledge.
Student-centered instructional design
• Instruction is organized into modeling cycles which engage students in all phases of model
development, evaluation and application in concrete situations –– thus promoting an integrated
understanding of modeling processes and acquisition of coordinated modeling skills.
• The teacher sets the stage for student activities, typically with a demonstration and class discussion
to establish common understanding of a question to be asked of nature. Then, in small groups,
students collaborate in planning and conducting experiments to answer or clarify the question.
• Students are required to present and justify their conclusions in oral and/or written form, including
a formulation of models for the phenomena in question and evaluation of the models by comparison
with data.
• Technical terms and representational tools are introduced by the teacher as they are needed to
sharpen models, facilitate modeling activities and improve the quality of discourse.
• The teacher is prepared with a definite agenda for student progress and guides student inquiry and
discussion in that direction with "Socratic" questioning and remarks.
• The teacher is equipped with a taxonomy of typical student misconceptions to be addressed as
students are induced to articulate, analyze and justify their personal beliefs.
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
23
Anyway, we are pleased to report that Karplus was firmly in favor of models, though, in
deference to his colleagues, he allowed his position to be somewhat diluted in the
curriculum. We believe he would have come out strongly in favor of the modeling cycle.
Before describing the modeling cycle, let us briefly review the three stages of the
learning cycle (exploration, invention, discovery) from a modeling perspective.
Exploration. Typically, in this stage students are given some physical
phenomenon to investigate with hands-on activities. Students are given minimal guidance
so they can make their own observations and formulate their own conclusions. The main
instructional difficulty with this stage is that it tends to degenerate into aimless "messing
about" under too little guidance or become unimaginative under too much. The modeling
method resolves this difficulty over several cycles by teaching students a general method
of scientific inquiry. Students learn that in every investigation it is essential to develop a
model of the physical system, and they continue to grow in their understanding of what
modeling involves. When investigating some general physical concept like "energy
conservation," they learn that it cannot be explored experimentally apart from a specific
model. The model supplies a context for the exploration. Thus, in investigating a new
phenomenon, students learn to focus quickly on identifying particular systems to be
modeled and on quantitative measures of their properties.
Invention (or concept introduction). This stage recognizes that modeling cannot
go beyond simple description without the invention of new concepts and symbolic tools
to represent them. Chief among these are the inventions of algebra and calculus, which
make it possible to formulate quantitative relations among variables. The mathematical
tools make it possible to formulate "universal" principles like Newton’s Laws, which
facilitate mechanics modeling in (nearly) every situation.4,5
Students cannot be expected to invent the concepts and notations introduced in
this stage. But they must discover for themselves the utility of the concepts for modeling
phenomena from the exploration stage. From the modeling perspective, that is the main
objective of the invention stage.
The stage name "concept introduction" is usually preferred over "invention,"
because it is supposed to be more descriptive of what is actually done. However, that
very name may encourage the serious pedagogical mistake of introducing concepts
piecemeal and out of context, in the misguided belief that complexities are mastered by
concentrating on one concept at a time. The very strength of the learning cycle is that
new concepts are introduced within the context of modeling and for the purpose of
modeling. The modeling approach makes this explicit. The emphasis on models rather
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
24
than single concepts makes instruction more coherent, for model construction requires
the coordinated use of a whole set of concepts.
The new concepts introduced in this stage are usually nontrivial and fully deserve
to be recognized as inventions, often great inventions! Students and teachers need to
appreciate the power that such inventions confer on the user. For this reason, we think
the stage name "invention" is well chosen.
Discovery (or concept application). Likewise, we prefer the original name
"discovery" for this stage. It is not usually a single concept that is applied in this stage,
but the whole model that was developed in the first two stages. The model is abstracted
from its original physical context and applied to new situations. The applications often
require genuine (though not original) discoveries by the student, so why not celebrate
that with the word "discovery?"  Rather than "model applications," we speak of "model
deployment" below, to emphasize strategic and tactical aspects of modeling which are
not so straightforward as the term "application" suggests.
Now let us turn to the modeling cycle. The modeling cycle has two stages,
involving the two general classes of modeling activities: Model development and model
deployment (See Refs. 4 & 5 for more details). Roughly speaking, model development
encompasses the exploration and invention stages of the learning cycle, while model
deployment corresponds to the discovery stage. It will be noted that the "modeling
terminology" is more descriptive of what the students actually do in the cycle.
The two stage modeling cycle has a generic and flexible format which can be
adapted to any physics topic. In its high school physics implementation, the cycle is two
or three weeks long, with at least a week devoted to each stage, and there are six cycles
in a semester, each devoted to a major topic. Each topic is centered on the development
and deployment of a well-defined mathematical model, including investigations of
empirical implications and general physical principles involved.
Throughout the modeling cycle the teacher has a definite agenda and specific
objectives for every class activity, including concepts and terminology to be introduced,
conclusions to be reached, issues to be raised and misconceptions to be addressed.
Though the teacher sets the goals of instruction and controls the agenda, this is done
unobtrusively. The teacher assumes the roles of activity facilitator, Socratic inquisitor,
and arbiter (more the role of a physics coach than a traditional teacher). To the students,
the skilled teacher is transparent, appearing primarily as a facilitator of student goals and
agendas.
To make the present discussion of details in the modeling cycle more concrete,
we choose a specific topic which appears in both high school and university physics
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
25
courses. Accordingly, as major objectives for the instructional agenda in the cycle, we
aim to develop student conceptual understanding of the following :
Target model: Motion of a material particle subject to a constant force.
Physical principle: Newton’s second law of motion.
Experimental context: Modified Atwood’s machine (Fig. 4).
Prerequisite: Before beginning this cycle, the students should have previous experience
with kinematic models (two cycles in the high school course), so they have fairly clear
concepts of velocity and acceleration. Many students still have only a shaky grasp of
these concepts at this point, and more experience with the concepts in a variety of
contexts is necessary to consolidate them. Conceptual development takes time, and it will
be haphazard unless instruction is carefully designed to promote it systematically.
m
m1
2
Fig. 4.  Modified Atwood Machine. A (low friction) cart with mass m1 is connected to a
mass m2 suspended by a string over a pulley. Values of the masses can be varied.
Stage I is designed to lead students systematically through the four main phases
of model development: description, formulation, ramification and validation (Refs. 4 &
5), though students are not introduced to this fancy terminology. Students are not simply
presented with the target model; they are induced to invent and evaluate the model for
themselves in an experimental context where it is meaningful.
Stage I begins with the presentation of, for example, the modified Atwood
machine for the class to consider. Eventually they will realize that a scientific
understanding of the system requires (1) the specification of a model to represent it
conceptually, and (2) an evaluation of the fidelity of the representation – but they are not
told this until they have the experience necessary to understand it by reflecting on what
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
26
they have done already. Modeling begins with description. Throughout the descriptive
phase the teacher functions as a moderator, non-judgmentally recording all suggestions,
asking occasionally for further clarification as to meaning while insisting that all terms
used in a technical sense be given valid operational definitions. Technical terms, such as
"frame of reference, one-dimensional  motion, and system" are introduced by the
instructor only in situations where they serve to clarify the discussion. Ample opportunity
to introduce important technical terms occurs as the course proceeds. Beginning students
may state, for example, that an object is accelerating but when asked what they mean by
acceleration, they often reply "speeding up". The teacher continues to ask probing
questions until the students articulate a satisfactory quantitative characterization of the
concept. The teacher strives to remain unobtrusively in control of the agenda throughout
the discussion, never acting as an authority or a source of knowledge.
At the conclusion of the descriptive stage, the students are directed, collectively, to
identify quantitatively measurable parameters that might  be expected to exhibit some
cause-effect relationship. A variable under direct control by the experimenters is
identified as the independent variable, while the effect is identified as the dependent
variable. This is a critical step in the modeling process. It is at this point that the students
learn to differentiate aspects of the phenomenon to which they must attend from those
which are distracters. While this issue of identifying and controlling variables is critical
to modeling, it is scarcely addressed in traditional instruction, where a lab manual
typically provides students with the lab purpose, procedure, evaluation of data and even
questions suggesting appropriate conclusions. This critical issue is also missed in
conventional homework and test problems, which typically provide only that information
necessary to accommodate the author’s choice of solutions.
Having completed the descriptive phase of modeling by settling on a suitable set
of descriptive variables, the instructor guides the class into the formulation phase by
raising the central problem: to develop a functional relationship between the specified
variables. A brief class discussion of the essential elements of the experimental design
(which parameters will be held constant and which will be varied) is pursued at this time.
The class then divides into teams of two or three to devise and perform experiments of
their own.
Before starting data acquisition, each team must develop a detailed experimental
design. Except where the design might pose risk of injury to persons or equipment, the
teams are permitted to pursue their own experimental procedures without intrusion by the
instructor. For a post-lab presentation to the class, the instructor selects a group which is
likely to raise significant issues for class discussion –– often a group that has taken an
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
27
inappropriate approach. At that time, the group members are expected to present a
detailed explanation and defense of their experimental design and conclusions.
Each lab team performs its own data analysis cooperatively, using computers and
striving to construct graphical and mathematical representations of the functional
relationships previously posited. The principal goal of the laboratory activities is to lead
students to develop a conceptual correspondence between targeted aspects of the real
world phenomenon and corresponding symbolic representations.
Every lab activity is concluded by each lab team preparing, on a whiteboard, a
detailed post-lab analysis of the activity and reasoning that led to the proposed model(s).
The teacher then selects one or more of the lab groups to make presentations before the
class, explaining and defending their experimental design, analysis of data and proposed
model.
Laboratory reports for each activity are written up in a laboratory notebook
according to a given format. It is stressed that the purpose of the laboratory report is to
articulate a coherent argument in support of their model construction. While each student
must prepare and submit a lab notebook, most of the work is done in class in their
cooperative study groups. Grading is done by selecting one report at random from each
group and selecting different members of the group to defend different aspects of the
report. This induces students, during the preparation of reports by the groups, to ensure
that every member of the group understands all aspects of the model that they have
developed, thus instilling a sense of shared responsibility for the knowledge. This
concludes Stage I.
The end product of Stage I is a mathematical model together with evidence for a
claim that accurately represents the behavior (or structure) of some physical system, in
this case the Modified Atwood’s Machine. Students have verified that the equation a =
F/m accurately describes the acceleration when F and m are varied independently. They
are encouraged to consider the possibility that this equation represents a general law of
nature, but they should be led to realize that there is no such thing as an experimental
proof of a general law. At best, experiment can validate specific models which conform to
the law, as in the present case.
Stage II is devoted to deployment of the model developed in Stage I to a variety of
new physical situations in a variety of different ways. This helps free the students’
understanding of the model from the specific context in which it was developed. The
model may be deployed to describe, to explain, to predict or to design a new experiment.
Though some of the activities in Stage II involve the laboratory, most are more like
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
28
traditional problem solving, except the work is done cooperatively in small groups. Most
of the work is done in class.
Each study group develops solutions for each problem in the study set. Each group
is then assigned one of the problems in the set to prepare, on the white boards, for class
presentation. One member of the group is then selected to make the presentation. The
same recitation grade is given to the entire group, and it depends on the quality of the
presentation. During the presentation, if questions are asked by fellow students that the
selected presenter can not answer, other members of the group may offer assistance. If
however any assistance from other members of the group is required to satisfy the
questioner, the recitation grade awarded the group may be reduced. The recitation scores
of the groups are enhanced if the members ask valid, well thought out questions during
the presentations (shared responsibility).
On each pass through the modeling cycle the students’ understanding of models and
modeling is progressively deepened; students become more independent in formulating
and executing tasks and more articulate in presenting and defending their points of view.
The ultimate objective is, of course, to have them become autonomous scientific
thinkers, fluent in the vicissitudes of mathematical modeling.
5. Cultivation of teaching expertise.
What does it take to become a master teacher like Malcolm Wells? The skill and
training required for expert teaching are generally underestimated and undervalued.
Accolades and awards for teaching are often based on superficial criteria. Malcolm’s
example sets a higher standard – one to be emulated if teaching is to be elevated.
An extensive review and analysis of the literature on expert performance has
identified essential conditions for the acquisition of expert skill in most domains.12  The
chief condition is prolonged effort to improve performance extending for a minimum of
10 years. A striking conclusion of the study is that individual differences, even among
elite performers, are primarily due to intense practice rather than innate talent. Music,
sports, chess, scientific research and literature are among the several domains examined
in the study. Teaching was not included, of course, but there is no reason to doubt that
the general conditions for acquisition of expertise apply there as well. Assuming so, we
can draw some important conclusions about the professional development of teachers.
Our first conclusion is that standard teacher preparation and in-service teaching
experience is not sufficient to develop a high level of teaching expertise. Consider what is
involved. Even assuming that a physics teacher has acquired adequate "content
knowledge" from a B.A. or even an M.A. in physics, the relevant pedagogical training is
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
29
practically nil. After landing a teaching position, the tyro teacher may scramble for a
couple of years to organize lab materials and activities, problem sets and homework,
grading procedures and the rest into a smoothly running course. By this time the teacher
has adopted a personal style and a teaching routine which makes it possible to cope with
the perpetual exigencies of everyday teaching.
Most physics teachers are dedicated to their job and care deeply about their
students. But caring and dedication are not enough! The experience of routine teaching
over many years, even when conducted with dedication and enthusiasm, will not
contribute significantly to the development of teaching expertise – just as plug-and-chug
practice does little to promote problem solving skill! There is strong empirical support
for this kind of assertion from the domain of chess.5, 12  Tournament chess players are
assigned numerical performance ratings which are extremely reliable predictors of their
tournament results. The fact is that, after an initial increase when learning the game, the
average rating of an avid amateur scarcely changes over the years no matter how many
games are played. Thus routine chess playing does not improve chess competence.
Likewise, we conclude, routine teaching does not improve teaching competence. Most
teachers become trapped in a routine that prevents them from coming close to realizing
their true potential.
How to rise above it!?
First consider how Malcolm did it. The schools have so crowded the teacher's
daily schedule that no room is left for cultivating expertise. Malcolm, of course, did it on
his own time – evenings, weekends, vacations – routinely working into the small hours of
the morning. For Malcolm, teaching is a calling, not just a job. He was unrelenting in his
efforts to improve – continuously monitoring the progress of his students, revising
assignment and activities, designing and building new apparatus, always on the lookout
for some other teacher's good idea. Malcolm is a counter example to the myth of the
"born teacher." Unlike the typical award-winning teacher, Malcolm is not a master
showman. Rather, he goes out of his way to give the students center stage. Malcolm's
success has come from hard work leading to technical mastery of his craft, from
continuous critical evaluation of his own teaching performance, and from meticulous
attention to every detail, large and small. "The devil is in the details!"
Few can match the prolonged and dedicated effort of Malcolm Wells, but many
can aspire to his level of teaching expertise, because Malcolm has prepared the way. This
article aims to pass on some of Malcolm's hard won insights. However, most of
Malcolm's expertise is bound up in teaching skills. Such skills cannot be transmitted
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
30
verbally; they can only be passed on through personal interaction and deliberate practice
in the classroom.
To develop a practical means for training teachers in the modeling method, we
joined Malcolm in designing and conducting a series of NSF summer workshops for in-
service teachers. A brief account of the experience provides some background for future
action.
Two groups of high school physics teachers participated in the project. In
teaching experience they ranged from novice to state teacher of the year, and in academic
background, from one year of College Physics to a Masters in physics education. The
first group of 17 teachers attended five-week workshops in the summers of 1990 and
1991 with a follow-up one-week workshop in the summer of 1992. They were also
brought together for half-day workshops at regular intervals during the school year to
discuss progress and problems with implementing the new method. All the teachers
employed the new method in their regular high school physics teaching during their two
years with the project, and they have continued using it since.
After initial hesitancy in the first workshop, teacher enthusiasm for the new
"modeling method" grew to a stupendous level by the middle of their first year of
teaching with it, and all teachers reported big improvements in student interest and
activity. By the usual anecdotal measures the program was a great success. However, the
Force Concept Inventory gave us an objective measure of gain in teaching effectiveness
by comparing the score of each teacher’s class just before the workshop with the one just
after. The result was a sobering 4% – barely significant! We could identify several
reasons for the limited gain: (1) The written curriculum materials tailored to the new
method were inadequate; (2) the teachers were so caught up in the mechanics of the
computer-based laboratory activities that they overlooked crucial pedagogical features
that make the method effective, and (3) too much lecturing about the method (Shame!).
In the second summer workshop, the teachers were involved in developing the
necessary curriculum materials, and this gave them a satisfying sense of ownership in the
program as well as rich experience collaborating with their peers. Also, pedagogical
techniques were given renewed emphasis. This contributed to a clearly significant 22%
average gain on the Inventory for all teachers. That, however, is still well short of the
results consistently achieved by Malcolm Wells. Moreover, though there was some
improvement on our other measure of student competence, the Mechanics Baseline, it is
not worth reporting.
In the summer of 1992, a new group of 14 teachers attended a single five-week
"Modeling Workshop." With the printed curriculum materials available, this workshop
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
31
proceeded more smoothly and quickly than the previous ones. Most important, the
workshop design was improved to enable the teachers to practice the new methods on
their colleagues almost every day. From our personal observations, we are confident that
this new group made as much progress in one summer as the original group did in two.
Unfortunately, we were unable to validate this conclusion with an objective follow-up
evaluation.
Overall, we regard the workshops as moderately successful. The teachers were
unanimous in high praise for the experience. As a consequence, all of them have
radically and permanently changed their teaching methods. As far as we know, their
teaching is now laboratory-based, computer-enhanced, student-centered and activity
oriented. They report that their students are more engaged and enthusiastic than ever.
They are especially delighted with the enhanced student participation stimulated by the
whiteboards. In short, the workshops succeeded fully in getting teachers to adopt a
cooperative inquiry method of teaching. They were less successful in leading teachers to
understand the rationale for the modeling method. For example, a video of one teacher’s
class shows enthusiastic students in intense and animated discussion over a whiteboard,
but the teacher failed to focus the discussion, so it went nowhere. Another teacher
inadvertantly subverts the objectives of guided-inquiry lab experiments by summarizing
the findings instead of requiring the students to do so. On the other hand, the Inventory
scores show that the teachers have been greatly sensitized to student misconceptions and
are learning to address them; although only a few of them have learned to appreciate the
deeper aspects of the modeling method. This is reflected in the minimal improvements of
Baseline scores. Considerable advances in workshop design and execution will be needed
to achieve a satisfying outcome along this dimension.
We are now prepared to draw some strong conclusions about what is most needed
to improve high school physics. Teacher expertise is the critical factor. The teacher,
above all, determines the quality of student experience in the classroom. Equipment and
school environment are secondary factors. To reach and maintain his/her full potential,
the teacher must be engaged in lifelong professional development. It will take at least ten
years to reach the teacher’s highest level of competence. Mere accumulation of academic
credits and hours of classroom teaching count for little, unless the teacher is consistently
engaged in deliberate effort to improve.
Teacher commitment is essential, and individual teachers, like Malcolm,
can go far in designing and executing their own programs for personal development.
However, even Malcolm needed help to reach his peak, so the ultimate success of every
teacher depends on opportunities to draw on the resources of the physics community.
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
32
Teachers need a support system in the physics community to nourish their professional
development. The infrastructure for such support is in terrible shape across the nation.
Box 3: MODELING WORKSHOP Description
      Participants will be introduced to the Modeling Method as a systematic
      approach to the design of curriculum and instruction.
G They will collaborate on the redesign of the high school physics course to enhance
learnability and exploit technology.
G They will learn how to use computers and electronic networks as an integral part of
their teaching practice.
G They will implement a student-centered instructional strategy which engages students
in active scientific inquiry, discourse and evaluation of evidence.
G They will examine implications of educational research for physics teaching.
CURRICULUM
G Standard topics will be covered (including mechanics, optics, electricity and
magnetism), but they will be organized into a systematic and coherent curriculum.
G Flexible curriculum design will facilitate future upgrades of computers and software
and incorporation of new topics or activities.
G Structured curriculum for the introductory physics course will be supplemented by a
project-oriented curriculum for an advanced course or extracurricular activity.
INSTRUCTION
G Since "teachers teach as they have been taught," workshops will include extensive
practice in implementing the curriculum as intended for high school classes.
G Participants will rotate through roles of student and instructor as they practice
techniques of guided discovery and cooperative learning.
G Plans and techniques for raising the level of discourse in classroom discussions and
student presentations will be emphasized.
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
33
From many quarters, especially the National Science Foundation, we hear a clarion call
for nationwide systemic reform of science and math education. It signals widespread
recognition of a need to rebuild the educational infrastructure.
But systemic reform will fail unless it focuses on developing and sustaining
teacher expertise. This is a problem of immense proportions, but we need not wait for
someone else to attack it. The physics community must assume responsibility for
establishing and maintaining an infrastructure for high school physics reform. To be fully
successful it must be a collaborative effort involving all segments of the physics
community – in high schools, colleges, universities and professional societies. Here is
how we propose to attack the problem.
We have recently been awarded an NSF grant to conduct a nationwide program
of Modeling Workshops for in-service high school physics teachers beginning in summer
1995. Besides the authors, the Project team includes Larry Dukerich, Ibrahim Halloun
and Jane Jackson. The Workshop is described in Box 3. It builds on the design pioneered
by Malcolm Wells, and it is aimed at cultivating Wells-like expertise among teachers.
We are dedicated to using the Modeling Workshop as an instrument for high school
physics reform. We are keenly aware that the impact of the program depends critically on
the dedication and local support of the participants. Consequently, participation in the
first round of workshops is competitive, with preference to applications showing the
most promise for local reform. If the first round is successful, we have plans and funding
to expand the program, and we would like nothing better than to make the workshop
available to all interested teachers. For further information about the program, write the
Modeling Workshop Project Director, Jane Jackson, at DH's address.
MALCOLM WELLS has started something!!
Acknowledgment. This work has been supported by grants from the National Science
Foundation.
Note:  Malcolm Wells died on July 20, 1994, two weeks after this article was completed,
so he had the opportunity to review the article himself.
*Department of Physics and Astronomy, Box 871504, Arizona State University, Tempe,
Arizona 85287-1504.
**Glenbrook North High School, 2300 Shermer Rd., Northbrook, Illinois 60062
Am. J. Phys. 63 (7), July 1995, 606-619.
34
References
1. I. Halloun and D. Hestenes, The Initial Knowledge State of College Physics Students,
Am. J. Phys. 53, 1043-1055 (1985).
2. R. Karplus, Science Teaching and the Development of Reasoning, J. Res. Sci. Teach.
14, 169-175 (1977).
3. A. Lawson, M. Abraham and J. Renner, A Theory of Instruction: Using the Learning
Cycle to Teach Science Concepts and Thinking Skills, NARST (1989).
4. D. Hestenes, A Modeling Theory of Physics Instruction, Am. J. Phys. 55, 440-454
(1987).
5. D. Hestenes, Modeling Games in the Newtonian World, Am. J. Phys. 60, 732-748
(1992).
6. F. J. Rutherford and A. Ahlgren, SCIENCE for all Americans (AAAS Project 2061),
Oxford U Press (1990).
7. L Steen, On the Shoulders of Giants, National Academy Press, Wash. D.C. (1990).
8. I. Halloun and D. Hestenes, Modeling Instruction in Mechanics, Am. J. Phys. 55, 455-
462 (1987).
9. I. Halloun and D. Hestenes, Common Sense Concepts about Motion, Am. J. Phys. 53,
1056-1065 (1985).
10. D. Hestenes, M. Wells, and G. Swackhamer, Force Concept Inventory, The Physics
Teacher 30, 141-158 (1992).
11. D. Hestenes and M. Wells, A Mechanics Baseline Test, The Physics Teacher 30, 159-166
(1992).
12. K. Ericsson, R. Krampe and C. Tesch-Römer, The Role of Deliberate Practice in the
Acquisition of Expert Performance, Psychological Review 100, 363-406 (1993).
