Printed in: New Ideas in Psychol, Vol. 8. No.2, pp, 231-246, 1990 0732-118X/9O Printed in Great Britain @ 1990 
Pergamon Press  
 
SECRETS OF GENIUS 
Review of Imagery in Scientific Thought by Arthur I. Miller. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1986.  
DAVID HESTENES 
Department of Physics, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-1504, U.S.A. 
Scientists and nonscientists alike are fascinated by the creative processes 
underlying the great scientific discoveries. We are eager to know the secrets of 
genius. Did Einstein possess creative powers that set him above the ordinary 
physicist? Or was he privy to some special heuristics that guided him to his 
discoveries? We are indebted to historians of science like Miller for helping us 
answer such questions. Recognizing the difficulty of the task, Miller calls for 
collaboration between historians and cognitive scientists to study creative 
processes in science. He tries to get the process started in the present book with a 
historical, epistemological, and cognitive analysis. His central thesis is that 
"mental imagery is a key ingredient in creative scientific thinking." We follow 
him by focusing attention on the role of imagery in the creation of the special 
theory of relativity and quantum mechanics, two major triumphs of 20th century 
physics. But to evaluate the role of imagery we need to know what else was 
involved in the creation of these great theories.  
 
THE CREATION OF SPECIAL RELATIVITY 
Miller previously wrote an entire book on the creation of special relativity theory. 
The present volume summarizes and extends that excellent work. Let me try to 
put the whole story in a nutshell. Though special relativity is often said to be a 
revolutionary theory, Einstein himself regarded it as a straightforward extension 
of classical physics. It does no more than correct a deficiency in the classical 
concept of time. The deficiency came from taking the concept of simultaneity for 
granted. To analyze the concept, Einstein devised a gedanken (or thought) 
experiment for determining when spatially separated events are simultaneous. 
This revealed an arbitrariness in the concept of simultaneity that had hitherto gone 
unnoticed. It enabled him to prove that, if signals used in measurements propagate 
with finite velocities, then judgments of simultaneity depend on the chosen 
reference frame. More specifically; if events A and B are simultaneous in one 
reference frame, then there exist other reference frames in which A occurs before 
B or B occurs before A. This relativity of distant simultaneity is the core of 
Einstein’s new insight into the concept of time. It is this that justifies the name 
"relativity" for the theory.  
To understand the origins of special relativity theory is to recognize that 
creation of the theory was an inevitable consequence of the scientific enterprise. 
Einstein himself declared that someone else would surely have done it if he had 
not. Need for the theory arose from an incompatibility between the two great 
theories of classical physics: Newtonian mechanics and the newly completed 
electromagnetic theory of Faraday and Maxwell. This incompatibility manifested 
itself in a variety of paradoxical experimental results, so it could hardly be 
overlooked or ignored. Indeed, it engaged the attention of many outstanding 
 
2
researchers, led by H. A. Lorentz and Henri Poincaré. How was it that Einstein 
alone was able to identify the locus of the problem in the concept of simultaneity?  
Miller identifies a number of ideas and observations that are likely to have 
helped guide Einstein's thinking. We note here two of the major ones which, by 
themselves, are nearly sufficient to determine the two basic postulates of relativity 
theory.  
Einstein did not need an elaborate analysis of experimental data to identify 
the conflict between Newtonian mechanics and electromagnetic theory. Both 
theories are involved in explaining the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction, 
which underlies the operation of electric motors and generators. The essence of 
the phenomenon is that a magnet moving relative to a wire loop induces an 
electric current in the wire. Einstein observed that the induced current predicted 
by the theory depended on whether the wire or the magnet was kept at rest, 
whereas the physical phenomenon appeared to depend only on the relative motion 
of the magnet and wire. Thus, the theory exhibited an asymmetry which was not 
inherent in the phenomena. Einstein removed this asymmetry by invoking the 
principle of relativity, which requires that the laws of physics for an observer at 
rest must be the same as for an observer moving with uniform velocity. This 
principle had been stated for mechanics by Newton, though not as a basic axiom. 
Einstein generalized it to apply to electromagnetic theory as well. Paradoxically, 
this required a modification of mechanics rather than electromagnetics. The 
precise form of the modification was determined by the second postulate of 
Einstein's theory.  
Einstein was evidently led to his second postulate by pondering a 
gedanken experiment in which the speed of an observer is increased until it equals 
that of a travelling light wave under observation. If this were possible, then the 
light wave would appear as a standing wave. But no such standing wave has ever 
been observed in optical experiments; therefore, it must be impossible. In 
accordance with the relativity principle, Einstein excluded this possibility and 
assured that the laws of optics will be the same for all observers by postulating 
that the speed of light is the same for all observers and independent of the 
velocities of bodies emitting light. 
After Einstein had settled on his two basic postulates he was able to derive 
the necessary modification of Newtonian mechanics mathematically. That 
involved deriving an explicit mathematical expression for the transformation 
relating the space and time coordinates of one observer to those of another. The 
result is now called a Lorentz transformation, because Lorentz had, in fact, 
derived it before Einstein. However, the physical meaning of the transformation 
in Einstein's theory is profoundly different from its meaning in Lorentz's theory. 
This point is not sufficiently emphasized in Miller's account. The physical 
interpretation of the mathematics is a crucial ingredient of a physical theory. It 
takes more than the mathematical form of the Lorentz transformation to arrive at 
the fundamental underlying concept, namely, the relativity of distant simultaneity. 
Here it may be surmised that Einstein once again made use of the symmetry 
considerations so prominent in his thinking. He must have been distressed by the 
nonsymmetrical form of the Lorentz transformation relating the time variables in 
different reference frames, for the relativity principle demands that both variables 
be equally significant. To retain the symmetry in the interpretation of the theory, 
he may well have explored gedanken experiments relating time measurements in 
the different reference frames. That would have led him to the fundamental 
 
3
insight that different reference frames necessarily entail different definitions of 
simultaneity. Too bad he is not around to ask!  
We have here a rational reconstruction of how Einstein might have 
identified simultaneity as the crucial issue. The greatest remaining mystery is why 
Poincaré failed to arrive at the same conclusion and, indeed, to appreciate 
Einstein's accomplishment in subsequent years. Miller shows us that Poincaré was 
well aware of all the essential facts and ideas. The only thing missing, it seems, 
was an appreciation of gedanken experiments.  
This case illustrates an important difference between mathematical and 
physical thinking which goes a long way toward explaining why so few 
mathematicians have made important contributions to physics in the 20th century. 
Pure mathematicians do not think about the equations of physics in the same way 
as a physicist does. They are concerned only with the structure of the equations 
and the formal rules for manipulating them. But physicists regard the equations as 
representations of real things or processes; they are only partial representations of 
the physicists' knowledge, so to improve a representation they may alter the 
equations in ways that violate mathematical rules. Both Einstein and Heisenberg 
were masters at this. Neither was a mathematical virtuoso. Indeed, in the period 
when Einstein was developing his general relativity theory, the mathematician 
Hilbert expressed the opinion that Einstein was mathematically naive. I have 
heard a similar opinion about Heisenberg expressed by one of his students in later 
years. Mathematics played an essential role in Einstein's thinking, but, as 
mathematical physics goes, the mathematics in all his great papers is 
comparatively simple. His forte was in analyzing the physical meaning of the 
mathematics. Indeed, such analysis is generally characteristic of the best work in 
theoretical physics. I have heard the Nobel laureate Richard Feynman, himself a 
true mathematical virtuoso, express this opinion forcefully, asserting that the 
value of a paper on theoretical physics is inversely proportional to the density of 
mathematics in it.  
What secrets of Einstein's genius have been revealed by studying the 
genesis of relativity theory? Consider the following four prominent characteristics 
of his thinking.  
 
(1) 
Skepticism and objectivity 
A successful scientist no less than a successful writer must be his own best 
critic. The crank is distinguished from the scientist not so much by his outlandish 
ideas as by a refusal to subject his favorite ideas to a searching criticism. 
Einstein's admiration for Mach's "incorruptible skepticism" is self-revealing. His 
own skepticism was expressed in the way he zeroed in on his own intellectual 
presuppositions as well as those of others. He never let his ego interfere with the 
objectivity of his scientific evaluations. Thus he was able to recognize and 
assimilate valuable ideas from other thinkers, like Mach, with whom he had 
profound disagreements. In ironic contrast, Mach was never able to appreciate 
Einstein, repudiating relativity to his death.  
 
(2) 
Search for general principles 
This is the constructive complement to Einstein's critique of presuppositions, 
for the generic laws and principles of physics are among the strongest 
presuppositions. Einstein never engaged in the data-driven search for specific 
laws by curve-fitting to experimental data. Rather, he looked for simple principles 
 
4
providing broad constraints on the range of possible empirical results. By itself, 
such a principle predicts nothing specific, but in combination with other principles 
it may have unlimited implications. In his insistence that such principles are 
"freely invented," Einstein avoided the extremes of empiricism and rationalism. 
He emphasized that the basic principles of physics are not summaries of or 
abstractions from experience, nor can they be found by deductive argument. This 
is not to say that they cannot be discovered (or should I say invented) by rational 
means. His own discovery of the principles of relativity theory shows otherwise.  
 
(3) 
Symmetry arguments 
Such arguments have been used informally in physics from its beginning, but 
never before so explicitly and effectively as by Einstein. He was the first to 
incorporate a symmetry principle into the very foundations of physics. Inspired by 
the striking success of relativity theory, physicists have developed symmetry 
arguments into a systematic methodology with a formal structure provided by 
group theory, the mathematical theory of symmetry. Group theory has become 
one of the most powerful tools of theoretical physics, in daily use for manifold 
applications of established theory as well as the development of new theory. Thus, 
one of the major heuristics in Einstein’s great discovery has become a standard 
tool of ordinary physicists. It is interesting to note that group theory had been 
formalized only a short time before relativity theory. Since Einstein’s theory can 
be regarded as one of the greatest applications ever of group theory, one wonders 
if it was at all influenced, perhaps indirectly, by the formal mathematical theory.  
(4) 
Gedanken experiments 
 Such experiments were used to assess the semantic content (i.e., the physical 
meaning) of theoretical constructs. Though Einstein did this with consummate 
skill and had the privilege to employ it in some of the greatest discoveries in 
history, it is not so unique to Einstein as Miller suggests (p. 113). It should be 
recognized as one of the basic mental activities of any "real physicist." Indeed, it 
could be regarded as a defining difference between physicist and mere 
mathematician. Galileo and Newton did it with equal skill. Mach’s provocative 
positivist critique of Newtonian mechanics must have helped Einstein develop his 
own skill. Surely the design of any physics experiment begins with a conceptual 
dry run; so, Faraday must be counted as one of the all time experts in gedanken 
experiments. Likewise, the major role of experimental design in the thinking of 
Enrico Fermi (1950) can be seen in problems he assigned to students in his unique 
textbook on nuclear physics. So it goes.  
The thinking in Einstein’s creation of relativity theory can be described as 
theory-driven. As we have seen, it was not directed at explaining any particular 
experimental results, but it was nonetheless empirically grounded in a broad and 
indirect way. This made empirical predictions from the theory exceptionally 
robust. As Miller explains (p. 118), the empirical data available in 1901 
contradicted Einstein’s theory as well as Lorentz’s theory of electrons. Since 
Lorentz’s theory was data-driven, he was ready to abandon it immediately in 
deference to the new data. But the rationale for Einstein’s theory was so secure 
that he confidently dismissed the data as inaccurate. Strong empirical 
confirmation for relativity theory was not available for decades. Nevertheless, 
many physicists came to accept it on the basis of its internal logic.  
The more we know about the invention of relativity theory, the more we 
see it as a rational process, no less admirable for having the mysteries of its origin 
 
5
removed. The characteristics of Einstein’s thinking which we have identified are 
similar in kind (if not in degree) to those of any theoretical physicist. They all 
involve cognitive skills that develop only with concentrated practice. Like every 
other creative scientist, Einstein was intensely dedicated to his work. And far 
from the myth of the solitary genius, he learned from the best teachers, honing his 
skills in thorough study of the works of such master physicists as Mach, 
Boltzmann, and Lorentz. The sharp critical skills he developed early in life 
enabled him to move quickly to a study of the most productive issues. From 
Einstein’s example there is still much to be learned about the training of our 
young scientists.  
SPACETIME AND THE RELATIVITY SCANDALS 
Einstein’s original 1905 article determined the content of special relativity theory 
completely, and no modifications of the theory have been made since. However, it 
took some time thereafter to recognize the deeper implications of the theory. The 
main advance came from a reformulation of relativity theory due chiefly to H. 
Minkowski. It consists of (a) a new mathematical form for equations of physics 
now called the covariant form along with (b) a new diagrammatic method for 
representing physical events now called Minkowski (or spacetime) diagrams. 
Einstein has asserted that Minkowski’s inventions were absolutely essential to the 
creation of his general theory of relativity. Miller chose not to discuss them in this 
book, probably because he was not dealing with general relativity. But they have 
proved to be as important to understanding as to applying special relativity. 
Indeed, they have become standard conceptual tools in the field. The reasons for 
this bear heavily on Miller’s central thesis, so some discussion is in order.  
A covariant formulation of the equations of physics has the great advantage of 
eliminating from the equations the imprint of a chosen reference frame. It is thus 
one step closer to an observer-independent description of physical reality. At the 
same time, it simplifies the form of the equations as well as many calculations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure I. A Minkowski diagram of spacetime depicting two dimensions of space 
and one of time. The spacetime points designate unique events. The lightcone 
with vertex at the origin consists of all events which can be connected to the 
origin by a light signal or any other signal travelling in a straight line with speed 
c. The time axis shown is not unique; any other axis within the lightcone will 
serve as well, each one representing the time coordinate for some (inertial) 
reference frame. 
 
 
6
 
More important, it reveals a deeper physical unity, including the unification of 
energy and momentum conservation laws into a single law. Underlying this is a 
new conception of space and time inherent in relativity theory but not initially 
recognized by Einstein. Minkowski’s new mathematical and diagrammatic 
representations brought that conception to the fore. The old notions of three-
dimensional space and one-dimensional time were replaced by the concept of a 
single four-dimensional spacetime manifold in which there is no unique time or 
space dimension. With the help of Minkowski diagrams (Figure 1) physicists have 
become adept at visualizing physical processes in the four-dimensional spacetime 
arena and have thus developed a new kind of "physical intuition." Though no one 
has a four-dimensional sensorium, mental imagery in four dimensions can be 
developed in much the same way as in three. As Boltzmann explains it, "the idea 
of a three-dimensional figure has no content other than the ideas of a series of 
visual images which can be obtained from it, including those which can be 
produced by cross-sectional cuts…it is held together or united only by a clear idea 
of the laws in accordance with which its perspective images follow one another" 
(Miller, 1986, p. 49) 
The spacetime conception provides new insight into the significance of the 
speed of light constant ’c’ so prominent in Einstein's second postulate. Note that in 
Figure 1 the constant plays the role of a conversion factor changing the time 
variable ’t’ into a variable ’ct’ with the same unit as the space coordinates ’x’ and 
’y.’ A common unit like this is just what is needed for the conception of spacetime 
as homogeneous with no preferred time or space directions. Thus, the speed of 
light (and with it the spacetime lightcone) is seen to represent a generic property 
of spacetime rather than a mere special property of light. Today we know that 
other entities, such as neutrinos, travel with the same speed, c, which is to be 
expected if the lightcone is indeed an intrinsic property of spacetime.  
The crucial role of imagery in understanding relativity is brought out by 
examining common misunderstandings of the theory. For decades the entire 
physics community was guilty of promulgating false and misleading explanations 
of relativistic phenomena to students and the public. No wonder some skepticism 
persisted even among physicists! The errors were scandalously elementary and 
egregious. Two scandals, that were not exposed until after Einstein's death, are 
documented in American Association of Physics Teachers (1963). The crux of 
each scandal can be explained in a few words.  
Relativity theory implies that the measured length L of a rod moving with 
velocity v along the direction of its axis will be less than the length L0 measured 
when the rod is at rest, as given by  
L   =   L0 
2
2
1
c
v
−
 
This is called the "Lorentz contraction," because Lorentz wrote down the formula 
before Einstein. The very name suggests the confusion of more than a few 
physicists who failed to realize that the respective meanings given to the formula 
by Lorentz and Einstein were incompatible. For Lorentz the formula described a 
physical contraction of the rod in the direction of its motion, whereas for Einstein 
it merely related measurements performed in different ways. However, the 
scandal was due to physicists who had that much straight. They told everybody 
that a physical object would actually appear to shrink in the direction of its 
motion. In doing so they confounded the elementary distinction between "a 
 
7
measurement of length" and "visual appearance." This blunder persisted until it 
was corrected in 1959 by a graduate student James Terrell (ibid.). He pointed out 
that the light in an instantaneous visual image must have left different parts of the 
object at different times, because they are different distances away. He showed 
that when this was taken into account, to a first approximation it had the effect of 
cancelling the Lorentz contraction so the moving object did not appear distorted.  
The second scandal appears to have been a misleading explanation of the 
twin paradox (also called the clock paradox). It was initiated by Einstein himself 
(1948) and spread abroad in an influential textbook by Moeller (1972). Although 
the explanations by Einstein and Moeller may not be literally wrong, they contain 
irrelevant considerations that make them unnecessarily complex and easy to 
misinterpret. They encouraged the misconception that "general relativity is 
needed to deal with accelerated systems." It is of interest to note that all this is 
related to a complex of misleading statements by Einstein concerning (1) the 
equivalence of gravitational forces with accelerated systems, (2) the origin of 
centrifugal forces (or Mach’s principle), and (3) the role of covariance in 
distinguishing special and general relativity. On the last point Einstein was called 
to task by Kretchmann (1917). Each of these points have been the subject of much 
discussion and debate in the physics community. The issues involved in the first 
and third points are now well understood by the experts, thought they continue to 
cause problems for novices. The second point involves fundamental physical 
issues that have not yet been resolved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Minkowski diagram for the twin paradox. 
 
Einstein’s statement on these points suggests that he may have harbored some 
misconceptions of his own about relativity. Even so, he insisted that these ideas 
played indispensable heuristic roles in the development of general relativity. If he 
did have misconceptions, he never let them interfere with the objective 
formulation of his theories. This raises a set of historical and conceptual issues 
that require the skills of a historian like Miller to be resolved. 
Minkowski diagrams played an important role in clearing up the second 
scandal (American Association of Physics Teachers, 1963) In the twin paradox, 
one twin in a pair of identical twins stays at home while the other twin travels at 
high constant speed to a nearby star and then returns immediately. Relativity 
theory predicts that the return twin will be younger than the stay-at-home twin. 
ct
x
A
O
C
B
 
8
Without discussing the vicissitudes of the paradox, we note that the situation is 
simply represented by a triangle in Minkowski space (Figure 2). Side OCB of the 
triangle represents the history (or path in spacetime) of the stay-at-home twin. The 
other two sides represent the history of the traveling twin, who leaves home at O, 
turns around at A and arrives back home at B. The length of each side is a 
measure of the time elapsed in travelling along it. Therefore, computation of the 
twin age difference after the trip is reduced to “solving the triangle” in Figure 2 
for the lengths of the sides. This is no more difficult than solving a triangle in 
elementary trigonometry. The only difference is that the rules of Euclidean 
geometry for associating numbers with line segments must be replaced by rules of 
non-Euclidean geometry. In particular, the Pythagorean theorem for the lower 
right triangle with vertex at C in Figure 2 is replaced by the non-Euclidean rule, 
(OA)2 = (OC)2 - (CA)2. As a consequence of this change, the bent path OAB is 
actually shorter than the straight path OCB, and, for spacetime histories in 
general, the longest path between two events is a straight line.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. A misleading diagram relating coordinate systems (or frames) 
moving with relative velocity v. 
 
All the elementary problems of relativity involving "time dilations," "Lorentz 
contractions," and the like, can be reduced to solving triangles in Minkowski 
space. The simplicity and clarity of this geometrical representation should be 
compared with more conventional representations of motion in three-dimensional 
space, where even the most innocent looking diagrams often contribute to 
confusion by suppressing important distinctions. For example, consider Figure 3 
which is supposed to represent a coordinate system S’ moving, with respect to a 
coordinate system S, with velocity v along the x-axis. This figure is taken from 
Moeller (1972), and a similar one appears in most books on relativity. It is 
dangerously misleading in two respects. First, it invites the viewer to picture S’ as 
an extended body contracted in its direction of motion. Of course, this is the 
original conception of Lorentz which becomes a misconception in Einstein's 
theory. Some books reinforce this misconception by drawing an extended body in 
the figure or mentioning that the scales on the x and x’ coordinates are different. 
The second problem with Figure 3 is its ambiguity with respect to time. A 
coordinate system is commonly regarded as an imaginary extended body with the 
coordinates tacitly representing points of the body at the same time. With this 
interpretation Figure 3 is inconsistent with the relativity of distant simultaneity, 
for if x and x’ are related by a Lorentz transformation, then they cannot represent 
x'
O
S
Z
x
y'
y
v
O'
S'
Z'
 
 
9
simultaneous events in both coordinate systems. This example suggests that 
conventional (Newtonian) representations of motion in three dimensions are more 
likely to produce confusion than enlightenment in relativistic problems. 
Historically, there has been a steady trend to replace them by Minkowski 
diagrams in physics textbooks. The confusion remains mostly at the elementary 
level.  
 
IMAGERY IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Miller devotes one chapter to the role of imagery in the development of quantum 
mechanics. This is a difficult subject, because the history of quantum mechanics 
is extremely complex, involving many actors. We should not be surprised or 
disappointed that he is hardly able to do more than get the analysis started. He 
wisely confines most of his attention to a single individual, Werner Heisenberg. 
Even so, his chronicle of ideas and events is so compressed (with so many 
subtleties and caveats omitted) that much of it must be incomprehensible to 
anyone other than a professional physicist.  
Miller notes two major shifts in the imagery of quantum mechanics: from 
planetary atomic models to energy levels diagrams, and from thence to "Feynman 
diagrams." These shifts are so prominent in the literature as to be obvious to 
physicists, but that does not make them any less worthy of a cognitive and 
epistemological analysis. Let us follow Miller in discussing these shifts, without 
forgetting that there are other modes of imagery employed in quantum mechanics.  
Heisenberg was a major actor only in the first shift. He began his graduate 
research under Max Born, one of the leading practitioners of the "old quantum 
theory," at a time when the theory was failing badly. Thus, he was in an ideal 
strategic position to contribute to the field. In the old quantum theory, the states of 
an electron in an atom were represented as orbits around the atomic nucleus 
similar to the orbits of planets around the sun. Each orbit has a definite energy, so 
the various atomic states can be represented as energy levels as in Figure 4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. An energy level diagram depicting transitions between energy 
levels (or states) in an atom. (Taken by Miller from an article by 
Weisskopf and Wigner, 1930.) 
 
 
Absorption of light by an atom can then be represented as a transition or jump up 
to a higher energy level, while emission is represented by a jump down. In the 
revolutionary change from the old quantum theory to the new, the concept of 
energy level was retained while the planetary orbits were replaced by a more 
B
C
D
A
B'
C'
 
 
10
abstract concept of atomic state. Energy level diagrams evidently played a key 
role in the thinking of Heisenberg and others during this revolution by providing a 
representation of atomic processes which is free from the defects of old quantum 
theory.  
Miller gives us a careful analysis of the language used by Heisenberg in his 
search for a suitable imagery for quantum mechanics. However, this does not 
provide us with a clean separation between the psychological and epistemological 
issues involved. Let’s see if we can help pry them apart.  
The scientists in Miller’s account are unanimous in emphasizing the crucial 
role of visualization in scientific thinking along with a warning that it can be 
misleading. One place they were misled (along with Miller and the physics 
community at large) was in their intuition that classical mechanics describes what 
is perceptually given. They were unaware of the strong cognitive component in 
their own perception. It was only by training that classical mechanics came to be 
integrated into that perception. Cognitive research has recently established that 
the perceptions of people untutored in physics are naturally inconsistent with 
classical mechanics in almost every detail (Halloun & Hestenes, 1985). Thus, 
Miller’s conclusion (p. 261) that "twentieth-century physicists were forced to 
liberate their thinking from the world of perceptions" misses the mark. The 
intellectual struggle to distinguish the objective properties of things from the 
perceptually given was as crucial to creating classical mechanics as quantum 
mechanics. Among all the perceptually salient qualities, the founders of classical 
mechanics had to identify motion as fundamental and provide it with an abstract 
mathematical representation. The reasoning of Galileo, Newton, and Boyle on the 
distinction between perception and reality (Burtt, 1980) has not been surpassed in 
subtlety by Heisenberg and Bohr, though few physicists are familiar with it.  
Having recognized the psychological tendency of physicists to confuse 
classical physics with perception, we can see more clearly the central 
epistemological issue raised by the creation of quantum mechanics. The conflict 
between classical and quantum physics had nothing to do with perception. It arose 
because physicists were unable to reconcile the mathematics of quantum 
mechanics with the classical conception of reality, so they were forced to 
construct new "quantum mechanical" conceptions of reality. This involved 
constructing new images of reality based in large part on diagrams expressing the 
mathematical structure of the theory. Thus we have a certain incompatibility 
between the classical and quantum images of reality. This is paradoxical because 
one cannot simply choose one theory over the other; both theories are essential to 
physics. The paradox troubled Einstein deeply, and many physicists today do not 
believe it has found a satisfactory resolution.  
Miller’s account of the imagery shift from energy level diagrams to Feynman 
diagrams accomplishes little beyond noting that the shift happened, and it is 
misleading in some respects. He is certainly right, however, in emphasizing its 
importance, so it should be worthwhile to expand on his beginnings. Miller’s 
failure to find a direct link from Heisenberg to Feynman is understandable, 
because there isn’t any. Feynman has publicly stated that his diagrammatic 
methods evolved from his path integral approach to quantum mechanics, which 
got its original impetus from Dirac’s famous textbook on quantum mechanics. His 
was an idiosyncratic approach to a widely recognized problem in the field of 
quantum electrodynamics (QED), which treats the interaction of light with matter. 
The problem was to develop a covariant method for solving the equations of 
QED. The widespread recognition of the problem is shown by the fact that it was 
 
11
solved independently by Schwinger and Tomanaga, who shared the 1965 Nobel 
Prize for that with Feynman. It should be understood that this achievement was 
entirely mathematical in the sense that no alteration of the basic QED equations 
was required. The basic equations and the standard noncovariant method for 
solving them were ably expounded by Heitler (1954) in a book known to every 
physicist in the field. The drawback of the noncovariant method was that once one 
got beyond the simplest cases it became unwieldy and physicists lost their way in 
the complexities. The new covariant methods brought great simplifications that 
made possible the formulation and circulation of subtle experimental effects, such 
as the Lamb shift, which were verified with unprecedented accuracy.  
The covariant methods are still very complicated, so Feynman developed a 
diagrammatic technique to simplify and systematize their application. Miller 
mentions only the simplest example of a Feynman diagram shown in Figure 5. He 
fails to mention that the chief function of diagrams is mnemonic. Each diagram 
represents a particular mathematical expression, and Feynman developed a system 
of rules for translating diagrams into mathematics and vice versa. The diagrams 
are much easier to generate, manipulate and analyze than the mathematics. In the 
end, however, the computations must be carried out mathematically. Here also 
Feynman introduced a number of significant 1mprovements in technique.  
Besides their mnemonic value, the Feynman diagrams have a suggestive 
physical interpretation. Thus, Figure 5 suggests that the electromagnetic force 
between electrons is mediated by photon exchange, though the mathematics it 
represents does not literally describe the emission, propagation and absorption of 
a real photon. A caveat is sometimes introduced by saying that the photon 
exchanged is virtual rather than real. But the caveat is omitted all too often. There 
is a strong tendency for physicists to reify the mathematics. On Miller’s account 
this is right in line with Heisenberg’s view that we should let the mathematics tell 
us what is real. One trouble with that view in this case is that the Feynman 
diagrams generated to solve many problems are not unique, but depend on the 
particular approximation scheme employed. Thus, the physical interpretation of 
Feynman diagrams raises serious ontological issues that are yet to be resolved. In 
the meantime, the “particle exchange” interpretation provides a colorful 
metaphor, at least, that helps physicists “visualize” and talk about their 
mathematics. 
  
 
 
  
Figure 5. A Feynman diagram depicting the interaction of two electrons 
 by photon exchange.  
 
Miller contrasts the creative thinking of Schwinger and Tomanaga with 
Feynman's by calling it non-imaginal. That won't wash. First, their mathematical 
creations are not so very different, and, since Dyson showed that they are all 
equivalent, Feynman's diagrammatic techniques have been fully integrated with 
 
12
the more rigorous mathematics of Schwinger. Second, it may be doubted whether 
creative thinking in physics is possible without a strong imaginal component. Be 
that as it may, there is plenty of evidence for imagery in the work of Schwinger 
and Tomanaga. We have already noted that the imagery of  Minkowski diagrams 
goes hand in hand with covariant equations. Schwinger and Tomanaga were 
thoroughly schooled in this, and references to spacetime structures in their papers 
show that it was prominent in their thinking. Though this is not the place to spell 
out details, it should be noted also that spacetime imagery is essential to the full 
interpretation of Feynman diagrams. In other words, a Feynman diagram is a kind 
of generalized Minkowski diagram.  
Anyone involved in the lectures, seminars and informal give-and-take of 
creative physicists cannot fail to notice the vivid imagery in their thinking. Most 
of this imagery is suppressed in their publications, partly by conventions 
concerning the style of scientific reporting, partly because it is not essential to 
establishing the scientific results, and partly because it may be too much trouble 
to construct suitable diagrams to express it. This puts severe limitations on 
Miller’s historical approach and tells us that the creative physicist needs to be 
studied in vivo, while he is alive and kicking. That is where the cognitive scientist 
comes in.  
HELP FROM COGNITIVE SCIENCE 
Miller devotes the last third of his book to bringing psychology to bear on his 
theme. This part can be read independently, because it repeats the relevant 
historical material from earlier chapters. Its deficiencies show how much he needs 
the help of cognitive scientists.  
Miller puts his skills as a historian to good use in setting the record straight 
on the famous Gestalt reconstruction of the creation of relativity theory by 
Einstein’s good friend Max Wertheimer. He absolves Wertheimer of 
responsibility for the mistakes of historians and philosophers in misconstruing his 
reconstruction as a historical account. Unfortunately, Wertheimer’s analysis does 
not give us any new insights into Einstein’s thinking. Rather, the detailed 
historical account of Einstein’s creation helps us recognize weaknesses in 
Wertheimer’s reconstruction.  
In another chapter, Miller makes a misdirected attempt to apply Piaget’s 
theory of cognitive development to analyze the genesis of relativity and quantum 
mechanics. In the preface he admits that he was warned that Piaget’s three 
developmental stages (sensori-motor, concrete operational, formal operational) 
apply only to children, but that did not deter him from applying them in a loosely 
metaphorical way to the thinking of mature physicists. It is time he learned that 
there is a large literature on the applicability of Piaget’s theory to learning and 
teaching physics (Hestenes, 1979, 1987). It is well established that the highest 
cognitive level in Piaget’s theory, the formal operational stage, is essential to 
understanding physics, though, contrary to Piaget’s original evidence, many adults 
never reach it. Piaget may have envisaged extensions of his theory to account for 
the higher creative activities of science, but according to Piaget’s analysis the 
creative powers already present at the formal level are so rich that perhaps no 
qualitatively higher level exists.  
Turning to cognitive science for more recent research on the role of imagery 
in scientific thought, Miller gets distracted by an AI dispute about the possibility 
of propositional representations for mental images and emerges without helpful 
insights. The deepest insights are to be found in the work of Herbert Simon, who 
aims to take the mystery out of creativity in science. As a working hypothesis for 
 
13
cognitive research, he makes the strong claim that the creative process in science 
is nothing more than problem solving, not differing from ordinary problem 
solving in science, except occasionally in the use of more powerful heuristics. To 
confirm this hypothesis, Simon has accepted the challenge to exhibit significant 
heuristics explicitly. In collaboration with others, he has formulated a number of 
heuristics with sufficient precision to produce computer programs capable of 
nontrivial problem solving. There is no obvious limit to how far such research can 
be carried. With Miller’s help we have already identified powerful heuristics used 
by Einstein. Some of these heuristics—for example, symmetry arguments—have 
become standard conceptual tools in physics.  
Miller underestimates the possibilities for analyzing imagery by Simon's 
approach (p. 261). The analysis of perception in chess by Chase and Simon 
(1981) provides sharp insights into the workings of perception in high level 
cognitive skills which need not be reviewed here. Their analysis suggests that 
Poincaré’s ability to grasp a mathematical proof at a glance is not fundamentally 
different from a chess grandmaster's ability to evaluate a chess game at a glance. 
Along with the development of perceptual skill in chess there arises a kind of 
"aesthetic sensibility" for selecting good chess moves much like Poincaré’s 
sensibility for good mathematics. It remains to be seen whether such observations 
can be worked into an explanation of Poincaré’s intuitive powers that will satisfy 
both Miller and Simon. In the meantime, we can let Simon speak for himself in 
his book on scientific discovery (Langley, Simon, Bradshaw, & Zytkow, 1987).  
We can now draw some important conclusions about imagery in physics, 
beginning with the fact that, in every branch of physics, the mathematics is 
accompanied by an informal system of imagery. On the one hand Miller has 
provided evidence that "imagery is a key ingredient in creative scientific 
thinking." On the other hand cognitive science provides evidence that imagery is 
equally important in the ordinary problem solving activities of physicists. There is 
no evidence for a qualitative difference in the imagery used in the two, cases, 
though the creation of a new imagery, such as Faraday's lines of force and 
Feynman's diagrams, may be a major scientific advance by itself. 
The advance in our understanding of "imagery" will depend on how precisely 
we can define the concept. To that end, let us define an (objective) image as a 
pictorial (or diagrammatic) representation of information, and (objective) imagery 
as the manipulation of images to store, modify, or retrieve information. The 
"information content" of an image is determined by the rules of manipulation. The 
murky concept of mental image can then be regarded as a mental representation 
that is similar to an objective image, while mental imagery is mental manipulation 
of mental images. While the mental imagery of individual physicists may be 
highly variable, their objective imagery is fairly uniform, and "only the objective 
kind can be used to communicate ideas. Undoubtedly, the practice of objective 
imagery with all sorts of charts, graphs and diagrams helps a physicist develop his 
or her "physical intuition," which may well be a certain capability for mental 
imagery. 
The imagery in physics is intimately related to mathematical representations 
of physical systems and processes. The imagery is related to the mathematics by a 
system of more-or-less definite rules. The rules may be explicitly formulated, as is 
the case for the "Feynman rules" relating Feynman diagrams to mathematical 
expressions. Often, however, the rules are tacit conventions that physicists 
employ "intuitively" without being aware of them. The lack of any clear 
explanation of the nature and function of physical imagery has been identified as 
a serious barrier to learning physics (Hestenes, 1987), forcing students to fumble 
about until they assimilate the imagery indirectly.   
 
14
We can distinguish two different functions for imagery in physics. On the one 
hand imagery may perform a semantic function relating mathematics to 
experience. Einstein’s gedanken experiments are of this kind. On the other hand 
imagery may perform a syntactic function exhibiting mathematical structure in a 
theory or model. Feynman diagrams, as well as other types of process diagram or 
system diagram, are of this kind. In general, diagrams perform information-
compression (or chunking) and organizational functions. Chunking reduces 
information overload and facilitates the perception of wholes. And, as Einstein 
observed, images serve as "ordering elements for perception."  
Imagery in physics is a promising domain for cognitive research. There is a 
rich lode of physical imagery that has never been mined systematically. Only a 
few prospectors like Miller and Simon have picked up samples. The payoff is 
likely to be greatest in education, leading to improvements in the design of images 
and in the teaching of imagery skills, thus enhancing creative powers at large. 
Here indeed, as Miller suggests, is a domain where historians and cognitive 
scientists can work together. But they had better enlist the help of some 
physicists.  
REFERENCES 
American Association of Physics Teachers (1963). Special relativity theory: 
Selected reprints. New York: American Institute of Physics.  
Burtt, E. A. (1980). The metaphysical foundations of modern science (rev. ed.). 
New York: Humanities Press.  
Chase, W., & Simon, H. (1981). Perception in chess. Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-
81. 
Einstein, A. (1948). Dialog ueber Einwaende gegen die Relativitaetstheorie. 
Naturnlissen-schaften, 6, 697-702. 
Fermi, E. (1950). Nuclear physics. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.  
Halloun, I., & Hestenes, D. (1985). Common sense concepts about motion. 
American Journal of Physics, 53, 1056-1065.  
Heitler, W. (1954). The quantum theory of radiation (3rd ed.). Oxford, U.K.: 
Clarendon Press.  
Hestenes, D. (1979). Wherefore a science of teaching. Physics Teacher, 17, 235-
242.  
Hestenes, D. ( 1987). A modeling theory of physics instruction. American Journal 
of Physics, 55, 440-454. 
Kretschmann, E. (1917). Ueber den physikalischen Sinn der 
Relativitaetspostulate: A. Einsteins neue und seine urspruengliche 
Relativitaetstheorie. Annalen der Physik, 53, 575-614.  
Langley, P., Simon, H., Bradshaw, G., & Zytkow, J. (1987). Scientific discovery. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  
Moeller, C. (1972). The theory of relativity (2nd ed.). Oxford, U.K.: Clarendon 
Press.  
 
