Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science & Technology Education, 2012, 8(2), 139-153 
Copyright © 2012 by ESER, Eurasian Society of Educational Research 
ISSN: 1305-8223 
 
 
An Interview with David Hestenes:  
His life and achievements* 
 
Mehmet Fatih Taşar, Sedef Canbazoğlu Bilici, Pınar Fettahlıoğlu 
Gazi Üniversitesi, TURKEY 
 
Received 22 April 2012; accepted 29 April 2012 
 
 
The following interview was conducted with Professor David Hestenes in Gazimağusa, 
North Cyprus on March 23, 2009 during his visit for attending the Frontiers in Science 
Education Research Conference. He has served the physics education community since 
late 70s. He is most notably known by the project he led named the Modeling Instruction. 
Also, the Force Concept Inventory (FCI for short) is a very well-known tool for 
diagnosing student misconceptions in introductory mechanics. He alone and within his 
research groups, throughout the many decades, drew attention to the ways of conducting 
rigorous physics education research and contributing to the improvement of physics 
teaching and learning. Thanks to his leadership combined with the finest of the 
scholarship in the field, we now know much more than we did in the past. At the end of 
this paper, a list of Professor Hestenes’ related publications is given for the readers’ 
convenience. 
 
Keywords: David Orlin Hestenes, physicist, physics education researcher, FCI, Modeling 
Instruction 
 
 
 
T: Professor Hestenes, Thank you for giving this interview for 
the EURASIA Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology 
Education and I’m sure many of our readers would be delighted to 
read about your ideas and hear about your stories from the past 
and I want to begin with your childhood, in what kind of an 
atmosphere did you have your childhood? 
H: Well, I would say I had quite a fortunate 
atmosphere because my father was a mathematician, 
and a very good mathematician at that. He got his PhD 
from the University of Chicago, and I was born in 
Chicago shortly thereafter. He went to Harvard on what 
would be called a postdoc nowadays, but in those days 
he had one of a handful of fellowships in the whole 
United States. He worked with G.D. Birkhoff at 
Harvard and then he came back to a faculty position at 
Chicago where I grew up, except for periods during 
World War II when he went to Colombia University to 
help with military R&D. He was assigned the job of 
organizing all the mathematicians in the United States 
for the war effort. That would be about 1941-42-43, and 
then he did this at Columbia University so he moved 
from Chicago and he stayed there (in New York City) 
for a while. 
T: What year you were born? 
H: I was born May 21, 1933. 
T: Yes, mine is May 11. 
H: (Laughs). 
T: Also Feynman and Salvador Dali May 11, on my 
birthday, yes. 
H: To continue, my father didn’t try to teach me 
mathematics directly, but he created an atmosphere. I 
often saw my father sitting down and working with a 
piece of paper. In fact, he had amazing powers of 
concentration. My brother and I could run around 
making all sort of noise, and he would just sit there 
working away. Later on I asked him how he got such 
powers of concentration, because I myself am easily 
distracted by noise or anything. And he said it is because 
when he went to college he studied at a desk in the 
hallway of the dormitory, so he had to learn how to 
concentrate in the midst of all the noise of the other 
dorm students. 
Correspondence to: M. Fatih TAŞAR, Professor of 
Science Education, Gazi Üniversitesi, Gazi Eğitim 
Fakültesi, K Blok 210, Teknikokullar, 06500, 
Ankara, TURKEY 
E-mail: mftasar@gazi.edu.tr 
M. F. Taşar et. al 
140 
© 2012 ESER, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 8(2), 139-153 
 
 
T: So, can you say he just sort of set a role model for you? 
H: I can say he set for me the strongest role model 
among all people I had ever known. I admired him most 
as a very kind and wise man with high standards. He 
was always feeding me wise proverbs as I grew up. For 
example when I screwed up, he would just shake his 
head. Rather than punish me, he would say something 
like “David you must always check! Usually you screw 
up because you neglected to do something.” That was 
one of his favorites. 
T: Apart from your father, what other things inspired you…? 
H: …well. 
T: In terms of whatever you wanted to become? 
H: Actually, I think I was somewhat unusual in being 
eager for a consistent worldview even when I was very 
young. Although my father had grown up in a religious 
atmosphere, he was non-practicing. However for some 
reason I felt the need to go to church and Sunday 
school all by myself without my parents sending me 
there. So Christianity became my first worldview. That 
lasted through high school. I remember my history 
teacher asking why is it that I’m the only one in my class 
who knows what he is going to be when he grows up, 
namely, a missionary doctor. Why a missionary doctor? 
Well, because there were ministers and missionaries in 
my heritage. And I was good at science. So I thought I 
should be a doctor, because you should use the talents 
God has given you. When I got to college I was a pre-
med major to become a missionary doctor. But when I 
got to zoology classes where I had to memorize so 
much stuff, and everything stunk of formaldehyde, I 
decided to omit the doctor part. I changed my major 
almost every semester while I was in college. I felt very 
comfortable in college, given the academic atmosphere 
of my family and my position as the oldest child. So I 
looked upon college as a place to explore and find out 
new things. I was always taking classes in subjects 
outside my major, so I ended up with something close 
to a year’s worth of extra credits while I finished in the 
usual 4 years. To be a pre-seminary student, I became a 
speech major. I liked that, and it was forensics 
competitionship in speech and debate, which was extra-
curricular, where I developed the most important skills I 
learned in college. That was how to present an argument 
in front of skeptical opponents who were looking to 
pick your argument apart, and so how do you defend 
your point of view? I have actually used that in the 
design of instruction for students, because I think it is 
important to promote scientific argumentation. How do 
you make — how do you formulate a claim and defend 
it with argument and evidence? That’s one of the 
foremost skills I aim to teach. 
T: Argumentation is becoming more popular topic in terms of 
science education research these days.  
H: It’s not popular enough actually (laughs). They 
should think more about it. But there has been some 
good work that hasn’t been as recognized as it should 
be. They could learn a lot from what goes on in debate 
programs in forensics. So I was a speech major, but 
then I started taking some courses in philosophy. In the 
summer I returned to UCLA where my father was 
chairman of the math department and I took some 
philosophy courses. When I went back to Pacific 
Lutheran University in my senior year, I petitioned to be 
their first student to major in philosophy. They had only 
one philosophy professor, but he sponsored me in 
enough independent study for a degree. So I ended up 
graduating with degrees in both speech and philosophy. 
It was only in the last summer of my senior year that I 
started reading philosophy of science, in particular, a 
book by Hans Reichenbach. I noticed that the 
philosophers would argue that Heisenberg says this and 
Schrödinger says that, and Bohr says such and such! I 
reasoned, “This can’t be real philosophy. They are just 
quoting physicists. This must be the Revealed Word! 
The physicists must be the real philosophers!” So I 
decided to change my major to physics, just as I 
graduated from college. And I took my first semester of 
freshman of physics in the last semester of my senior 
year. Well, in that last semester I got married, I had an 
overload of 19 units, I was on the golf team, and I did 
debate as extracurricular activities. Most difficult of all 
for someone with the habit of staying up late, physics 
was an early morning class. Besides, I took physics and 
introductory calculus at the same time and with the 
same professor because the school was small. He barely 
gave me a passing grade in both. He had heard about 
my plan to become a physicist and said as he handed 
out my poor grades at the end of the semester. “You’ll 
never be a physicist.” However, that did not bother me 
because I knew that my father was a very good 
mathematician, and I did not think he was so smart! 
 
 
Figure 1. David Orlin Hestenes 
Interview with David Hestenes  
© 2012 ESER, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 8(2), 139-153 
141 
 
 
T: And so how did he become a good mathematician you 
think? 
H: Well, that’s a very interesting story. You want to 
hear the story about how my father became a 
mathematician? 
T: Shortly please. 
H: Yes, well some years later when I was in graduate 
school, I came across an article in the intellectual journal 
Daedalus, a wonderful journal of science and the arts. 
It’s been going on for a long time. It would be around 
1960 when I read this article. The article was a profile of 
the typical professor in a United States University at that 
time. When I read it, I was amazed to see that it was 
almost a perfect description of my father: Scandinavian 
descent and educated in a Midwestern university. His 
parents were Norwegian living in Minnesota. And that 
was a time of migration by young people from farms to 
cities. They had wonderful universities and schools in 
the region: the University of Minnesota, the University 
of Wisconsin and St. Olaf College, which my father 
attended first. It is a liberal arts college with perhaps the 
best math program of any small college in the United 
States. Anyway, students like him who came from the 
farm had two obvious career options: either go back to 
the farm after graduation or continue on at the 
university. My father had gone to college with the 
intention of being the best hog farmer in the state of 
Minnesota, but he kept getting straight A’s in 
mathematics. And they offered him a series of 
scholarships and fellowships that ultimately brought him 
to graduate school at the University of Chicago, one of 
the leading universities for mathematics in United States 
at the time. So that’s how a farmer’s boy became a 
mathematician.  
Then, when I was growing up, I guess my father 
thought that, since he found his path to mathematics by 
himself, I could figure out what I want to do by myself, 
because he never pressed me to learn any mathematics 
or physics. I only remember one hint when he gave me 
a book on electronics and said, “You should take 
physics” in high school. So I took physics and I couldn’t 
understand why he thought it was something I would 
like. The author of the physics textbook was aptly 
named Charles E. Dull. That was one the most widely 
used textbooks in the United States for 20-30 years, but 
it didn’t inspire me in the least. So, I just brushed off 
physics and didn’t think about it until my senior year in 
college when I started reading philosophy of science. I 
was actively looking for a coherent world view then, 
because religion didn’t satisfy my intellectual needs. So I 
went into physics for that reason, I wanted to do real 
philosophy. That is how I got started late in physics. I 
was age 20 at the time – I graduated at 20. I was already 
married then, my wife was pregnant and the Korean 
War was going on, so I volunteered to be drafted into 
the army and ended up getting the G.I. Bill to support 
me in graduate school when my army service was 
completed. The G.I. Bill was a wonderful Program.  
So, I did not start studying physics seriously until age 
23 when I got out of the army. I was accepted to 
graduate school at UCLA because I had good grades, 
but it was only a provisional acceptance because I only 
had one semester of physics. I was assigned an advisor 
who was an experimentalist, and he was appalled by my 
lack of physics background. He told me, “Well, you can 
make up your deficiencies in 4 years.” I was shocked! 
Fortunately my father was chairman of the math 
department at UCLA. I complained to him: “That’s 
ridiculous I shouldn’t have to take 4 years to make up 
my deficiencies in undergraduate physics!”. He said, 
“You go talk to Dave Saxon.” Now, David Saxon, it 
turns out, was an associate professor at time, but he was 
a very clever man, and ultimately became president of 
the entire California University system. One of his 
talents was that he thought outside the box. So, he went 
through my program of study in detail with me. At one 
point he said, “Now, these two courses, if you take this 
course first, you don’t have to take the other one 
because that is prerequisite for this course.” And he said 
–he was a theoretical physicist– he said, “Well, you are 
already in the graduate program so you don’t have to 
satisfy undergraduate requirements for labs, so you 
don’t have to take any physics labs.” So, I didn’t. With 
his advice I was able to rush through the entire 
undergraduate physics curriculum in one year. And the 
next year after that, I completed a master’s degree in 
physics. A total of two years for that, starting from 
practically zero! One thing I learned from that 
experience was that universities are too strict in 
requiring 
people to 
fulfill all 
the background 
requirements in their major field. You can always fill in 
missing pieces later on when you need them. There 
were, of course, big holes in my background in physics. 
And one of the holes came up when I had my PhD. oral 
exam. But, that’s a separate story. 
When I started doing my graduate research, because 
of my background in philosophy I was very much 
interested in the mathematical languages for physics and 
their history.  I had read Bertrand Russell  on the 
foundations of mathematics. Since I was too naïve to 
think otherwise, I was convinced by his proposal that 
mathematics is derivative from logic. So I tried to 
convince my father to collaborate on writing a calculus 
textbook with explicit foundations in logic. My father 
was so wise that he didn’t try to convince me otherwise. 
He just let me talk about it, think about it and discover, 
of course, that I didn’t know to how do it. And it wasn’t 
very long before I decided that’s the wrong way to 
approach mathematics anyway.  
After I had finished all the basic academic 
requirements and was ready to start my doctoral 
dissertation, I took the year off from the physics 
M. F. Taşar et. al 
142 
© 2012 ESER, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 8(2), 139-153 
 
 
department, and my father got me an office in math 
department 
where 
I 
concentrated 
on 
studying 
mathematical languages. In particular, I studied 
quantum electrodynamics and learned about the work of 
Richard Feynman.  And I took one of the very first 
courses in the United States on differential forms in 
differential geometry –taught by Professor Barret 
O’Neil. One day in the mathematics– engineering 
library I looked at a shelf of incoming new books and 
pulled down and some lecture notes entitled “Clifford 
Numbers and Spinors” by Marcel Riesz.  It was about 
Clifford algebra as a mathematical system. I read, I 
think, for about 15 minutes and all of a sudden I had an 
epiphany. I exclaimed “Gee, differential forms and the 
Dirac algebra have a common algebraic structure!”… do 
you know the Dirac algebra? 
T: I do. 
H: Yeah well, you know Feynman’s trace calculus? 
T: Not that much. 
H: Well, I was impressed by the fact that with trace 
Calculus 
all 
the 
computations 
in 
quantum 
electrodynamics can be done without picking out a 
matrix representation. One thing I concluded from 
studying “Marcel Riesz” was that, in fact, matrix 
representations are irrelevant even in the Dirac algebra, 
and so in quantum mechanics generally. I saw that 
space-time geometry was encoded in the algebraic 
structure of the Dirac algebra, and I recognized that the 
algebraic structure of differential forms was included as 
well. That got me started on the long path of developing 
geometric algebra into a powerful unified mathematical 
language for physics. That development has been my 
main work as a physicist. I‘ve written many books and 
published many papers on the subject, but I got started 
right then at graduate school. I also had Feynman for 
quantum electrodynamics during that period. I 
remember him saying that every idea that he ever had in 
physics, had its beginning when he was a graduate 
student. 
T: So you took a course from him? 
H: I took a course from him, but it wasn’t UCLA, it 
was at Hughes Research Institute in Malibu California. I 
went there with a group of graduate students from 
UCLA to hear him lecture for two hour once a week for 
two years. He lectured on quantum electrodynamics for 
a year and then on solid state physics. I ended up doing 
my thesis on geometric algebra in physics, even though 
my doctoral advisor didn’t really appreciate what I was 
doing. He wanted me to work on his own unified field 
theory, and he would tell me what he wanted me to do. 
I would go work on that for a while. Then I would 
return and say “your idea doesn’t work so I’m going 
back to doing my own thing.” This went on for about 
two years until I came to his office one day and told him 
what I had been doing on my own. Then I asked, “Well, 
do you think I have enough for a thesis.” He said, 
“No.”  So I went back to my office and I wrote up a 
165 page thesis. When I handed to him and asked again, 
“Do you think I have enough for thesis?” He said, 
“Yes.” 
T: What department he was in? 
H: He was in the physics department, though I spent 
as much time in mathematics and had two prominent 
mathematicians on my dissertation committee. Well, 
another interesting thing happened at the time that 
hardly anyone in the world knows except me, and now 
you. My father had arranged for John von Neumann to 
be hired as a distinguished university professor at 
UCLA. At that time John von Neumann was the 
nation’s leading mathematician. He is regarded as the 
father of the modern computer. I was just starting my 
thesis work then and might well have had von 
Neumann as my mentor. Tragically, though, von 
Neumann contracted an aggressive cancer and died 
within a year before getting to UCLA. That is why his 
appointment at UCLA remains unknown. 
One reason that my father was able to attract von 
Neumann, I suppose, was because he was a leader in 
connecting mathematics with computing. Besides 
chairing the math department, my father directed the 
Institute for Numerical Analysis, which housed the first 
electronic computer in western United States. And that’s 
where studied when I first started graduate school. That 
was good for me too, not because I did much 
computing, but because I was at the ground floor of 
computer science and artificial intelligence and got 
acquainted with the first generation of computer 
scientists. 
T: And about what year? 
 H: That was… I started graduate school in 1956, so 
I spent 1956 to 1958 at the Institute while I was taking 
graduate courses and exams. After completing my 
exams, I spent that year in the math department where I 
got the idea for Geometric Algebra. Then I went back 
to the physics department and finished up my thesis, 
including in my thesis some things I thought my 
professor would like but I didn’t like. It turned out that 
3 months after I finished my thesis I came across the 
idea that really made the whole approach work 
beautifully. That consolidated my ideas. To explain since 
you know Dirac algebra. you know that the whole 
algebra is generated by the Dirac matrices, so you can 
understand the significance when I reinterpreted the 
Dirac gammas them as vectors. These vectors then 
generate an associative algebra, mathematically speaking, 
a Clifford algebra. But I developed this algebra as an 
encoding of geometric properties for space-time in 
algebraic form. I call that system space-time algebra (STA). 
From that viewpoint, the Pauli algebra sheds its 
representation by 2×2 matrices to emerge as a sub-
algebra of the STA.  That was my second significant 
discovery about the Pauli algebra.  
Interview with David Hestenes  
© 2012 ESER, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 8(2), 139-153 
143 
 
 
The first discovery is one of the highlights of my life. 
And it gave me strong motivation and direction for my 
research. That discovery was recognition that the Pauli 
matrices could be reinterpreted as vectors, and their 
products had a geometric interpretation. I was so 
excited that I went and gave a little lecture about it to 
my father. Among other things, I said, “Look at this 
identity σ1 σ2 σ3 = i, which appears in all the quantum 
mechanics books that discuss spin. All the great 
quantum physicists, Pauli, Schroedinger, Heisenberg and 
even Dirac as well as mathematicians Weyl and von 
Neumann, failed to recognize its geometric meaning and 
the fact that it has nothings to do with spin. When you 
see the Pauli sigmas as vectors, then you can see the 
identity as expressing the simple geometric fact that 
three orthogonal vectors determine a unit volume. Thus 
there is geometric reason for the Pauli algebra, and it 
has nothing whatsoever to do with a spin. When I 
completed my little lecture on geometry of the Pauli 
algebra, my father gave me the greatest compliment of 
my life, which I remember to this day. He said, “You 
have learned the difference between a mathematical idea 
and its representation by symbols. Many mathematicians 
never learn that!”  That really made me proud, because, 
actually, my father was very sparing with his 
compliments. So when he praised me, I knew I knew I 
had really done something good.  
After completing my thesis, I was awarded a two-
year 
National 
Science 
Foundation 
postdoctoral 
fellowship with John Wheeler at Princeton University. 
When I got there I found that Princeton was a kind of 
clearing house for postdocs from all over the United 
States. After the typical two-year tenure as a postdoc, 
they would be distributed to faculty positions at various 
colleges and universities across the country. I was 
invited to consider Arizona State University (ASU), one 
of several new universities that were created around the 
1960's. It had been a teachers college since Arizona 
became a state, and it was elevated to a university in 
1958. The physics department chair at ASU had his 
doctorate from Princeton, so he knew John Wheeler 
and asked him to recommend candidates for a new 
faculty position at ASU. That’s how I got invited.  
Before accepting the position, I talked to my father. He 
had recently been on a committee of the National 
Research Council to evaluate new graduate programs 
that were starting up all over the country, so he had an 
ideal perspective on new faculty positions. He said that 
ASU is an excellent choice, because it is a new university 
that is sure to grow rapidly, given its location in a rapidly 
growing urban center. That makes it easy to write your 
own ticket on the academic train. He was exactly right. 
In fact, I was able to negotiate an agreement with the 
department chair to teach only graduate courses in my 
research field for my first several years on the faculty. 
That was indeed a first class ticket! Moreover, ASU has 
been the most rapidly growing university in the United 
States during the 40 years since I was hired. It is now 
the largest university in the U.S., with more than 70,000 
students. It has continued to move up quite rapidly in 
academic status. My father sure knew the landscape of 
the academic world! 
T: You got the inside dope. 
H: Another reason that I went to ASU and stayed 
there is because I was married when I was in college. I 
had my first child while I was in army and my second 
child was born on my first day in graduate school. By 
the time I finished my PhD I had four children. Then I 
went to Princeton. I have never heard of another 
postdoc with four children. 
T: That’s quite a success. Every child is like another 
dissertation. I can tell you. 
H: So, I'm not impressed by the problems of having 
extra children. Though it does restrict your academic 
mobility, because moving is quite pain if you have a big 
family. But all of that worked out quite nicely for me. At 
Arizona State University I was able to write my ticket 
right away, because from my training in debate I knew 
how to negotiate. So, before I accepted the faculty 
position, I said to the department chair, “Well, if I come 
here I want to teach only graduate courses at first. I 
want to teach graduate electrodynamics and relativity 
using geometric algebra.” . . . because I wanted maximal 
opportunity to develop geometric algebra as a unified 
mathematical language for physics. The chair agreed to 
that and more. I also had become very impressed with 
the Maximum Entropy approach to statistical mechanics 
by Edwin T. Jaynes. It’s the most coherent information 
theory approach to statistical mechanics and I want to 
teach it. In fact, I had also applied for a faculty position 
at Washington University where Jaynes’s was located. 
However, they had such a small department of eminent 
people only; I didn’t get an offer from them. Otherwise, 
I would probably have gone there, because Jaynes was 
one of the physicists in the generation ahead of me that 
I most admire. Thirty years later I was gratified to hear 
from Jaynes himself that he had lobbied hard to hire 
me. In retrospect, though, ASU was probably the better 
choice for me, if only because I got to develop my own 
graduate course in statistical mechanics, which I 
certainly couldn’t have done in competition with Jaynes. 
Anyway, for most of my first 8 years at ASU I got to 
teach graduate courses that helped me develop 
curriculum materials based on geometric algebra. 
Development has continued to this day. I’ve written 
books and many articles on Geometric Algebra (GA) 
and its applications, so that, in recent years, it has 
become recognized as a discipline in its own right. 
There is now a steady stream of books by other authors 
on GA and its applications.. For example, computer 
scientist 
Leo 
Dorst 
and 
colleagues 
published 
“Geometric Algebra for Computer Science.” Chris 
M. F. Taşar et. al 
144 
© 2012 ESER, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 8(2), 139-153 
 
 
Doran and Anthony Lasenby at Cambridge University 
published “Geometric Algebra for Physicists.” That 
book arose from more than a decade of GA research at 
Cambridge that produced many important results, most 
notably, “Gauge Theory Gravity,” which improves on 
General Relativity. Now GA is being applied to robotics 
and there are conferences on GA every year around the 
world. It is clear now that the whole field will keep 
growing without my help. My ultimate goal has always 
been to see GA become a standard, unified language for 
physics and engineering as well as mathematics. GA is 
arguably the optimal mathematical language for physics. 
For example, you can do introductory physics using 
geometric algebra without using any coordinates. 
Actually, my Oersted Medal lecture, published in the 
American Journal of Physics, is an introduction to 
geometric algebra at an elementary level. So, I’m willing 
to bet that GA will eventually become the standard 
language, even in high school. There is a need to 
integrate 
high 
school 
algebra, 
geometry, 
and 
trigonometry into one coherent system that is also 
applicable to physics. GA puts it all together in a 
remarkable way. 
T: So is it easy to make sense for . . .? 
H: Well, you see, if you’ve already learned a different 
language, right? A new language looks hard. 
T: Yes. 
H: No matter what language! However, if you 
analyze GA in terms of its structure, it can’t be harder 
than conventional mathematics, because its assumptions 
are simpler. The geometric interpretation it gives to 
algebraic operation is more direct and richer than 
ordinary vector algebra. It includes all the features of 
ordinary vector algebra, but it’s not limited to three 
dimensions. It works in space-time, and so you have a 
vector algebra for space-time, which, as I have noted 
already, improves on the Dirac algebra. Indeed, it turns 
out that I discovered something amazing when I 
reformulated the Dirac equation in terms of space-time 
algebra, where Dirac’s gammas –the gamma matrices–
are now vectors, okay? The gammas become an 
orthonormal frame of vectors in space-time. But, what 
about the imaginary unit i in quantum mechanics?  Well, 
it turns out that you don’t need it. 
T: You don’t need it? 
H: You don’t need it! You don’t need an extra 
imaginary unit because the frame of orthonormal 
vectors suffices when multiplication of vectors is 
defined by the rules of geometric algebra. Of the four 
vectors in a frame, one is a timelike vector and three are 
spacelike vectors, right? If you take the product of two 
spacelike vectors you get a new quantity called a 
bivector, which generates rotations in a plane of the two 
vectors, and its square is minus one. As I proved in 
1967 (in the Journal of Mathematical Physics) the 
generator of phase in the Dirac wave function is just 
such a bivector. And what is the physical significance of 
the plane specified by that bivector? Well, that plane 
determines the direction of the spin. Thus, spin and 
complex numbers are intimately, indeed, inseparably 
related in the Dirac equation. You cannot see that in the 
ordinary matrix formulation, because the geometry is 
suppressed. Because matrix algebra is not a geometric 
algebra; it was developed as a purely formal approach to 
handle systems of linear equations. In contrast, 
geometric algebra gives the Dirac equation geometric 
meaning. So, there is a meaning to the imaginary unit i 
that appears in the Dirac equation. We have seen that it 
represents the plane of spin. Eventually, I also proved 
that this property remains when you do the non-
relativistic approximation to the Dirac equation, going 
to the Pauli equation, and then to the Schrödinger 
equation. Now, it is usually said that the Schrödinger 
equation describes a particle without spin. But, the fact 
is, when you do the approximation correctly this i, 
which generates rotation in a plane in the Dirac 
equation, remains precisely as the i in the Schrödinger 
equation. Thus, the i in the Schrödinger equation is 
generator of rotations in a plane, and the normal to that 
plane is a spin direction. In other words, the 
Schrödinger equation is not describing a particle without 
spin; it is describes a particle in an eigenstate of spin, 
that is, with a fixed spin direction. Studying the 
implications of these facts has been a major theme of 
my research to this day. And more results will be 
published soon.  
T: Great 
H: Yeah, so, that keeps me going. 
. 
T: And you’re still excited after forty years?  
H: Yeah, that's right. So, if you are interested I tell 
you a little about what it has all lead to. Have you heard 
of zitterbewegung? 
T: I’m not familiar. 
H: That’s a German word meaning “trembling 
motion.” The term was coined by Schrödinger. He 
noticed that if you try to make a wave packet with the 
free particle solutions of the Dirac equation something 
funny happens. You can’t make a wave packet using 
only the positive energy solutions. The Dirac equation 
has troubles because there are both positive and 
negative energy solutions, and everybody believes that 
for a free particle the energy has to be positive. And, 
you need both positive and negative energy solutions to 
make wave packets, otherwise you don’t have a 
complete set. When you make a wave packet it has 
oscillations between positive and negative states that 
Schrödinger called zitterbewegung. The frequency of 
these oscillations is twice the de Broglie frequency. Do 
you know the de Broglie frequency? 
T: Hmm! 
H: It is mc squared over h-bar.. The zitterbewegung 
frequency is twice that, okay?  Schrödinger suggested 
Interview with David Hestenes  
© 2012 ESER, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 8(2), 139-153 
145 
 
 
that this oscillation was actually a circulation of charge 
that generated the magnetic moment of the electron. 
And Dirac agreed. You can find it in his famous book 
on Quantum Mechanics, and it still pops up in books on 
quantum electrodynamics, but serves as nothing more 
than a colorful metaphor. My own research addresses 
the question: “Is zitterbewegung really a mere 
metaphor? Or is it a window to particle substructure in 
quantum mechanics?” After decades of trying, I have 
arrived at a particle model of the electron that moves at 
the speed of light along a helical path in space-time. The 
diameter of the helix is a Compton wavelength. The 
zitterbewegung is oscillation across the diameter and 
that generates the electron’s magnetic moment. I have 
found well-defined differential equations for the 
electron’s motion with quite a simple form and 
interesting new predictions. This model allows you to 
picture the zitterbewegung as a rotating dipole moment. 
The time average of this rotation is the well-known 
magnetic moment of the electron. The frequency of this 
rotation is the zitterbewegung frequency, which is about 
10 to the 21st hertz, okay? That’s too high for anyone to 
detect, except in a resonance. It turns out that such a 
resonance experiment has already been done. Do you 
want me to tell you about it?  
T: Please. 
H: Okay. So this is science in the making. Going 
back to de Broglie, he’s credited with proposing wave 
particle duality. But, that wasn’t where he started. His 
original idea was that the electron has an internal 
oscillation, that is, an internal clock. This internal clock 
is attached to a wave that oscillates with the same 
frequency. When Schrodinger took de Broglie’s idea and 
made his equation, he discarded the clock part, and just 
had wave-particle duality. Most everybody else forgot 
about the clock as well, except for a few French 
followers of de Broglie. One French experimentalist 
who didn’t know about quantum electrodynamics 
(though he did high energy experiments) decided to 
look for de Broglie’s clock. He reasoned that if there 
really is such a clock, it should be observable. Well, 
since the clock has such a high frequency, it will take a 
resonance to observe it. So he looked around to find 
some way to create such a resonance. He found it in the 
field of electron channeling. Do you know what that is? 
T: No, I don’t. 
H: Okay, briefly. You can aim a narrow beam of 
electrons at a crystal so the electrons are moving parallel 
to a crystal axis and they get trapped in a spiral that 
spirals along a crystal axis. Then you have a greatly 
increased transmission through the crystal because 
scattering off atoms is minimized. Amazingly, you can 
focus the beams so that something like 60% of the 
electrons are trapped in spirals around a single crystal 
axis. Then you can tune the speed of incident electrons 
so the frequency of passage past atomic centers on the 
crystal axis is the de Broglie frequency. This Frenchman 
reasoned if there really is an electron clock, then it 
should have a resonant interaction with the crystal in 
this situation, though he had no idea about a mechanism 
that could produce it. He simply said, “there should be 
an interaction there, if there is a clock.” However, 
nobody would support doing such a crazy experiment. 
So, he wrote a proposal to do a more conventional 
experiment on crystal channeling. After he got the grant 
and assembled his team to do the experiment, he told 
them the real reason why he wrote this proposal – to do 
the clock experiment. So they did the job they were paid 
for, and then they took one day off to do his 
experiment, and they got a positive result. They found a 
resonance near the de Broglie frequency, as predicted. 
Evidently, they had measured the period of de Broglie’s 
electron clock! The Frenchman took a long time write it 
up, mainly because he had to sharpen up the beam 
analysis and things like that, but then he couldn’t get it 
published in a regular physics journal. Finally, he got it 
published in an obscure journal called “Annals of the de 
Broglie Institute,” which hardly anyone reads. A couple 
of years later, he decided that he was confident that his 
experimental effect is real, though it may be inconsistent 
with conventional quantum mechanics, including the 
Dirac equation. A lot of work has been done on 
channeling 
experiments 
and 
nobody 
had 
even 
considered anything like the clock experiment. 
Conventional quantum mechanics doesn’t have any 
mechanism to predict or explain such a result. So the 
Frenchman rewrote the paper and submitted it to 
Physical Review Letters. There were five reviewers, I 
think, and the typical review amounted to saying, “Well, 
there’s no theoretical reason to why this should exist so 
it can’t be right.” Okay? That reminds me of 
Eddington’s remark: “I won’t believe the experiment 
until it is confirmed by theory.” 
T: (Laughs). So, theory precedes experiment. 
H: Well, you don’t want to do anything that 
contradicts quantum mechanics, do you? 
T: No. 
H: No, that couldn’t be right! I mean Bohr said 
quantum mechanics is a complete description of nature. 
Of course he didn’t use the Dirac equation, he used the 
Schrödinger equation. Hence, Bohr can’t be right, 
because the Dirac equation shows that the Schrödinger 
equation isn’t a complete description. But is the Dirac 
equation complete? Anyway, the reviewers didn’t believe 
in de Broglie’s clock so the paper was rejected once 
more. However, one of the reviewers said, “Maybe this 
effect you’re talking about can be explained by 
zitterbewegung.”, 
“Zitterbewegung?” 
The 
French 
experimentalist had never heard of it, because it is 
mentioned only in theoretical textbooks. So he googled 
it on the web and found a paper entitled “The 
zitterbewegung interpretation of quantum mechanics” 
M. F. Taşar et. al 
146 
© 2012 ESER, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 8(2), 139-153 
 
 
by a guy named David Hestenes. Thenhe contacted me 
and told me about his experiment. It happens that I was 
writing another paper on zitterbewegung, which I now 
call “Zitter” because my model for it differs somewhat 
from Schrödinger’s and zitterbewegung is too much of a 
mouthful to say all the time. I was looking for new 
experimental tests of my Zitter model, So, I used my 
Zitter model of the electron to analyze and explain the 
clock experiment. The analysis was not altogether 
straightforward, however, because the experimental 
resonance was found near the de Broglie frequency, 
which is exactly half the Zitter frequency. It turns out 
that there’s a mathematical reason for the difference 
that explains it beautifully! Besides accounting for that 
factor of 2, my model explains the small difference 
between the measured frequency and the de Broglie 
frequency as due to a small splitting into resonant peaks 
that are not separately resolved in the experiment. My 
analysis will be published in in the journal Foundations 
of Physics in 2010.  In the meantime, we are looking to 
have the experiment repeated with greater resolution to 
confirm the result and look for more details. It is an 
uphill battle, because the physics is outside the main 
stream, and the competition for accelerator time is 
heavy. So, we shall see what happens! 
T: Good luck. 
H: Yeah, yeah. So that’s the scientific research that 
I’ve been doing most recently. But, geometric algebra 
also has implications for general relativity, and gravity, 
and black holes, and things like that. Most of the work 
in that direction has been done by a group in Cambridge 
that has adopted geometric algebra completely and used 
it very beautifully. 
T: I never knew about this kind of work that you have done. 
I know you mostly from your physics education. 
H: Yeah, except for my Oersted lecture, okay? So, I 
gave my Oersted lecture on elementary applications of 
geometric algebra instead of my educational R&D, for 
which the award was intended. But I related that to 
science education by emphasizing that what you 
understand about science depends critically on your 
facility with conceptual tools, representational tools, and 
mathematical tools. For example, you had to do all of 
your calculations with roman numerals, you wouldn’t do 
very well, okay? Indeed, the whole history of 
mathematics can be understood as invention and 
application of better and better conceptual and 
mathematical tools. That history is still ongoing, and I 
submit that the publication record of geometric algebra 
marks it as the leading candidate to unify mathematics 
in the 21st century. Invention of an efficient grammar 
for geometric algebra seems to be pretty much 
complete, and the next phase of developing better tools 
for a broad range of applications is well underway. I 
have published the first advanced book on classical 
mechanics worked out exclusively with geometric 
algebra. All equations are formulated and calculations 
are done without resorting to coordinates or matrices, 
including rotational dynamics, precessing tops, and all 
that. The introductory chapter is a kind of annotated 
history of geometric algebra. So, I am confident that 
geometric algebra will eventually become the standard 
language for physics and probably for engineering. On 
the other hand, I have done some education research. 
T: And how did you get involved in education research? What 
were the reasons in the first place? Because as I can see you are 
way too busy with other scientific work. 
H: When you have four kids that have trouble 
learning physics you wonder about what the problem is, 
and then you see that most students have similar 
difficulties. Well, I got seriously interested in 
investigating the problem of learning physics in 1976. I 
was a full professor at that time and I had finished my 
decade of teaching all graduate courses exclusively, so I 
started my turn to teach introductory physics courses.  
And I began lengthy talks about it with an experienced   
colleague – actually the chair who hired me in the first 
place. He was one of the most dedicated teachers I have 
ever known. 
T: And his name? 
H: His name was Richard Stoner, and his office right 
next to mine. He was so excited about teaching that he 
would regale me about it almost daily. He showed me all 
his examinations and data on student performance. This 
data was unique, because he believed that there was too 
much emphasis on quantitative problem solving in the 
usual physics course. So he designed very interesting 
qualitative questions for students to answer with 
qualitative arguments. He was frustrated because he 
could not write an examination on which the class 
average was better than 40%. So he would come to me 
and talk about the mistakes students made. I got very 
curious. I thought there must be something systematic 
going on. Now, because of my father I actually had the 
privilege to witness the early daya of electronic 
computing and computer science. And because my 
background in philosophy, I have followed the 
development in artificial intelligence in my spare time 
from its beginning.  
T: You have four kids and are a physics teacher in your spare 
time? (Laughs) 
H: And so, I was always very much interested in 
cognitive aspects of physics and mathematics. Then, I 
heard about Robert Karplus while I was interacting with 
Stoner. You know about Karplus? Well, he was another 
theoretical physicist with many children (eight, I think) 
who got him interested in teaching science to children.  
Around 1976 he organized some famous workshops for 
the AAPT. Do you know about those workshops? 
T: No, unfortunately. 
H: Well these workshops were cleverly designed to 
involve professors in doing unfamiliar tasks under 
Interview with David Hestenes  
© 2012 ESER, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 8(2), 139-153 
147 
 
 
conditions that simulate conditions faced by young 
students in science classes. For example, trying to do a 
manual task while looking at it through a mirror that 
inverted the image, so it was difficult to coordinate the 
hands. Karplus had been very successful in applying 
Piaget’s research on cognitive development to the 
design of a science curriculum for grade school 
students. He organized instruction in a “learning cycle” 
with stages of “exploration, invention and discovery.” 
And he introduced professors to his theory of 
instructional design in the workshops. Unfortunately, 
not long after that, I think about 1978, he had a terrible 
stroke and was permanently disabled. Otherwise the 
history of science education might have been much 
different. He was such a great intellect and motivator! 
Anyway, his workshops got me interested in Piaget, and 
as I devoured Piaget I kept thinking about the problems 
that Richard Stoner had with the students. Why do they 
have such difficulty in learning physics? And there were 
couple of the incidents, which I won’t bother to tell you 
about, which gave me a clue that the student 
conceptions about physics are much different than the 
professor’s. Then in 1979 I started a graduate seminar to 
read and discuss the literature in science education with 
graduate physics students. And I published my first 
paper on physics education in 1979, which was a review 
of Piaget and the relevance of psychology to physics 
teaching. It was called, “Wherefore a science of 
teaching?” 
T: I read that paper. 
H: Oh, you read that paper? Okay, well, I am proud 
to report that the paper had some influence on the 
emergence of Physics Education Research as a viable 
scientific discipline. It happened that, some 15 years 
later, two people independently told me that it got them 
going in the field. And both of them went on to make 
important contributions of their own. Anyway, I had 
done this literature review in science education and 
cognitive psychology for my seminar. That stimulated 
me to write the paper and contact the editor of “The 
Physics Teacher,” Clifford Swartz, about publishing it. 
Do you know him? 
T: No. 
H: Well, Clifford Schwartz created “The Physics 
Teacher” himself and continued as its autocratic editor 
for several decades thereafter, so he had wide influence 
on physics education.  He accepted my paper on the day 
that it arrived and moved it into publication 
immediately. That was the fastest publication in a 
science journal that I have ever seen. One week after I 
submitted it, I got back the page proofs – even before 
the notice of acceptance for publication. And shortly 
after publication, the Director of Science Education at 
the National Science Foundation made it required 
reading for all personnel in the Directorate. And, he 
invited me to Washington D.C. be a reviewer of new 
research proposals; this was still in 1979.  
T: That was a long time ago I read that paper. It was talking 
about how the computers work and would like to… 
H: It talked about artificial intelligence models of 
human thinking, yes. They are fundamentally wrong.  
But that was first generation cognitive science, which 
was based on modeling the brain as a computer. 
T: Long term memories, short term memories. 
H: Exactly, that’s right. All that is valuable, but has 
been thoroughly revised by developments in neural 
network theory. A revolution in cognitive science began 
about 1983, when I was privileged to help organize the 
very first conference on neural network modeling of the 
brain. I spent a decade doing that stuff too and 
published a few papers. But then, I had to stop because 
I was involved in too many things, and I didn’t have 
really good colleagues at my university to work with.  
T: You also developed with your colleagues, “the force concept 
inventory,” the “mechanics baseline test” and modeling theory”.  
H: Okay. I was going to tell you about that. Since I 
had conducted a seminar, published a paper and visited 
the NSF, my department chair knew I was involved in 
physics 
education. 
This 
newly 
appointed 
chair 
unilaterally accepted into our graduate physics program 
a young man from Lebanon, named Ibrahim Halloun, 
who came with scholarship money to pay his way to get 
a doctorate in physics education. Then the chair told me 
that I would be Halloun’s thesis advisor. That is how I 
got started on serious physics education research. 
Shortly thereafter an veteran high school physics 
teacher, Malcolm Wells, came to me and said that he 
had taken every university course in science and 
education that was at all relevant to teaching, and he had 
studied Piaget on his own. He said he was unsatisfied 
with the doctoral program in the School of Education 
and came to me because he wanted to write a 
dissertation that would be a substantial contribution to 
physics education. 
T: We are saying in Turkish that the lip and the pop method, 
I mean just to throw around and hope something works out.  
H: These two guys appeared at the same time, and 
also at the same time I was assigned to teach 
introductory physics. I was already convinced from my 
philosophy studies and scientific work that modeling is 
the essential core of scientific method. So I started to 
teach Introductory Physics with a modeling approach, 
and I formulated principles for a Modeling Theory of 
instruction. Halloun and Wells quickly picked up the 
idea of modeling instruction. I told Halloun about my 
ideas on why students are having so much trouble 
learning physics. That gave him a research theme: To 
develop an instrument for systematically assessing the 
difference between student preconception about the 
physical world and the ideas of physics that we want to 
teach them. The end result of that research (after nearly 
M. F. Taşar et. al 
148 
© 2012 ESER, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 8(2), 139-153 
 
 
ten years of development) is the “Force Concept 
Inventory,” which is essentially a discrimination test. It 
asks students to discriminate between scientific and 
nonscientific statements. It is a multiple-choice test 
wherein the nonscientific alternatives had been chosen 
from research to express popular nonscientific beliefs. If 
you don’t know science, the distracters look much more 
plausible than the scientific statements. So Halloun got 
started on developing the test as part of his dissertation. 
He did all the grunt work of designing specific questions 
and testing them with students At the same time he 
joined me as a teaching assistant in teaching 
Introductory physics with a modeling approach. The 
first version of our concept inventory was called the 
“Mechanics Diagnostic” and it was published along with 
spectacular data documenting the ineffectiveness of 
conventional physics instruction. The results have since 
been repeatedly confirmed by others. Did you read the 
paper? 
T: Most probably... I read almost every paper of yours in 
physics education. 
H: Okay. First I should say that about fifty percent 
of the questions on “The Force Concept Inventory” 
(FCI) are about the same as on the “Mechanics 
Diagnostic,” so it is not surprising that student scores 
on the two tests are quite comparable. The “Mechanics 
Diagnostic” was administered to the physics classes of 4 
different professors with a total of some 1500 students. 
Each professor had a different style of teaching. Two of 
them had awards for being an outstanding teacher.  
T: Can you put a parenthesis there? How do you think the 
physics people learn to teach? Are they physics professors? You 
said that they had their own ways of teaching. 
H: Well I think they just model their teaching on the 
teaching they had.  
T: They teach the way they were taught? 
H: They teach the way they were taught –which is 
the lecturer method, Okay? But the question here is: 
what is the effect of students’ prior knowledge on 
learning? How does it influence what students learn in 
the classroom? This was the first systematic study of 
that issue. There had been individual studies, some of 
which are referenced in our papers. They had noted 
various student “alternative conceptions” about physics, 
which are dismissed as mere misconceptions or “naïve 
beliefs” by the typical professor. It is not generally 
known that these “naïve beliefs” were held by 
intellectual greats of the past, including Newton and 
Galileo, as well as Aristotle. In fact, all of these beliefs 
were proposed at one time or another in the past as 
reasonable descriptions of the way the world works. It 
took the systematic scrutiny of experimental science to 
change them. However, when students take the typical 
introductory physics course, the “näive beliefs” they 
bring with them are not scrutinized. Rather students use 
these beliefs to interpret what goes on in the course. 
Consequently, students systematically misunderstand 
what they hear, read and do in the course. Student 
understanding is usually evaluated by problem solving 
performance. Problems are graded by assigning partial 
credit with the tacit assumption that mistakes are 
random. But, they are not random. They are systematic 
errors, 
due 
mainly 
to 
systematic 
student 
misunderstanding of the underlying concepts.  
T: From the beginning? 
H: 
From 
the 
beginning! 
And 
conventional 
instruction is not designed to address that fact. Okay? 
So, we got this first dramatic evidence for this failure 
from 4 professors all teaching in a different style. One 
was an instructor of problem solving drill. He believed 
you learn physics by practicing problem solving. In his 
lecture he demonstrated solving one problem after 
another; he had the students emulate that; then sent 
them home to solve more problems. The next guy was 
an experimentalist; he believed in developing students’ 
physical 
intuition 
by 
giving 
them 
enticing 
demonstrations of surprising physical effects – tacitly 
assuming that seeing is believing! Okay? Another guy 
was a theoretician who concentrated on explaining the 
logical structure of the subject. He believed that you 
can’t understand conservation of energy without 
deriving the work–energy theorem from Newton’s 
Laws, and things like that. The fourth guy was a new 
teacher and he just followed the textbook without 
deviation or elaboration. Okay? First we gave the 
Mechanics Diagnostic as a pretest to all the students, 
which showed the students to have appallingly low 
scores, even though almost all of them had taken high 
school physics. Then we repeated the Diagnostic as a 
posttest and found that there was only a 15% 
improvement. The average score was only about 60%, 
whereas the questions look so trivial to a professor that 
shouldn’t worth asking. Furthermore, the mean scores 
of all the classes were the same within 1% for all the 
professors. So, student scores were independent of the 
professor’s experience, teaching technique, or whatever. 
I must confess that I was one of those professors. It is 
sobering to be confronted with evidence that what you 
do in lecture has no net impact on the students at all! 
Okay? So, the paper had immediate impact. For 
example, after it was submitted to the American Journal 
of Physics, I gave a talk on the results at an AAPT 
meeting, and the editor came running down from the 
audience after my talk and exclaimed, “So that is what 
your paper was about!” Then he accelerated its 
publication.  
Now, while Halloun was working on his thesis, I had 
many discussions with the high school teacher Malcolm 
Wells about what he should do for his thesis. He had 
still not decided when he saw the results just described, 
and he declared, “My students can do better than that!” 
So, he gave it to his students, and they didn’t do better! 
Interview with David Hestenes  
© 2012 ESER, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 8(2), 139-153 
149 
 
 
Well, that got Malcolm Wells fired up. He knew that he 
was an excellent teacher, though we had argued for 2 
years about what he could contribute to his profession 
that would be uniquely valuable. Finally, he had a clear 
goal for his dissertation:  To design and conduct 
instruction that is more effective at overcoming student 
preconceptions and developing Newtonian thinkers.  At 
that time I was writing up results from Halloun’s 
dissertation for publication. It was then that I 
constructed a systematic classification, a taxonomy of 
alternative beliefs about force and motion by 
comparison with the Newtonian system.  The taxonomy 
is key to success of the FCI. The classification 
demonstrates a complete covering of the Newtonian 
force concept. It is based on an analysis of the 
Newtonian force concept along five dimensions. Even 
physicists disagree on what constitutes the concept of 
force. Some say that “force” is defined by F = ma. I 
claim that it takes all five of Newton’s laws to define the 
concept of force. Why do I say five? Don’t they usually 
say three? 
T: I was thinking. 
H: That is right. It’s because Newton didn’t articulate 
all of his laws, okay? For example, one essential “law” 
that he took for granted is that space is Euclidean. 
Right? Geometry is essential to the concept of length 
and measurement. And you need the concept of a clock 
to define time and its measurement.  
T: As a Zeroth Law? 
H: And how did Newton handle that? With one 
sentence: “I presume everyone knows geometry? An 
explicit specification of the Euclidean geometry of space 
is what I call the Zeroth Law. Have you read my paper 
called, “Modeling Games in the Newtonian World?”  
T: I did.  
H: That is my favorite paper about “modeling.” 
That’s where I published a complete analysis of 
Newtonian theory, though it had been worked out ten 
years before and used to develop the taxonomy of force 
concepts, The complete force concept is thus to be 
regarded as a five dimensional concept, because you do 
not understand how to apply the concept in any given 
situation until you have mastered all 5 dimensions. It’s a 
kind of conceptual engine that does not run unless all its 
parts are working. Of course, every physicist can run 
that engine, though most of them are unaware of all the 
working parts. Indeed, many physicists and physics 
textbooks do not understand the function of Newton’s 
First Law? It says that a particle moves at a constant 
speed in a straight line when there is no net force on the 
particle. Well, that looks like a special case of Newton’s 
Second Law, except, “what defines constant speed?” 
Well, that is the speed of a free particle! And a free 
particle is defined by the condition that there is no net 
force on it. So, a free particle can be used as a standard 
reference motion to define a clock. Thus, the First Law 
serves to define clocks implicitly in Newtonian 
mechanics. That’s not generally recognized. There are 
more people that understand the First Law as defining 
an inertial reference frame. Okay? But that is equivalent 
to identifying a system of free particles. To ascertain if a 
given reference frame is inertial, you set a few free 
particles in motion and see if they move in a straight 
lines, or not.  
T: Or not. 
H: Or not., Well, I was very pleased when I came to 
this understanding of the First Law while I was writing 
my Mechanics book, which, by the way, is the first place 
I articulated a systematic modeling approach to physics. 
That was background for my subsequent papers on 
Modeling Theory in instruction and cognition as well as 
scientific practice. All these ideas fit together into one 
coherent program. The modeling program is concerned 
with development and use of conceptual tools to 
enhance human cognition. This includes evolution of 
the natural languages, which developed informally in 
response to environmental pressures The languages of 
science and mathematics developed more formally. 
Each science creates its own conceptual tools, its own 
specialized language to achieve its specific goals.  
Anyway, I was inadvertently sucked into applying my 
philosophical 
ideas 
about 
modeling 
to 
physics 
education, because I had two graduate students to 
mentor. Then, Malcolm Wells got more spectacular 
results with his thesis. When he came to me he was 
already using Robert Karplus’ “learning cycle” in his 
teaching. It has 3 phases called “exploration, invention 
and discovery.” We discussed how it works at length. 
Then I asked him, “How do you explore? How do you 
invent? And how you discover knowledge?” The first 
phase is commonly called “discovery learning” Okay? In 
the exploration phase you bring students into contact 
with phenomena that you want them to understand and 
they play around with it. The hope is that they will 
identify significant properties and finally change 
something to discover how it changes or behaves. Then 
the students will invent or are introduced to a concept 
to describe or explain the behavior. The idea is that in 
this way the students will learn concepts that are 
grounded in experience. The trouble with discovery 
learning is that students tend to mess about with the 
phenomena without progressing to insight. They need a 
more systematic approach to sense making So I 
suggested to Malcolm that he meld the learning cycle 
with the stages of model development and deployment 
that I spelled out in my paper “Toward a Modeling 
Theory of Physics Instruction,” a preprint of which was 
available at the time. Malcolm ran with the idea and 
applied it brilliantly in his teaching, enhancing it with 
many subtle details. The method can be regarded as a 
way to teach systematic scientific inquiry.  
M. F. Taşar et. al 
150 
© 2012 ESER, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 8(2), 139-153 
 
 
The central idea in the modeling approach is that 
you understand a phenomenon by creating or adapting a 
model to describe it. The subtlety in teaching is in how 
to get students to do that for themselves, so they 
become autonomous learners. Scientific inquiry begins 
with specifying the system of interest and the variables 
involved. Representation of the system and its variables 
is the first step in constructing a model. The next step is 
specifying relations among the variables and how they 
change. Finally, validity of the model is established by 
comparing it with empirical data on how the system 
behaves. This is an outline of ideas about modeling that 
I presented to Malcolm. We coined the term “modeling 
cycle” for the integration of systematic modeling into 
the learning cycle. To guide students through the 
modeling cycle and develop their insight into the 
process, Malcolm developed a technique that we call 
“Modeling Discourse.” It has two major components: 
first, engaging students in explicit descriptions of what 
they are doing and thinking in terms of models and 
modeling. Second, sensitivity to student preconceptions 
about physics and getting them to articulate their beliefs 
clearly so they can be evaluated with evidence and 
argument. Malcolm became very skillful at managing 
modeling discourse. Halloun also worked on modeling 
instruction as part of his thesis, but he focused on a 
modeling approach to problem solving. We published a 
paper on that too. It worked fairly well, but it’s not as 
deep an innovation as what Malcolm Wells did.  
Anyway, Malcolm evaluated his approach to 
modeling instruction in his thesis, with the most well-
controlled and significant educational experiment that I 
know of. As a control for his experiment, Malcolm 
engaged another high school physics teacher who was 
perfectly matched with Malcolm in education and long 
teaching experience. That fellow used a conventional 
problem solving approach to teaching mechanics, 
assigning the students one problem after another 
throughout the course. Malcolm Wells synchronized his 
course to spend the same amount of time on mechanics, 
but he didn’t teach any explicit problem-solving at all.  
T: Swackhamer? 
H: No, Swackhammer entered the picture several 
years later. This guy’s name was Wayne Williams. To 
compare the effectiveness of the two approaches, 
Malcolm designed a conceptual problem-solving test 
that we refined and published later as “the Mechanics 
Baseline Test.” This test is non-routine in the sense that 
none of the questions can be solved by simple 
substitution in formulas; all questions require conceptual 
analysis with a quantitative aspect. Furthermore, all the 
questions are basic in the sense that they concern 
material that should be covered in any introductory 
physics course. To evaluate impact on student 
preconceptions Malcolm joined with me in revising the 
Mechanics Diagnostic to create a more comprehensive 
coverage of force and motion concepts. The result is the 
famous Force Concept Inventory. With these two 
excellent instruments, the Baseline test and the FCI, to 
evaluate outcomes, Malcolm was able to validate the 
remarkable result of his experiment. Not surprising but 
still impressive, Malcolm’s students had much higher 
gains than the control group on the FCI, and even did 
much better than the university physics students in 
Halloun’s study. The big surprise was that Malcolm’s 
students did 20% better than the control group on the 
problem-solving test, even though Malcolm didn’t even 
try to teach problem-solving. Rather, he was teaching 
the modeling concepts that are needed for effective 
problem-solving. Problem-solving is a lot easier if you 
understand on the problem! The teacher of the control 
group, Wayne Williams, was so impressed by the result 
that he postponed his retirement. He asked Malcolm, 
“How did you do that?” Later on when we started 
Modeling Workshops, Williams attended and he kept on 
teaching five years past his retirement age.  
T: Larry? Because I attended one of his workshops. 
H: No, Larry Dukerich came in later. What 
happened next was, because I was convinced that 
Malcolm’s work had produced an innovation in 
instruction of great promise, I contacted the NSF 
program manager that I had met a decade earlier, and he 
agreed on the spot to fund a Pilot Project to see if 
Malcolm’s success is transferable to other teachers. 
Malcolm and I organized the first workshop for 
teachers together, and I learned that it was better to let 
Malcolm do it without me. Larry attended that first 
workshop, as did Gregg Swackhamer, I think. 
Swackhamer was a teacher from Chicago who had read 
my papers on modeling and was interested enough to 
visit me for his Sabbatical leave. I told him to spend the 
time in Malcolm Wells’ classroom. He contributed his 
observations to our joint paper on Malcolm’s teaching. 
He also helped clean up the FCI for publication.  He 
has since served as a stalwart leader in the Modeling 
Program. 
In our pilot workshop the teachers were very 
enthusiastic about everything. So we were surprised and 
disappointed that the FCI showed no improvement in 
their teaching for the following school year. We asked, 
“How could that be?” The teachers thought their 
teaching had improved considerably, but that was not 
reflected in measurable results. If you were doing an 
ordinary education experiment without the FCI to 
evaluate what the students actually learned, you would 
have thought from teacher reactions that it was a 
tremendous success. Then we identified the problem: 
while we were teaching modeling techniques we were 
also teaching use of new MBL (micro-computer based 
laboratory) tools, probes, and so on. The teachers were 
so focused on the mechanics of teaching with these new 
laboratory tools that they neglected to cultivate 
Interview with David Hestenes  
© 2012 ESER, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 8(2), 139-153 
151 
 
 
modeling discourse to draw out the student ideas and 
correct their misconceptions. Fortunately, the pilot 
project brought the teachers back for a second year. 
This time we made sure that the teachers understood 
how crucial modeling discourse is to the success of 
modeling instruction. Subsequent evaluation with the 
FCI showed the significant gains we had hoped for. 
This experience serves as an example showing that 
inquiry based instruction isn’t enough. How you do the 
inquiry makes all the difference. 
That got me inextricably involved in physics 
education! Success of the pilot workshop set us off and 
running: The FCI got published and Eric Mazur at 
Harvard endorsed it. We got big grants for more and 
better teacher workshops and Modeling Instruction 
grew to a nationwide program that has remained vibrant 
for 20 years.. To date more than 2,000 physics teachers 
have taken Modeling Workshops, close to 10% of all 
physics teachers in the United States. The workshops 
have continued to evolve and improve through the 
contributions of many committed teachers. My own 
physics education research during the last decade has 
been what you’d call “informal.”  I have kept up with 
the literature and monitored what was going on with 
teachers 
in 
the 
program, 
offering 
occasional 
recommendations for improvement. I have suggested 
some very nice improvements that haven’t been 
adopted by all the teachers because they haven’t been 
fully worked into the modeling curriculum. Our 
government funding ran out, and I have wasted a lot of 
time trying to get it renewed or replaced to no avail. 
Here we have this great program, –you heard in my 
talk– we have this graduate program for teacher 
professional development that the teachers can’t afford 
to attend. So, the big problem is financing; I won’t go 
into details of everything though, as Malcolm Wells 
liked to say, the devil is in the details. One major thing 
we learned during the first decade of running Modeling 
Workshops is that for teachers to gain sufficient 
proficiency with the modeling approach to use it in 
teaching their own classes, the optimal length of a 
workshop is four weeks. Five weeks is more than you 
need, and three weeks is barely adequate, though that is 
most common for practical reasons.  
T: How many hours in a week? 
H: A typical workshop is scheduled for five hours a 
day for 3 weeks, okay? The total is the number of hours 
required for a three credit course at an American 
university, so teachers can be awarded university credit 
for attending. Actually, the workshop is most effective 
when the teachers have shared living quarters, so the 
teachers continue to talk about the experience for most 
of the day. This sort of immersive experience is a very 
important social component of the modeling program. 
Teachers describe the experience as “transformative!” 
Indeed, most of the teachers have remained in contact 
through the “modeling listserv,” which has attracted 
daily postings from teachers for a decade. And when 
funding for Modeling Instruction dried up, the teachers 
created their own organization, “the American Modeling 
Teachers Association” to continue the work. Thus, the 
Modeling Program has spawned a cohesive “community 
of practice,” a nationwide community of dedicated 
teachers with a shared vision of models and modeling in 
science teaching. I believe that cultivating and 
supporting such a community of science teachers is the 
most promising possibility for broad, rapid, and 
sustained high-quality science education reform –
perhaps the only possibility.  Time will tell! 
Having passed on the Modeling Program to a 
younger generation of teachers, I can spend more time 
on Zitterbewegung research. That’s beginning to look 
very exciting, promising new answers to questions about 
quantum mechanics. For example, where do quantized 
states come from? Well, I have so far found exact 
Zitterbewegung solutions only for an electron in a 
constant magnetic field. Solutions of the Schroedinger 
equation for this case are called Landau levels. The 
states are essentially the same as for a 2D harmonic 
oscillator, describing uniform circular motion. Well, in 
my Zitter model the electron is circulating around a 
guiding center. So, the electron has an internal motion, 
and it is resonance of this internal motion with the 
orbital motion of the guided center that determines 
quantized states. This suggests that all quantization can 
be explained as Zitter resonances. In fact, Schrodinger 
said that when he first developed his equation, he was 
expecting to explain stationary atomic states as 
resonances. But he couldn’t see what resonated with 
what. I see electron Zitter as the missing piece needed 
to explain quantized stationary states as resonances. I 
have long known that geometric interpretation of the 
unit imaginary i suggests an internal spatial motion of 
the electron. So now, in one case I can account for the 
stability of radiationless states by resonance. Of course, 
I have not yet proved that these quantized states are 
radiationless. That’s the next thing I want to work on 
this summer, and I think I know how to do it. 
T: I would like to do . . . I have studied superconductivity in 
my Masters. I am really curious to know your answer to that. Do 
you think we know all that is to know about the electron? 
H: No. No, I don’t. 
T: Because it just occurs to me that we need a somewhat new 
theory of electron probably to solve the questions of 
superconductivity. Do you feel a need of that sort? 
H: I feel more than a need. I think I know at least 
one way that the theory should be changed. The 
standard theory of superconductivity is not as successful 
as people make it out to be. When you get near the 
critical point they have a renormalization theory to 
explain what happens. But renormalization theory 
doesn’t get the correct result for the critical point. And 
M. F. Taşar et. al 
152 
© 2012 ESER, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 8(2), 139-153 
 
 
not just at the critical point! The deviations of theory 
from the experimental data increase as you get closer 
and closer to the critical point. So, what is going on 
there? Here is my hypothesis: the electrons have this 
internal Zitter motion, and as you approach the critical 
point there is an increase in Zitter correlations, that is, 
in resonances between Zitter motions of different 
electrons. As temperatures increase correlations are 
destroyed by thermal fluctuations. I submit this as a 
general explanation for all critical phenomena in 
condensed matter systems. 
T: Is there coupling again going on there? 
H: Well, aside from Coulomb repulsion, the force 
between two electrons is not just magnetic coupling. It 
is generated by a magnetic moment plus a rotating 
dipole moment due to Zitter. If the rotating dipole 
moments are not in sync, not resonant, then their 
average force is zero. But, as you go to lower 
temperatures the opportunity for correlation increases, 
so electrons start circulating in sync; that changes the 
strength of the interaction. Thermal fluctuations destroy 
such correlations, but the thermal fluctuations become 
less and less significant as temperature decreases. Then 
chains of correlated electrons appear with longer and 
longer correlation lengths as temperature decreases. I 
submit that Bose Einstein condensation can be 
explained in the same way, by reducing it to 
condensation of Fermions. All the atoms in a Bose 
condensate have Fermion structure, and I suggest that 
the correlations among atoms are due to resonances 
among the electrons hidden in the atoms. That is a topic 
for research. 
T: More than a hunch? 
H: More than a hunch! I have well-defined equations 
of motion for the electron, so it is a hunch that can be 
investigated. 
T: So, we call it hypothesis. 
H: (Laughs) We call it a hypothesis. Let us define 
hypothesis as a hunch that can be investigated, a testable 
hunch.  
T: And my last question is about what is yet to be done in 
physics education. For the future generation of researchers, what do 
you suggest to them? In what ways to proceed? What is left to 
inquire in physics education research? 
H: Well, I just published a couple of papers in which 
I laid out a modeling theory of cognition. They say a lot 
more about what I think physics education researchers 
should be reading. They should be reading the literature 
in cognitive linguistics. The field of “Cognitive 
Linguistics” has emerged only in the last few decades. 
Have you heard about George Lakoff? 
T: No. 
H: You should learn about Lakoff because he is 
famous, and famous for good reason. I say quite a lot 
about him, actually, in my paper entitled “Notes for a 
Modeling 
Theory 
of 
Science, 
Cognition 
and 
Instruction.” It was published in the GIREP 
proceedings two years ago. 
T: In Amsterdam? 
H: In Amsterdam. That is the paper for my invited 
talk at the GIREP conference on Modeling in Physics 
and Physics Education. A copy of it can be downloaded 
from the modeling website. Then, I have more recent 
paper that follows it up.  There is more and more work 
in cognitive science of great relevance to science 
education, especially in Cognitive Linguistics. They have 
learned, for example, that the notion of “force” in 
everyday language is the source of many metaphors in 
everyday life. I already mentioned that it differs 
drastically from the Newtonian concept of “force.” I 
may write something about this in the future. There is 
an issue of finding sufficient time. Anyway, I see a few 
physics education researchers, such as Joe Redish, 
reading the cognitive science literature. Actually, his son 
is a neuroscientist, and I spend a few years studying 
neuroscience myself. There is some of that already in 
my paper “Toward a Modeling Theory of Physics 
Instruction” published in 1987. That paper was actually 
written at the same time as the “Mechanic Diagnostic,” 
but publication was delayed for 2 years because of 
uncompromising objections by a referee.  Ultimately, 
the enlightened editor of the AJP overrode his 
objections and published it anyway. Along with that, we 
published the positive results of Halloun’s experiment 
with modeling instruction in problem solving. Of 
course, Halloun is now busy doing his own thing. He is 
very, very active in elevating physics education in the 
Arab world. 
T: Okay, it has already been one hour and 50 minutes. I very 
much thank you for spending this much of time with us. And I 
am sure—I am delighted that this has been the most wonderful 
conversation I have ever had in my entire life and I thank you for 
that. I hope the readers and the listeners of this conversation, you 
also enjoyed. And I thank you very much again and I hope to 
read much of your work again in the future.  
H: I was going to say that the main way you led me 
on was by saying that you actually read my papers. It’s 
always pleasure to talk to somebody who takes your 
work seriously. 
T: For the last fifteen years I have been following your works. 
H: Ok. Thank you very muz 
T: And again thank you for all the contributions in physics 
and physics education and also giving this conversation. Thank 
you. 
SELECTED 
PUBLICATIONS 
OF 
DAVID 
HESTENES 
Hestenes, D. (1966). Space-time algebra. New York: Gordon 
& Breach. 
Hestenes, D. (1979). Wherefore a science of teaching?  The 
Physics Teacher, 17, 235–242.  
Interview with David Hestenes  
© 2012 ESER, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. & Tech. Ed., 8(2), 139-153 
153 
 
 
Halloun, I. & Hestenes, D. (1985). The initial knowledge state 
of college physics students. American Journal of Physics, 
53, 1043–1055.  
Hestenes, D. (1986). A unified language for mathematics and 
physics. In: J.S.R. Chisholm/A.K. Common (Eds.). 
Clifford algebras and their applications in mathematical physics 
(pp. 1–23). Dordrecht/Boston: Reidel.  
Hestenes, D. (1986). Clifford algebra and the interpretation of 
quantum mechanics. In: J.S.R. Chisholm, A.K. 
Commons (Eds.). Clifford algebras and their interpretations in 
mathematical physics (pp. 321–346), Boston: Reidel.  
Hestenes, D. (1987).  How the brain works: the next great 
scientific revolution. In C.R. Smith & G.J. Erickson 
(Eds.), Maximum entropy and bayesian spectral analysis and 
estimation problems (pp. 173–205).  Dordrecht/ Boston: 
Reidel.  
Hestenes, D. (1987). Toward a modeling theory of physics 
instruction. American Journal of Physics, 55, 440–454.  
Hestenes, D. (1990). The Zitterbewegung interpretation of 
quantum mechanics. Foundations of Physics, 20, 1213–
1232. 
Hestenes, D. (1992). Modeling games in the Newtonian 
world. American Journal of Physics, 60, 732–748.  
Hestenes, D., Wells, M. & Swackhamer, G. (1992). Force 
concept inventory. The Physics Teacher, 30,141–158.  
Hestenes, D. (1994). Invariant body kinematics: II.reaching 
and neurogeometry. Neural Networks, 7, 79–88.  
Hestenes, D. (1994). Invariant body kinematics: I. saccadic 
and compensatory eye movements. Neural Networks, 7, 
65–77. 
Wells, M., Hestenes, D. & Swackhamer, G. (1995). A 
modeling method for high school physics instruction. 
American Journal of Physics, 63,606–619.  
Hestenes, D. (1996). Modeling software for learning and 
doing physics. In C. Bernardini, C. Tarsitani & M. 
Vincentini (Eds.). Thinking physics for teaching, plenum 
(pp.25-66). New York. 
Hestenes, D. (1997). Modeling Methodology for Physics 
Teachers. In E. Redish and J. Rigden (Eds.). The changing 
role of the physics department in modern universities (pp. 935–
957). American Institute of Physics Part II.  
Hestenes, D. & Jackson, J. (1997). Partnerships for Physics 
Teaching Reform a crucial role for universities and 
colleges. In E. Redish & J. Rigden (Eds.). The changing 
role of the physics department in modern universities (p. 449–
459). American Institute of Physics.  
Hestenes, D. (1998). Modulatory mechanisms in mental 
disorders. In D.J. Stein & J. Ludik (Eds.). In neural 
networks in psychopathology (pp. 132–164). Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press.   
Hestenes, D. (1999). New foundations for classical mechanics 
(2nd ed.) Dordrecht/Boston: Kluwer.  
Hestenes, D. (2001). Old wine in new bottles: a new algebraic 
framework for computational geometry. In E. Bayro-
Corrochano & G. Sobczyk (Eds). Advances in geometric 
algebra with applications in science and engineering (pp. 1–14).  
Boston: Birkhauser. 
Hestenes, D. (2003). Space time physics with geometric 
algebra. American Journal of Physics, 71, 691–714.  
Hestenes, D.(2008).  Notes for a Modeling Theory of Science, 
Cognition and Physics Education, In E. Van Den Berg, 
A. Ellermeijer & O. Slooten  (Eds.) Modelling in physics 
and physics education. U. Amsterdam.  
Hestenes, D. (2009). Modeling science education. In A. Bilsel 
& M. U. Garip (Eds.), Proceedings of the frontiers in science 
education research conference (pp. 3–14). Famagusta, North 
Cyprus: Eastern Mediterranean University Press. 
Hestenes, D. (2010). Modeling theory for math and science 
education. In R. Lesh, P. Galbraith & A. Hurford 
(Eds.). Modeling students’ mathematical competencies, New 
York: Springer. 
Hestenes, D. (2011). Grassmann’s legacy. In H-J.Petsche, A. 
Lewis, J. Liesen &S. Russ (Eds.). From past to future: 
Grassmann’s work in context. Berlin, Birkhäuser. 
Hestenes, D., Megowan-Romanowicz, C., Popp, S.O., 
Jackson, J. & Culbertson, R. (2011). A graduate 
program for high school physics and physical science 
teachers. American Journal of Physics, 79, 971–979.  
 
 
 
 
The audio recording of this conversation/interview 
is available from the journal web site. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
* The first author conducted the interview and the other two 
authors transcribed it. Afterwards the text was checked by 
Professor Hestenes for accuracy. 
