Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras 27 (2017), 351–379
c⃝2016 The Author(s).
This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
0188-7009/010351-29
published online April 11, 2016
DOI 10.1007/s00006-016-0664-z
Advances in
Applied Cliﬀord Algebras
The Genesis of Geometric Algebra:
A Personal Retrospective
David Hestenes*
Abstract. Even today mathematicians typically typecast Cliﬀord Al-
gebra as the “algebra of a quadratic form,” with no awareness of its
grander role in unifying geometry and algebra as envisaged by Cliﬀord
himself when he named it Geometric Algebra. It has been my privilege
to pick up where Cliﬀord left oﬀ—to serve, so to speak, as principal
architect of Geometric Algebra and Calculus as a comprehensive math-
ematical language for physics, engineering and computer science. This
is an account of my personal journey in discovering, revitalizing and ex-
tending Geometric Algebra, with emphasis on the origin and inﬂuence
of my book Space-Time Algebra. I discuss guiding ideas, signiﬁcant re-
sults and where they came from—with recollection of important events
and people along the way. Lastly, I oﬀer some lessons learned about life
and science.
1. Salutations
I am delighted and honored to join so many old friends and new faces in
celebrating the 50th anniversary of my book Space-Time Algebra (STA).
That book launched my career as a theoretical physicist and the journey that
brought us here today. Let me use this opportunity to recall some highlights
of my personal journey and oﬀer my take on lessons to be learned. The ﬁrst
lesson follows:
2. Cliﬀord Algebra Versus Geometric Algebra
A central theme in the history of mathematics is an intricate dance between
geometry and algebra, with each playing solo on occasion. Drawing on contri-
butions by Grassmann and Hamilton, the two were fused into a comprehen-
sive Geometric Algebra by W. K. Cliﬀord [8] in the middle of the nineteenth
century. Ironically, in honoring Cliﬀord by calling his system Cliﬀord Algebra
*Corresponding author.
352
D. Hestenes
Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras
mathematicians devalued it by separation from its geometric roots. Conse-
quently, for the better part of a century it was treated as just one more
algebra among many without recognizing it as a universal algebra containing
all others. Then, in the 1950s, following up on insights of Marcel Riesz [54],
I picked up where I am sure Cliﬀord was headed when his life was so trag-
ically cut short and proceeded to develop Geometric Algebra into a uniﬁed
mathematical language for all the sciences. Today it covers a broader range
of physics, engineering and mathematics than any other system. Its scope is
reviewed in [41].
In the following I review how the Geometric Algebra of today came to
be. But ﬁrst a product warning:
Do not confuse Geometric Algebra (GA) with Cliﬀord Algebra (CA)!
Though they stand on common ground, they diﬀer profoundly in cul-
ture, content and praxis. You may have noticed that mathematicians employ
the term CA exclusively; whereas the term GA is employed only by physicists
and engineers.
Some well-meaning individuals aim to bridge the gap and honor Cliﬀord
with the name “Cliﬀord’s Geometric Algebra.” But that overlooks Cliﬀord’s
express choice for a name that is not attached to a single individual, while he
avers that Grassmann’s contribution to GA is greater than his own. Indeed,
the idea for GA was so much in the air that Rudolph Lipschitz discovered
it independently only a few years later [47], though he deferred to Cliﬀord’s
priority when he learned about it. More to the point, as I document in this
paper, recent developments of GA beginning with Marcel Riesz vastly extend
its original conception. Accordingly, I submit that GA is as much a collective
product of human culture as the Real Number system. Both belong equally to
us all, while both are enriched by stellar contributions from many individuals.
A more egregious mistake is attributing the fundamental formula
ab = a · b + a ∧b,
(1)
to Cliﬀord. Mathematicians who work with CA do not make that mistake,
because, after a century of ossiﬁed tradition, they have still not recognized
its deep signiﬁcance in integrating Grassmann’s inner and outer products.
Cliﬀord missed it himself. That is absolutely clear in his popular book The
Common Sense of the Exact Sciences, so good that it is still in print today.
There he introduced Grassmann’s outer product and a version of the inner
product, but he did not combine them to form his geometric product, nor
did he relate them to complex numbers and rotations.
I can count on the ﬁngers of one hand the number of mathematicians I
know who recognize the role of Geometric Algebra in unifying mathematics.
Why so slow? It has been said: “The husband is always the last to know!”
Surely, one factor is the great chasm between mathematics and physics that
opened up in the last century. As the distinguished mathematician Arnold
opined [1]:
“Mathematics is a part of physics. Physics is an experimental science, a
part of natural science. Mathematics is the part of physics where experiments
are cheap. In the middle of the twentieth century it was attempted to divide
Vol. 27 (2017)
The Genesis of Geometric Algebra
353
physics and mathematics. The consequences turned out to be catastrophic.
Whole generations of mathematicians grew up without knowing half of their
science and, of course in total ignorance of other sciences.”
Physics was traditionally a required minor for math students until it was
dropped after World War II. Consequently, ninety percent of math professors
today have studied no physics at all! They remain ignorant of advances in
mathematics outside their narrow specialties.
3. Growing a Coherent World View
My story is unusual in that I only got started on serious study of physics
at age 23, when many physicists are reputed to have already done their best
work. One wonders if this late start was a serious handicap or if it gave me
an opportunity to approach physics with a fresh perspective. In search for an
answer, let me review some relevant facts about my life experience.
My father was a distinguished mathematician, with major contributions
to Optimal Control Theory [21] and Numerical Analysis [28]. He was proud
and self-assured, but modest; kind and tolerant, but ﬁrm and exacting. He
never tried to interest me in his own work or teach me mathematics. Rather
he left me to my own devices. Truth is, I was an unproblematic child. My
grades were good, and I took all the available science and math courses in
high school, though I didn’t put much eﬀort into them. Early on I made it
a game to ﬁnish homework as fast as possible, often as fast as the teacher
assigned it to the class.
My development as a teenager was driven by two major forces: games
and religion. I avidly played all kinds of games, including sports. I usually
won, mainly, I think, because I deliberately focused on analyzing tactics and
strategy. In trying to invent new games, I learned how diﬃcult it is to deﬁne
a good set of rules.
The single most exciting and inﬂuential period of my life was the summer
of 1947, when I spent every day and night in the company of my cousin
Marguerite Eastvold, a vivacious and beautiful woman some 4 years older
than me. She thoroughly inculcated in me a coherent Christian world view.
She took me to spectacular revivals by the famous evangelist Billy Graham.
She got me in the habit of daily Bible study and memorizing salient verses.
She convinced me that my talents and interest in science suited me for a
career of service to the Lord and humanity as a missionary doctor. All this
persisted through high school into college, where I fell into roles of Christian
leadership myself.
In college I began to ﬁnd cracks in the Christian world view that led me
toward critical philosophy and science. Indeed, the evolution of my teenage
world view amounted quite literally to a recapitulation of the Reformation
and Enlightenment in my personal life. It was driven, in part, by intense study
of the Bible, which sensitized me to deep subtleties in language structure
and meaning. That has served me well in my subsequent scholarly career. I
was especially struck by wide divergences in diﬀerent translations of certain
354
D. Hestenes
Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras
Bible passages. From this I concluded that there is no such thing as a truly
literal translation, and I wondered how language gets its meaning. This led
me eventually to wonder how mathematics gets precise meaning and greater
truth value than ordinary language. It became a driving force in my research
on Geometric Algebra and my Modeling Theory of learning and cognition
[39].
Among other things, it led me (largely under the inﬂuence of Jaynes [42,
45]) to conclude that Information Theory is grounded in a sharp distinction
between message and meaning. Messages conveyed in human perception and
communication as well as scientiﬁc measurement have information content
measured by Shannon’s entropy, but they have no meaning. Meaning of a
given message is supplied by the human receiver using a codebook derived
from evolution and experience. That insight lies at the foundation of Modeling
Theory.
I entered UCLA as a pre-medical major in preparation to be a mission-
ary doctor, but I had dispensed with that plan by the end of my sophomore
year when I failed the ﬁrst course in calculus. I was actually given a passing
grade because my father was chair of the mathematics department. However,
I knew that the real reason for failure was because I spent most of my sopho-
more year playing chess. That turned out to be time well spent when later I
studied what chess can tell us about cognitive processes.
To break from my past and start anew, I started my junior year as
a speech major at Paciﬁc Lutheran College, a thousand miles from UCLA.
There I discovered the beautiful Nancy Shinkoethe, who became my wife
before I graduated. Also in the ﬁrst semester I got hooked on philosophy and
extended it to a major by the time I graduated.
After my junior year I started reading philosophy of science, including
Hans Reichenbach and Bertrand Russell. I was dismayed to ﬁnd that every
argument about the physical world was supported by quotes from physicists
like Einstein, Bohr and Schroedinger. I concluded “This can’t be philosophy,
this is the ‘revealed word.’ The real philosophers must be the physicists.”
So I decided to become a physicist, and I took the ﬁrst course in freshman
physics with another stab at calculus in the last semester of my senior year. I
had the same professor for both courses, and when he gave me barely passing
grades at the end, he said memorably: “You’ll never make it as a physicist,
Hestenes!” That didn’t faze me a bit, because I knew my father was very
good at math, and I didn’t think he was so smart! After all, I could crush
him at chess.
To support my wife and budding child while I studied physics in grad-
uate school, I got the GI bill after serving a 2-year stint as a private in the
U.S. Army. That stint taught me great lessons about the hard life of the un-
derprivileged and the workings of government institutions. It convinced me
that all young people should be required to devote 2 years to some kind of
public service such as Peace Corps, Teach-for-America or the military.
Then, in 1956 at age 23 I started graduate school in physics at UCLA
with one semester of freshman physics behind me.
Vol. 27 (2017)
The Genesis of Geometric Algebra
355
4. Accelerating into Physics
When I entered the UCLA graduate school as an unclassiﬁed student, I was
assigned an experimental physicist as academic advisor, and he told me it
would take 4 years to make up the deﬁciencies in my physics background.
Alarmed at the prospect, I ran to my father who said, “Go talk to Dave
Saxon!”
David Saxon was an Assistant Professor of Theoretical Physics. Ulti-
mately, he turned out to be the savviest of academic politicians, rising to
be President of the entire University of California System, the most pow-
erful academic position in the United States if not the world. Years later I
learned that he was deeply obligated to my father. Caught up in the para-
noia of McCarthy hearings on communist inﬁltration into American institu-
tions, the University of California instituted a Loyalty Oath for all employees.
When Saxon refused to sign in protest, he was ﬁred from his professorship
at UCLA. But he did not have to leave campus, because my father rehired
him at once for the Institute for Numerical Analysis (INA) where my father
was co-director. After the Loyalty frenzy was over a few years later, Saxon
returned to his position in the UCLA Physics Department.
Saxon set up a program of study that enabled me to complete the es-
sential undergraduate physics courses in 1 year. Since I aimed to become a
theoretical physicist, he let me omit all the lab courses. I skipped some courses
because they were prerequisite to more advanced courses that I did take. Of
course, this left some holes in my background, but I had no trouble ﬁlling
them in later when needed. There is a great lesson in this for all academics.
Students spend far too much time meeting academic prerequisites tailored
to each specialty, be it in physics, engineering or mathematics. Better to let
them move on where fancy takes them and pick up what they need along the
way. Students need ﬂexibility to choose a path that suits them best.
With undergraduate physics under my belt after my ﬁrst year in grad-
uate school, in the second year I completed the required graduate physics
courses, passed the graduate Ph.D. qualifying exams and received a Master
of Science degree in Physics. My grades were very good and my teachers were
impressed, so I was one of only two students in the whole graduate school to
be awarded a University Fellowship to support me for the 1958–1959 school
year. Good thing too, because my GI Bill support had run out.
I was riding high, eager to start doctoral research. Then disaster struck!
I failed my doctoral oral exam, the gateway to research. The committee asked
me to work out a standard bit of quantum mechanics which happened to be
one of the holes in my background. While I struggled to make progress, the
committee, including Saxon, harassed and cajoled me all the way. Though
I managed to solve the problem in half an hour, the committee was unim-
pressed and required that I study for a whole year before repeating the exam.
I was devastated! But they were right, of course. Years later, after I had be-
come a professor myself, I realized that I had actually performed better than
most students do, and they could readily have passed me. But the commit-
tee was looking out for my interests. They thought I was moving along the
356
D. Hestenes
Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras
academic path too fast and decided to slow me down. When I returned for
the exam a year later, I was not asked a single question I had prepared for.
Fortunately, I just happened to have ﬂuent answers to every question that
they did ask, including one about asymptotic properties of spherical Bessel
functions. After only 20 min, Saxon jumped out of his chair and said He
passes! as he stomped dramatically out of the room. The rest of the commit-
tee folded soon thereafter. I was ﬁnally ready to start research! And Saxon
saw to it that I was awarded a full time Research Assistantship for ﬁnancial
support.
The 3 years of academic preparation just described was only half my
graduate education. The other half came at the INA (Institute for Numer-
ical Analysis) where my father set me up in an oﬃce for quiet study. The
INA was established shortly after WWII for research on the ﬁrst electronic
computer in western U.S., the so-called South Western Automatic Computer
(SWAC). Driven by exceptional engineers and mathematicians that ﬂocked
from around the world, the SWAC was an incubator for the ﬁrst generation of
Computer Scientists. There I was, right in the middle! Of course I had to try
my hand at computer programming. But programming was done in machine
language in those days. I soon concluded that life is too short for that, so I
steered clear of programming for the rest of my life, though I imbibed the
culture of computer science.
The INA had another attraction for me. When Saxon was there he was
given a budget to create a library for the INA. There I found more than
a hundred of the best physics books and exciting new books on artiﬁcial
intelligence like W. Ross Ashby’s “Design for a Brain,” which hooked me on
artiﬁcial intelligence. I had the library all to myself, with no other physics
students around. How exciting!
You could say that I beneﬁted from “special privilege,” owing to my
father’s position. But the truth is, any student could have much the same. I
know several math and engineering students who opted to hang out at the
INA, and that morphed into Computer Science careers. University students
should know that if they just seek out what research professors are doing
they are likely to ﬁnd something that interests them. And if they express
that interest to the professor, for example by hanging around, they are likely
to be taken on to help. Like anyone else, professors are gratiﬁed by interest
in their work.
One special privilege I did get from my father in the summer of 1959 was
the opportunity to attend an expensive 2-week course on “Information The-
ory and Statistical Mechanics” by E. T. Jaynes, intended exclusively for in-
dustry executives and researchers. I was the only student who got to attend—
for free! That was the most profound and gripping series of lectures I have
ever heard, including a complete course on quantum electrodynamics from
the spectacular Richard Feynman which I attended a couple of years later.
It introduced me to a rich theme for research and teaching throughout my
career: interplay between Shannon’s statistical concept of information and
the Clausius concept of entropy!
Vol. 27 (2017)
The Genesis of Geometric Algebra
357
5. Research Begins: Discovering a Theme
In the fall of 1959, with graduate exams behind me and Research Assistant-
ship in hand, I disappeared from the Physics Department for an entire year
to study in the Math Department, where my father arranged for me to use
an empty oﬃce reserved for visiting scholars.
This gave me complete freedom to pursue my own research agenda,
which was already heavily inﬂuenced by reading the philosopher Bertrand
Russell. I was quite consciously focused on foundations of mathematics and
its role in physics and epistemology. Two courses I had taken the previous
year proved to be especially relevant: First, a course in Feynman’s approach
to Quantum Electrodynamics (QED); Second, a unique course on General
Relativity that introduced me to Schroedinger’s elegant little book Spacetime
Structure [56]. In the Math Department I got to take a new graduate course
in Diﬀerential Geometry by Barret O’Neill [50]. This may have been the ﬁrst
course in the United States to include a thorough introduction to diﬀerential
forms with applications. These three courses provided ideal preparation for
a serendipitous event that changed my life and ultimately brought all of you
here today.
One day when I dropped into the Mathematics Library, as I often did,
I noticed on the “New Book Shelf” a set of lecture notes entitled Cliﬀord
Numbers and Spinors by mathematician Marcel Riesz [54]. They were based
on lectures given by Riesz at the Institute for Fluid Dynamics and the Uni-
versity of Maryland. They were not formally published, and I don’t know
why a copy was sent to UCLA, perhaps because Riesz had been a guest of
my father a few years before.
I was excited by what I read from the get go. The lectures began by
factoring the well-known “Laplacian” into the square of a ﬁrst order diﬀer-
ential operator with coeﬃcients he called “Cliﬀord numbers.” Though Dirac
was not mentioned, I recognized this at once as a variant of Dirac’s famous
factorization of the “d’Alembertian” to get the Dirac operator and the Dirac
equation. But Dirac’s coeﬃcients were matrices. I knew from my QED course
that physical predictions are independent of matrix representation, so I im-
mediately concluded that Dirac matrices should be replaced by Cliﬀord num-
bers in the equations of physics, and I suspected that Cliﬀord numbers could
be identiﬁed with vectors. These convictions were supported by lecture IV,
where I saw the Dirac operator written as ∇= ek∂k and Maxwell’s equations
written in the now familiar form
∇F = ∇2A = J.
(2)
Before that stunning afternoon was over I had my doctoral research objective
clearly in mind: To develop Cliﬀord algebra into a uniﬁed, coordinate-free
calculus for all of physics. The project was not so straightforward as it might
look from hindsight today.
I set about devouring the Riesz lectures immediately, and anyone famil-
iar with STA today will recognize important notions that I picked up there
and have used extensively since. But what may not be so obvious are the
358
D. Hestenes
Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras
crucial insights that I introduced to elevate Cliﬀord algebra to a comprehen-
sive Geometric Algebra. For example, Riesz demonstrated how Grassmann’s
exterior product can be incorporated into Cliﬀord algebra, but he did not
note its geometric interpretation, which is crucial to applications. I adapted
the interpretation of diﬀerential k-forms that I learned from O’Neill to inter-
pret k-vectors as directed k-dimensional volumes, though it was many years
before I was clear on the diﬀerence between k-forms and k-vectors. Also, I
recognized many relations of Riesz’s expansion formulas to Feynman trace
calculus and the theory of determinants. Eventually I learned that Grassmann
had captured it all a century earlier in his Regressive Product. He derived
a rich system of formulas that have been repeatedly rediscovered by other
mathematicians including myself. As I was eventually able to show [44], his
progressive (exterior) and regressive (interior) products provide a foundation
for invariant theory including the “theory of determinants.”
Within a couple of months I made my ﬁrst scientiﬁc discovery: The
geometric connection of Grassmann algebra to Cliﬀord algebra, and their
subtle relations to the Pauli matrix algebra. I was so excited that I prepared
a private mini lecture to tell my father about it. This story has been told
before [31], but it was so crucial to my career that a brief recounting is
in order here. Even today, the symbols σ1, σ2, σ3 are referred to as Pauli
Spin Matrices in books on quantum mechanics, where it is noted that they
anticommute:
σ1σ2 = −σ2σ1.
(3)
and satisfy the striking formula:
σ1σ2σ3 = i.
(4)
Quantum physicists claim that anticommutivity expresses incompatibility of
spin measurements in orthogonal directions. On the contrary, I proposed that
{σ1, σ2, σ3} is simply a frame of three orthonormal vectors; anticommutivity
expresses orthogonality, and σ1σ2 represents a directed area, while σ1σ2σ3 =
i is a pseudoscalar representing an oriented volume. How is it, I asked my
father, that the great theoretical physicists and mathematicians Pauli, Dirac,
Weyl, von Neumann—all failed to recognize the geometric import of the Pauli
algebra. My father’s response is the greatest compliment I ever received:
“You have learned the diﬀerence between a mathematical concept and its
representation by symbols—many mathematicians never learn that!”
Of course, the geometric interpretation of the Pauli algebra raised many
new questions about the interpretation of quantum mechanics, such as,
whether the pseudoscalar i is related to the imaginary unit in Schroedinger’s
equation. However, I was unable to get my fellow graduate students excited
about it. “Why i?” they teased. I soon learned that it is even harder to
interest professors, including my thesis advisor. I needed more ammunition.
Vol. 27 (2017)
The Genesis of Geometric Algebra
359
6. Genesis of Spacetime Algebra
In fall 1960 I returned to the physics department to be close to my thesis
advisor, Robert Finkelstein, and complete my thesis. For the next 3 years
my eﬀorts oscillated back and forth between investigating Finkelstein’s (bril-
liant but ultimately unsuccessful) ideas on Uniﬁed Field Theory and my own
interest in developing geometric algebra and its implications in physics.
Having identiﬁed the 2×2 Pauli matrices with basis vectors in Euclidean
3-space, it was obvious to identify the 4×4 Dirac matrices with basis vectors
in spacetime. The relation between them was not so obvious though, because
the matrices are of diﬀerent dimension. Moreover, spinor wave functions in
the Pauli and Dirac theories are column matrices, so their relation to vectors
was not obvious either. Perfect resolution of these issues turned out to be keys
to creating the spacetime algebra in my book [19,20], but I had to complete
an imperfect doctoral thesis before I could see how to do it.
It was undoubtedly good for me that the chapter on spinors promised
in Riesz’s lecture notes never got written, because I had to work it out for
myself. He did drop a hint though, namely, that spinors can be represented as
elements of minimal ideals in a Cliﬀord algebra. They are easily constructed
by recognizing that the columns of a matrix are minimal left ideals of the
matrix, that is, columns are invariant under matrix multiplication from the
left (an important fact that is seldom mentioned in books on linear algebra).
I will explain how that played out in my doctoral thesis.
As the title Geometric Calculus and Elementary Particles [18] suggests,
my thesis was composed of two parts. I was most excited about the ﬁrst part
on Geometric Calculus, but my thesis advisor expressed no interest in it. He
liked the second part on Elementary Particles, about which I was privately
highly dubious.
In reviewing Part I, let me change notation in my thesis to current GA
notation that did not exist at the time. Accordingly, the geometric algebra
generated by a vector space Vr,s of signature (r, s) is denoted by Gr,s =
G(Vr,s), or better by Rr,s = G(Rr,s) to emphasize that the scalars are assumed
to be real numbers R = R0,0 exclusively. Indeed, GA can be regarded as an
extension of the real numbers to include the concepts of magnitude, direction
and signature.
The geometric algebra of Euclidean space R3 = R3,0 is generated by
orthonormal vectors {σk ; k = 1, 2, 3}. This is, as we have noted, isomorphic
to the Pauli matrix algebra. I used D4 to denote the (real) Cliﬀord algebra
generated by an orthonormal frame of vectors {γμ ; μ = 0, 1, 2, 3}, which
are isomorphic to the Dirac matrices. This is the geometric algebra R1,3 now
known as spacetime algebra (STA). The standard relation of the Pauli algebra
to the Dirac algebra can be expressed by the tensor product
D4 = R1,3 = R3 ⊗R2.
(5)
This factorization of the “Real Dirac algebra” D4 is an instance of Clif-
ford’s original construction of geometric algebras as commuting products of
quaternion algebras [8]. To express it in terms of generating basis vectors, let
360
D. Hestenes
Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras
{τ1, τ2} be an orthonormal basis for R2. Then the vectors and pseudoscalars
are related by
γ0 = τ2τ1,
γk = σkτ2,
γ5 ≡γ0γ1γ2γ3 = −iτ1.
(6)
Dirac’s alpha matrices are then isomorphic to the Cliﬀord numbers
αk ≡γkγ0 = σkτ1,
α1α2α3 = γ5 = −iτ1.
(7)
The signiﬁcance of the τ1, τ2 algebra remained a mystery to me until after
my thesis was completed.
The most profound consequence of this representation for real spacetime
algebra is that it enables a completely coordinate-free geometric formulation
of the Dirac equation, which implies a geometric meaning for complex num-
bers in quantum mechanics. Unraveling its implications is still underway.
Part I employs STA to create a gauge invariant geometric calculus for
spinor ﬁelds on spacetime. It should be recognized that, at the time, gauge
invariance was just beginning to be recognized as a fundamental principle for
elementary particle theory.
The gauge transformation of a spinor ﬁeld Ψ = Ψ(x) is deﬁned by
Ψ →RΨS,
(8)
where R = R(x) and S = S(x) are rotor ﬁelds normalized by R R = S S = 1.
The gauge invariant derivative is given by
∇kΨ = (∂k + Ck)Ψ + ΨBk,
(9)
where Ck = Ck(x) is the gravitational ﬁeld connection, and the Bk = Bk(x)
are “gauge ﬁelds” for non-gravitational interactions.
Part II in my thesis studied models of fermions represented as ideals in
D4. Just as columns are left ideals in matrix algebra, minimal left ideals in
D4 can be deﬁned by idempotents (serving as projection operators); thus
Ψ±± = Ψ 1
2(1 ± σ3) 1
2(1 ± τ3),
τ3 = iτ2τ1,
(10)
with
Ψ±± = (Ψ++Ψ+−|Ψ−+Ψ−−),
(11)
These ideals were identiﬁed with positive, neutral and negative charge states
for known Fermion families at the time:
Leptons:
L = (μ+ν1|ν2e−)
Nucleons:
N = (pn|Ξ0Ξ−)
Hyperons:
Y = (Σ+Y 0|Σ0Σ−)
I employed them in models of Hyperon decays, which seemed to impress
Finklestein. However, I decided not to publish any of that because I thought
it was no better than other models already in the literature.
If my idea of associating elementary particles with minimal ideals in the
Dirac algebra has physical signiﬁcance, it must come from geometric meaning
of the algebra. Years later, when the Standard Model had ﬁnally settled on
the Electroweak gauge group SU(2)×U(1), I pointed out that it ﬁts perfectly
Vol. 27 (2017)
The Genesis of Geometric Algebra
361
into Dirac theory [30,40]. Whether that has new physical implications is still
uncertain.
After I completed my doctorate in 1963, Saxon again intervened to oﬀer
me a 1 year research position. That was just what I needed to support my
family while I looked for a postdoctoral position. My ﬁrst child, Kristina,
was born while I was in the Army; my second child, Karen, was born on
my ﬁrst day of graduate school in 1956; two more, Helen and Glen were
born in 1958 and 1960, respectively. By the end of the year I was awarded a
2 year NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship to study with John Wheeler at Princeton.
The fellowship included a generous supplementary allowance for dependents.
Consequently, my yearly income exceeded that of an Assistant Professor at
Princeton. That may be some kind of a record.
How the mores of family and education had changed since my birth!
Before WW II it was virtually unheard of for undergraduate or graduate
students to be married. For example, my father put oﬀmarriage to his college
sweetheart until after his Ph.D. in 1932. I was born eleven months later. When
the GI Bill was oﬀered to veterans after WW II, they ﬂocked to the colleges,
but most of them were married. To manage the inﬂux of families, UCLA
imported a raft of surplus Army barracks for “married student housing.”
This on-campus housing was still available to me at a nominal price after the
Korean war. Support for married students has declined ever since.
7. Crystallization of Spacetime Algebra
Shortly after completing my Ph.D., I recognized that the τ1, τ2 algebra in
(6) has no physical signiﬁcance and serves only to complicate the equations,
especially in electrodynamics. It is a superﬂuous vestige of matrix algebra.
The physical content of the algebra lies in relations of the Pauli and Dirac
algebras to the geometry of space and spacetime. I saw that, in contrast to
(6) these algebras are most eﬃciently expressed by deﬁning the spacetime
split
σk ≡γkγ0,
σ1σ2σ3 = i = γ5.
(12)
Immediately I set about incorporating this simpliﬁcation in major portions
of my thesis and in three months completed a paper entitled “Space-Time
Algebra,” which I submitted for publication in Reviews of Modern Physics.
The referees recommended that it be published as a book, and the editor,
Elliott Montroll, oﬀered to publish it in an international series of books by
distinguished physicists for which he was also the editor. Indeed, shortly
after publication, when my father was visiting a mathematician in India, he
saw a copy of my book on the professor’s desk. A bit of luck for me! Such
wide distribution turned out to be very helpful, for the book STA hit some
important targets that would have been missed by a journal article.
The spacetime split oﬀers an important lesson about a diﬀerence in
thinking between physicists and mathematicians, or, if you will, between
geometers and algebraists. The algebraist would never think of introducing
362
D. Hestenes
Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras
the spacetime split, because it is geometrically motivated. Indeed, both math-
ematicians and physicists committed to the matrix formalism take no notice
of it in my published works.
My postdoc at Princeton 1964–1966 may have come at the busiest time
of John Wheeler’s career. He had just coined the term “black hole” and was
leading an international renaissance in General Relativity. He was so busy
traveling that he missed half the classes in his relativity course, though they
were admirably ﬁlled-in by his graduate student Kip Thorne. After my ﬁrst
year, Wheeler wrote me a long, rambling letter from his vacation home in
Martha’s Vineyard, apologizing for spending so little time with me. He framed
it like a mystery story about another postdoc that he had seriously neglected,
with the punch line at the end: “And that man was Roger Penrose!”
Actually, I was not much bothered by Wheeler’s lack of attention.
Princeton was teeming with clever postdocs in physics and mathematics.
There were many stimulating colloquia, and excellent courses by Wigner,
Wightman, Goldberger and others. Besides, I had a burning research ques-
tion of my own to investigate.
GA has many square roots of minus one. In particular, spacelike vectors,
bivectors and pseudoscalars in R1,3 all square to minus one. Which one of
these plays the role of unit imaginary in quantum mechanics, and what is its
geometric justiﬁcation? I had my suspicions. But how can one prove it? The
answer is given in my paper “Real Spinor Fields” [22]. It is the capstone of my
reformulation of physics with STA. Because of its importance, I summarize
its essential points here. See [36] for more details.
Although expressed diﬀerently in my paper, I began with a spinor ideal
of the form (10)
Ψ = ψ 1
2(1 + σ3) 1
2(1 + τ3).
(13)
Then I showed that the coeﬃcient ψ = ψ(x) on the right can be uniquely
expressed as an even multivector with the Lorentz invariant form
ψ = ρ
1
2 eiβ/2R,
(14)
where ρ = ρ(x) and β = β(x) are scalar-valued functions, and “rotor”
R = R(x) is normalized to R R = RR = 1. We can now dispense with
the idempotent projections in (13) and regard ψ = ψ(x) as the spinor wave
function. This version of the wave function has a more direct physical inter-
pretation than the ideal form. In particular, the Dirac current and the spin
are given, respectively, by
ψγ0 ψ = ρRγ0 R ≡ρv
and
s = ℏ
2Rγ3 R.
(15)
This shows that R = R(x) speciﬁes a position dependent Lorentz transforma-
tion determining directions of the Dirac current and spin at each spacetime
point. The Lorentz invariant “β-factor” in the general form (14) for a “Real
Dirac spinor” is so deeply buried in matrix representations for spinors that
its existence is not generally recognized by physicists, and its physical inter-
pretation has remained problematic to this day.
Vol. 27 (2017)
The Genesis of Geometric Algebra
363
In terms of the “real Dirac wave function” (14), I found that the Dirac
equation can be written in the form
γμ 
∂μΨiℏ−e
cAμΨ

= mecΨγ0,
(16)
where me is electron mass and e = ±|e| is the charge coupling constant, while
the Aμ = A · γμ are components of the electromagnetic vector potential. It
should be emphasized that this version of the Dirac equation is isomorphic
to the standard matrix version, so it involves no new assumptions, and by
itself it can have no new physical consequences. However, it does reveal geo-
metric structure that is buried in the matrix version, so it has implications
for interpretation of Dirac theory. In particular, it nails down a geometric
interpretation for imaginary numbers in quantum mechanics, thus resolving
the ambiguity that troubled me when writing my STA book.
The symbol i in (16) denotes a unit bivector, which can be written in
the following equivalent forms:
i ≡γ2γ1 = iγ3γ0 = iσ3 = σ1σ2.
(17)
The notation i emphasizes that it plays the role of the unit imaginary that ap-
pears explicitly in matrix versions of the Dirac equation, and in Schroedinger’s
equation when derived as a nonrelativistic limit of the Dirac equation [16,27].
Moreover, through angular momentum conservation [26] the Dirac equation
implies that the direction of that plane is related to the spin (15) by the spin
bivector
S ≡isv = ℏ
2R i R.
(18)
Thus, we have a connection between spin and phase, revealing phase as an
angle of rotation in the “spin plane.” In view of the unparalleled success of
the Dirac equation in physical explanation, this iron clad connection between
spin and phase must be explained by any satisfactory interpretation of quan-
tum mechanics. The widely accepted “Copenhagen interpretation” does not
appear to meet that standard [27].
Deﬁning a vector diﬀerential operator ∇= γμ∂μ puts the real Dirac
equation (16) in the coordinate-free form
∇Ψiℏ−e
cAΨ = mecΨγ0 ,
(19)
where A = Aμγμ is the electromagnetic vector potential. The operator ∇
is often called the “Dirac operator,” and physicists typically regard it as
uniquely tied to the Dirac equation and the mysterious origin of spin. But
the astute reader will have noted that, when formulated in terms of STA, the
same operator appears in Maxwell’s equation (2), where it has nothing to do
with spin. Indeed, we have seen that spin was (you might say) surreptitiously
introduced into the Dirac equation with the “imaginary factor” iℏ. That
leaves us free to regard ∇= ∂x as the derivative with respect to the spacetime
point x—a key to Geometric Calculus, as we see below.
As far as I know, the only person to pick up on these results from my
1967 paper [22] was the French mathematician Roget Boudet. He was so
364
D. Hestenes
Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras
impressed that he spent the rest of his career investigating their implications
[3,4], and he spread the word about STA to every Frenchman who would
listen. One of the ﬁrst to listen was Gaston Casanova, who then devoted his
Ph.D. thesis and many short papers afterward to my “real Dirac equation”
(16). Circa 1970, Casanova sent me a paper attributing that equation to my
1966 book instead of my 1967 paper. To my utter surprise when I looked in
the book, there it was! I had indeed derived the equation there, but hadn’t
fully understood what I had achieved. Understanding was not complete until
I derived the form for the wave function (14) along with the observables (15)
and (18). What a stiking lesson in the subtlety of mathematical discovery!
8. From Spacetime Algebra to Geometric Calculus
Near end of my 2-year postdoc in 1968 I began to look for a permanent
academic position. The search was happily short. Wheeler had just been
approached by the chair of a recently created graduate physics program at
Arizona State University (ASU), and he recommended me for a faculty po-
sition. I was immediately invited to give a colloquium at ASU and oﬀered a
position as Assistant Professor on the spot. Before accepting, I talked it over
with my father. He told me that many new graduate programs had recently
been created across the United States, and he had served on an NSF commit-
tee to evaluate them. He allowed that ASU was among the most promising
and sure to grow rapidly, so it would oﬀer great opportunity to “write your
own ticket.” Boy, was he right on all counts! ASU was the most rapidly grow-
ing university in the country during my entire tenure there, and it is now the
largest university in the United States. More important to me, I was indeed
able to write my own ticket from the get–go. The department chair agreed
to let me teach only graduate courses of my own choosing and design for
the ﬁrst 5 years. That included electrodynamics and relativity using GA and
statistical mechanics with the information theory approach of E. T. Jaynes.
Of course, it was a great help in my program to work out details in applying
GA as a unifying mathematical system for all of physics.
My graduate courses attracted and prepared a lot of good students to
work with me. I mention two dissertation projects most relevant to the main
thrust of my own research at the time.
Richard Gurtler had already been working as an industrial physicist
at Motorola when he started with me, so he was well prepared and ripped
through his thesis in a year without the least hesitation. I had him analyze
solutions of the Dirac equation for hydrogen using STA, especially to describe
the peculiar behavior of the parameter β in the wave function (14). The re-
sults have been valuable to me, as they clearly showed how problematic it
is to ﬁnd a viable physical interpretation for β. I still regard it as an impor-
tant clue toward improving Dirac electron theory. On completing his Ph.D.,
Gurtler went right back to his job in industrial research on photovoltaics. I
listed his name on a couple of papers I wrote after he left [16,25], because we
had substantial discussions on some of the material included.
Vol. 27 (2017)
The Genesis of Geometric Algebra
365
Garret Sobczyk took my physics courses while he was a graduate student
in mathematics, so I was pleased when he asked me to supervise his doctoral
dissertation. As discussed below, I had recently published two papers on
Geometric Calculus in a mathematics journal, so I had many ideas on how
to follow that up. For a year we had regular meetings when I gave him one
good idea after another, and he came up empty each time. Then he seemed to
undergo some kind of conceptual phase transformation, suddenly extracting
interesting results from most of my suggestions. He quickly produced an
elegant thesis, which I still regard as the best I have seen at ASU.
After Sobczyk had ﬁnished his dissertation, in fall 1971 I arranged to
teach a graduate mathematics seminar on geometric calculus with extensive
problem sets graded by Sobczyk. This gave me time to integrate Sobczyk’s
thesis with my own ideas and write it all up in three long papers, which I
submitted for joint publication in a math journal. In the meantime, Sobczyk
left for adventures as a postdoc in Poland behind the Iron Curtain, and I
did not see him again for more than a decade. After a year, the papers were
rejected with the recommendation that they be published as a book. I then
submitted the papers to a diﬀerent math journal with the same outcome after
another year. Before continuing this story, let me backtrack and pick up the
thread from the beginning.
In my dissertation I championed Geometric Algebra as a unique fusion
of geometry and algebra. But when the time came to write up my ideas for
journal publication, I had second thoughts. Was it a conceit of mine to think
that there is but one Geometric Algebra that embraces all others? After all,
I knew that other mathematicians laid claim to the name [2]. This question
bothered me so much that my ﬁrst two papers on the subject are conserv-
atively entitled Multivector Calculus [23] and Multivector Functions [24]. I
realized that more work was needed before I could be absolutely conﬁdent
in asserting universality and uniqueness for Geometric Algebra and Calculus.
These papers started that work. They are straightforward generalizations of
ideas in my STA book.
The ﬁrst paper argued that the diﬀerential operator ∇= ∂x in “multi-
vector algebra” (alias GA) should be regarded as no more and no less than
the derivative with respect to a vector variable x. This has the huge advan-
tages of reducing gradient, divergence and curl to a single operator in spaces
of any dimension, and reducing the various integral theorems of Green, Gauss
and Stokes to a single theorem. I knew that all this was related to diﬀerential
forms, but the connection was unclear. That was a topic I discussed at length
with Sobczyk. It took years to clear up to my satisfaction, largely because it
became intertwined with issues of diﬀerential geometry. Indeed, it served as
a major theme driving development of Geometric Calculus.
In the second paper I demonstrated that there is a natural “Green’s
function” associated with the vector derivative that generalizes Cauchy’s in-
tegral theorem in two dimensions and extends it to arbitrary dimension. Since
Cauchy’s theorem is central to complex variable theory, I thought that this
should be regarded as a major result. I wondered why I had not seen anything
like it in the mathematics and physics literature. It was more than 15 years
366
D. Hestenes
Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras
before I found an answer. We shall come back to that later. In the meantime,
of course, my “spectacular theorem” was completely overlooked.
In 1970 I submitted an article on the “Origins of Geometric Algebra”
to the American Mathematical Monthly to call attention to the geometric
signiﬁcance of fusing Grassmann algebra with Cliﬀord Algebra. The editor
was Harley Flanders, who was the ﬁrst to publish (in 1964) a book in English
on diﬀerential forms and their applications. I was surprised and dismayed
when he rejected my article, saying that it contained nothing new. I concluded
that it was not worth my time to try publishing in mathematics journals. My
article was not wasted, however. Fifteen years later it became the ﬁrst chapter
in my book on classical mechanics.
In 1973 I learned that philosopher-physicist Mario Bunge was editor for
a series of advanced monographs in mathematical physics published by D.
Reidel. When I submitted my three papers with Sobczyk with a proposal for
a book, he responded so enthusiastically that I told him I had much more
along the same lines, and he gave me a strong green light to proceed. Thus
began the long process of producing the book Cliﬀord Algebra to Geometric
Calculus [44]. I had no idea that it would take more than 10 years. Let me
mention a few landmarks of its involuted odyssey.
Most of the book was written between 1973 and the end of 1976. Among
other things, I introduced the concept vector manifold as a new foundation
for geometric calculus and coordinate-free diﬀerential geometry, integrated
diﬀerential forms into a more comprehensive theory of directed integrals, and
developed a new approach to diﬀerentials and codiﬀerentials for mappings
and ﬁelds.
I submitted the completed manuscript directly to the publisher ready
to be typeset and published. I was shocked when the manuscript was rejected
several months later after being sent out to an independent reviewer. Bunge
explained that all would have gone smoothly if I had just submitted the
manuscript through him. I was annoyed but not discouraged by this outcome,
as I was absolutely conﬁdent in the quality of my work. Besides I had just
decided to add a chapter on incorporating Lie groups and Lie algebras into
GA, thus greatly increasing its scope. I had developed the material in trying
to help a student with a dissertation on the subject. But he was a man in
a hurry and switched to another advisor to get his Ph.D. more quickly. At
least I was pleased with the work he induced me to do myself. A decade later
we got together again to collaborate in a diﬀerent ﬁeld—neural networks.
My problem of ﬁnding another publisher for the book was soon solved
when I was contacted by the eminent mathematician Gian Carlo Rota about
procuring a copy of my STA book. It happened that I was attending the
ﬁrst of many MaxEnt conferences at MIT in 1978, so I dropped in to see
Rota in person. When I asked why he was so interested in STA he handed
me some of his own papers on determinants and invariant theory. As I read
them the next day, I saw immediately that the ideas and results articulated
perfectly with GC, so within a week I had made the ﬁnal improvements in
the manuscript.
Vol. 27 (2017)
The Genesis of Geometric Algebra
367
Rota also agreed to consider the book for publication in the Addison-
Wesley Encyclopedia of Mathematics series for which he was editor. I ex-
pected another long delay when he asked for six copies of the manuscript.
After 2 years I started asking for a yes or no decision. I kept sending requests
to Rota for another year without response. Finally, one morning I got the
most gratifying phone call of my life. It was Rota, who apologized profusely
and explained that he had been recuperating from serious eye operations for
a year, but he had recommended the book for publication before that. Then
he praised the book in great detail for the better part of an hour, and ﬁnished
with an oﬀer to write a foreword for it.
Alas! Addison-Wesley had hired a new editor for their Advanced Books
program, and, unaccountably, she sent my book out for another round of
review, despite the strong endorsement from Rota. She was replaced before
she ﬁnished, but the next editor introduced a new obstacle. He refused to
communicate with me altogether, even to report on the status of my book.
After 3 years with this new series of delays, I contacted Rota once again in
frustration. He inquired and reported that the editor seemed to have some
grudge against me. When I learned his name, I understood. He was the same
man who had rejected my book years before when he was editor for Reidel.
Immediately, I went back to Reidel, and the new editor there, Alwyn Van
der Merwe, got the book reviewed and published within six months [44]!
By that time I had another book to publish, and Van der Merwe ac-
cepted it immediately. Here is its history. Teaching the two semester Electro-
dynamics course for many years in succession aﬀorded me the opportunity
and the impetus to rework the entire subject in with spacetime algebra and
geometric calculus. I was so pleased with the details that I planned to write
a book on the subject. But before I could get started, the course was passed
on to a colleague who was eager to teach it. With some reluctance, I then
agreed to teach the graduate Classical Mechanics course, because no one else
was interested. Soon after I got started I realized, to my surprise, that refor-
mulation with GA had as much to oﬀer nonrelativistic mechanics as it did for
relativistic electrodynamics. Indeed, GA enabled a new spinor approach to
rotations and rigid body dynamics that eliminates the need for scalar coor-
dinates and matrices, and substantially reduces the conceptual gap between
classical and quantum mechanics. I became convinced that reformulation of
physics with GA should begin with mechanics.
From 1974–1978 I taught a year-long course in classical particle and
continuum mechanics that enabled me to work out the details. Then, during
my 1980–1981 sabbatical as a NASA Faculty Fellow at JPL I extended the
treatment to space physics and Celestial Mechanics. That was greatly en-
hanced when, stimulated by a visit from Pertti Lounesto in 1983, I worked
out a powerful new spinor approach to the two body problem and orbital
perturbations [43]. This has since been applied to complex perturbations in
the solar system by Jan Vrbik [59], with impressive success. Every physicist
in the ﬁeld should know about that work, but, sadly, few do. Finally, as if
on cue, Van der Merwe appeared to facilitate publication as a book New
Foundations for Classical Mechanics [32].
368
D. Hestenes
Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras
I must take this opportunity to once again praise the service of my wife
Nancy in preparing illustrations for the book, which I believe are among the
most meticulous and extensive in the literature. Every diagram and label had
to assembled by hand. In this day of easy desktop publishing, young people
have no idea what painstaking eﬀort that required.
Though relativistic quantum mechanics with STA was the main line
of my research during my ﬁrst two decades as ASU, I never asked to teach
quantum mechanics, because that was a bastion of physics orthodoxy among
my colleagues. Many, I believe, were contemptuous of my work behind my
back, though none ever asked me a question about it. At least they respected
the fact that I had no trouble getting published or attracting good students.
When I went up for promotion to full professor in 1976, the department chair
concluded that no colleagues were qualiﬁed to assess my work, so he contacted
the editor of the Journal of Mathematical Physics for the name of a referee
of my published papers. As he conﬁded to me later in conﬁdence, he received
the most glowing report he had ever seen, so my promotion was approved
with ease. Oh, how much our lives are inﬂuenced by people we never know!
9. Spreading the Word
Interest in STA began to pick up about 1980, when Dirac invited me to
give a colloquium on Real Dirac Theory at Florida State University where
he was living out his retirement. His associate, Leopold Halpern, conﬁded
that Dirac had given me his greatest compliment: mine was the ﬁrst collo-
quium in 10 years when he stayed awake the whole time. Afterwards, in my
conversation with him, Dirac agreed to write a letter of support for an NSF
research proposal of mine. Of course, that letter was so rare and precious
that I sequestered it for safe keeping. Consequently, I am unable to locate
it right now, so I must paraphrase. It was characteristically pithy—one sen-
tence long: “I think there is something to this Real Dirac Theory.” Are you
surprised that the reviewers dismissed his opinion as inconsequential when
they rejected my proposal? What gives me pause is that Dirac was 4 years
younger than I am today.
During the decade after 1980, interest in spacetime algebra and Cliﬀord
algebra grew rapidly and shared research programs in physics and mathemat-
ics. I attribute this largely to eﬀorts of Jaime Keller, Roy Chisholm and Pertti
Lounesto. Each played the critical social role of connector (as described by
Malcolm Gladwell [15]) serving to promote the spread of ideas.
Keller and Chisholm organized the very ﬁrst conferences and conference
proceedings on applications of Cliﬀord Algebras, and both were motivated to
invite me as Keynote Speaker by my STA book. Due recognition of both has
been accorded in a recent Memorial to Keller [51].
Chisholm’s conference [7] was held in 1985 at the beautiful University of
Kent campus, high on a hill overlooking the magniﬁcent Canterbury cathe-
dral. It was exceptionally long (12 days), well-funded and well-organized with
high quality. Chisholm had scoured the literature in mathematics and physics
Vol. 27 (2017)
The Genesis of Geometric Algebra
369
to identify leading experts on Cliﬀord Algebra and convince them with per-
sonal invitations to attend.
With my new book to support strong claims [44], here at last was the
perfect opportunity for me to trumpet universality of Geometric Algebra as
a uniﬁed language for mathematics and physics. I was surprised by the weak
response to my address. I like to think that some listeners were just stunned
by what they heard. More likely, though, they needed time to contemplate
details in the written version a year later [33], though I suppose not many
looked back. I cannot make a better case today. So I am pleased to report
that it did have the intended eﬀect on sophisticated readers a few years later.
See below.
Chisholm’s conference served as a paradigm for many more conferences
to follow. Indeed, before it was over the next conference was already scheduled
for Montpellier, France in 1989. That was followed by conferences near Gent
in 1993 and at Aachen in 1996. More conferences followed at regular intervals
to this day along with many oﬀshoots on special topics.
Keller’s conference Matem´aticas del epacio-tiempo was held at the Uni-
versity of Mexico in 1981, and Chisholm must have known about it because
he invited Keller to his. It did not have the impact of Chisholm’s, except on
me, as it was my ﬁrst invitation as invited speaker. So I prepared a major
paper on spinor calculation of scattering amplitudes in “Real Dirac Theory.”
Understandably, the response was disappointing, but Keller must have sym-
pathized, because he took steps to rectify it 10 years later.
In 1991 Keller founded the journal Advances in Applied Cliﬀord Alge-
bras and republished my paper [29] in the ﬁrst issue. Keller served as editor
until his death in 2011, and successfully shepherded the journal to achieve
international recognition, taking care to maintain its interdisciplinary char-
acter, especially to foster interaction between physics and mathematics. The
Journal provided a crucial venue for publishing work in emerging disciplines
involving Cliﬀord algebra. Together with the regular conferences it helped
deﬁne those disciplines and give them cohesion.
Pertti Lounesto’s service as a connector was quite diﬀerent. He stud-
ied signiﬁcant publications on Cliﬀord algebra with great care, then invited
himself to visit many of the authors to discuss their work in person. On two
occasions he traveled all the way from Finland to stay with me in Arizona
for up to a month. He came prepared to discuss and argue about details in
my books and papers. He pointed out many deﬁciencies and even mistakes
in my arguments, though nothing, I am happy to say, that was not easily
corrected. He persisted in this throughout the years with a kind of brutal
honesty. It was diﬃcult not to feel some resentment at being singled out for
such persistent nitpicking. Eventually I learned that I was not alone in this.
He did it to everyone. He even set up a web site with a huge list of mistakes
by many authors, some very prominent. I confess some relief in seeing that
my oﬀences did not stand out as particularly egregious. I recognized all this
as an expression of Pertti’s uncompromising search for mathematical truth
and respect for the work of others. Indeed, Pertti acquired a well-deserved
reputation as the (conscience) policeman of the Cliﬀord algebra community!
370
D. Hestenes
Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras
Pertti ﬁrst contacted me about STA and Marcel Riesz in 1979, when
he was ﬁnishing up his doctoral thesis. His ﬁrst extended visit to Arizona
in 1982 was especially productive. From my studies in celestial mechanics I
knew about the celebrated Kustaanheimo–Stiefel regularization of the New-
tonian two body problem, and I suspected it could be signiﬁcantly simpliﬁed
with GA. As Kustaanheimo was Finnish and Pertti knew him personally, I
suggested that we work together on that. It turned out to be surprisingly
easy. I set us up in separate oﬃces at ASU so we could work independently
and then compare results. I had the problem completely solved and written
up in just two days while he had nothing. Of course, I had a huge advan-
tage with all my background in classical mechanics. He spent a whole day
meticulously studying the manuscript and proposing changes, which we then
argued about at length. The net result was that he convinced me to change
only a single sentence. I submitted the paper for publication immediately,
and it was in print within a year [43]. It was a paper we could be proud of.
I was comfortable including Pertti as coauthor, because I would never have
written it without the stimulus of his visit. But I suspect Pertti was privately
embarrassed by the whole incident, as he never spoke of it again, and I don’t
believe he ever listed the paper among his publications.
10. Inﬂuence of Marcel Riesz (1886–1969)
Lounesto provided a great service to mathematicians by informing them
about Marcel Riesz’s great 1958 lecture notes on Cliﬀord Algebra, which
could easily have been lost because they were not formally published. Though
he learned about the notes from my STA book where I had incorporated
and extended the main ideas, Lounesto, as always, sought access to original
sources. He then became the main messenger informing other mathematicians
about Riesz’s lectures, which had, in fact, been dismissed with little interest
in Mathematical Reviews [58]. In 1985 at Kent he met E. Folke Bolinder,
who had heard Riesz’s lectures in person, and together they got the notes
published [54].
Actually, Riesz’s most ambitious work with Cliﬀord algebra is in a mas-
sive paper on integral operators and the Cauchy problem [52], which has been
republished in his collected papers [53]. It should be classiﬁed, today, as a
contribution to “Cliﬀord Analysis,” though it predates that ﬁeld by decades.
Indeed, I rank it as one of the most signiﬁcant contributions to ﬁeld, though,
as far as I know, no one in the ﬁeld has even referenced it. I hope this remark
will induce someone to take a look. All that aside, I believe that Riesz’s main
impact on mathematics will come implicitly through his contribution to the
evolution of geometric algebra.
Eventually, Lounesto followed publication of Riesz’s lectures with his
own book on Cliﬀord Algebras and Spinors [48]. He thoroughly develops the
geometric approach to Cliﬀord Algebras, spinors, idempotents and ideals with
a good survey of the literature and many examples. Among many other good
ideas, he does me the honor of implicitly adopting and explicitly recounting
Vol. 27 (2017)
The Genesis of Geometric Algebra
371
many details from my work. In particular, he gives an accurate account of
my operator approach to spinors, which, as we have seen, dispenses with
ideals in Dirac theory. Unaccountably, he blunders in attributing the source
of my idea to Paul Kustaanheimo, whom I had never heard of until I studied
celestial mechanics. I should add that he does not appreciate the “spacetime
split,” so his treatment of electrodynamics is unnecessarily clumsy, which
left him unprepared for the coming revolution brought on by the “Conformal
Split.” Moreover, like the rest of the mathematics community, he fails to
integrate CA with diﬀerential forms. Lounesto’s book has not had the impact
it deserves in the mathematics community. Though often cited, it is seldom
appreciated.
11. Culmination of Spacetime Algebra
I spent the fall of my 1987–1988 sabbatical year at Boston University pursu-
ing my new interest in neural network modeling [34] at Steven Grossberg’s
Center for Neural Systems. My spring was spent at Kent University hosted
by Chisholm. This set initial conditions for a momentous conﬂuence of world
lines in the summer.
I got to know Cambridge Astronomer Steve Gull from many encounters
at summer conferences on Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods, which,
led by E. T. Jaynes, attracted outstanding researchers on information theory
and statistics in disciplines ranging from physics to economics and artiﬁcial
intelligence. Steve himself had already started a revolution in astronomy data
analysis that continues to this day, and he was a dominant voice in all dis-
cussions and disputes at the MaxEnt conferences. He had arranged to hold
the conference at Cambridge that summer.
Steve happened to be sitting next to me at the conference banquet
when a mysterious note was delivered to me on a plate. When Steve asked
me what it was about I rebuﬀed him saying he wouldn’t be interested. He
kept pestering me as we walked out until I revealed that the note came from
Anthony Lasenby. That just piqued his interest even more, but I kept the
note conﬁdential.
Before I left on my sabbatical, an astronomer colleague, David Burstein,
gave me Lasenby’s name as someone at Cambridge interested in my spacetime
algebra. So I looked up Lasenby when I arrived at Cambridge that summer.
He told me the full story about his encounter with Burstein when we met.
Lasenby was intrigued by my book Space Time Algebra, after a copy
was given to him by a retiring colleague. Burstein was visiting the famous
Cambridge Institute of Astronomy when they met at tea, and the conver-
sation went something like this: “I see you are from Arizona State Univer-
sity, then you must know David Hestenes.” Surprised that anyone at Cam-
bridge would know my name, Burstein responded “Yes, why do you ask?”
Lasenby answered, “Because he wrote the great little book Space Time Al-
gebra.” Whereupon Burstein exclaimed, “You mean it’s good!”
372
D. Hestenes
Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras
When I met Lasenby I told him about what I had been doing since the
STA was published and gave him my two papers from the Chisholm confer-
ence, which surveyed the aims and means of my two pronged research program
in geometric calculus [33] and quantum mechanics [31]. My generalization of
Cauchy’s integral formula grabbed Lasenby’s attention immediately, because
he was teaching complex variable theory at the time.
Soon after I returned to Arizona I got a postcard from Steve Gull with
just one word inscribed: WOW!
Steve had buttonholed Anthony the next day and they dug into my
papers immediately. They were both astronomers and close colleagues. But
they were not like my astronomer colleagues, who couldn’t care less about the
niceties of mathematical physics. They were radio astronomers. And I learned
from them that radio astronomers are physicists ﬁrst and astronomers second.
Indeed, they were theoretical physicists—“bloody theoreticians,” as Martin
Ryle, the father of radio astronomy respectfully called them.
Steve and Anthony enlisted graduate student Chris Doran, and the
three of them dug into Geometric Algebra with unprecedented fervor that
generated scores of papers and a steady stream of dissertations by graduate
students at Cavendish Laboratory—I call that period 1988–1998 “the Cam-
bridge decade.” It was capped by publication of their epochal Gauge Theory
Gravity [46], to my mind, one of the most profound contributions to General
Relativity ever.
That brought the STA phase in GA development full circle. I have re-
viewed the key ideas and mathematical details for the whole phase in a coher-
ent series of three papers: [36–38] Doran and Lasenby give a more complete
account in their book Geometric Algebra for Physicists [12].
A spectacular new phase in GA development began suddenly with the
introduction of Conformal Geometric Algebra (CGA) [35] at the GA confer-
ence in Ixtapa Mexico. Call it the CGA phase. CGA enables direct (coordinate-
free) algebraic manipulation of geometric objects like lines, spheres and planes.
It has many applications in engineering and computer science, especially in
robotics and computer graphics. From the beginning, development of such ap-
plications has been led by Hongbo Li, Leo Dorst, Joan Lasenby and Eduardo
Bayro-Corrochano.
This is a good place for me to sign oﬀmy historical remarks with ref-
erence to a broader survey [41]. Up to the new millenium I believe I knew
about every published paper on GA. Since that time, GA and CGA have so
proliferated that I often encounter names of authors I have never heard of.
I take that as evidence that GA will continue to ﬂourish without my input.
Satisfying closure on a lifelong endeavor!
Let me conclude with some observations on the sociology of geometric
algebra.
Developments in CGA have been completely overlooked by mathemati-
cians. An explanation for this can be found in the conceptual diﬀerence that
underlies the superﬁcially synonymous terms ‘Geometric Algebra’ and ‘Clif-
ford Algebra.’
Vol. 27 (2017)
The Genesis of Geometric Algebra
373
Algebraists these days, especially in France, mostly follow Chevalley [6]
in deﬁning CA using an ideal in tensor algebra associated with a quadratic
form. While that may have certain technical advantages, it neglects geometric
meaning that provides a foundation for rich mathematical structures. To
strict algebraists, CA is just “the algebra of a quadratic form,”—nothing
special, just one more algebra among many others.
In contrast, the geometric approach assigns meaning to the notion of
vector as a directed number by deﬁning an associative product
ab = a · b + a ∧b,
(20)
where
a · b = 1
2(ab + ba)
and
a ∧b = 1
2(ab −ba).
(21)
These equations (actually axioms) provide the essential grammar on which
the language of Geometric Algebra is grounded. Contrary to a mistaken as-
sertion that has become all too common recently, Cliﬀord never wrote down
these equations! Marcel Riesz was the ﬁrst to do that, though with a diﬀer-
ent notation [54]. And Riesz did not emphasize their geometric interpretation.
That emerged with the development of Geometric Algebra as a language for
physics, as we have seen.
“By their fruits ye shall know them.” Mathematicians adhering to the
strict algebraic conception of CA have completely missed the rich geomet-
ric implications of GA, in other words, algebra that ﬂows from geometry.
Besides CGA, they missed the incorporation of Lie groups and Lie algebras
into GA, including versor representations of the classical groups [13] and the
exceptional groups [9].
In contrast to algebraists, specialists in functional analysis, most notably
Marcel Riesz [52], have been led naturally (but tacitly) to the geometric
interpretation of CA. Accordingly, it is in analysis, speciﬁcally in the emerging
ﬁeld of Cliﬀord Analysis, where the unique power of CA has been most evident
and the most mathematical progress has been made.
12. Geometric Algebra for Mathematicians
I have bemoaned the gap between mathematics and physics that grew up
in the last century. As antidote I recommend a strong dose of Geometric
Algebra or, if you will, Geometric Calculus, depending on which aspects of
the subject you wish to emphasize. One great beneﬁt is that GA uniﬁes and
simpliﬁes all aspects of fundamental physics, thereby facilitating access by
mathematicians. A complementary beneﬁt is recognition that it has already
uniﬁed much of mathematics and has potential for much more.
A good place to start treatment is with my friends in Cliﬀord Analysis,
as they are closer to physics than most other branches of mathematics. Over
the years (decades, really) I have tried to convince them that their ﬁeld needs
a makeover in the way it is advertised to physicists and to other mathemati-
cians. They must strengthen and repackage their claims, if they are to elevate
Cliﬀord Analysis from a struggling, minor sub-specialty to a major branch of
374
D. Hestenes
Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras
mainstream mathematics. Here, I argue the case for the last time. First, we
need to be clear on what is at stake.
As we have seen, interest in both Geometric Calculus and Cliﬀord
Analysis expanded rapidly in the 1980s through common workshops and pub-
lication channels. Still, during a coﬀee break at one CA workshop in the 1990s,
I heard one participant refer to the workshop as a kind of “ghetto.” That was
not necessarily a pejorative comment about the quality of participants and
their work, but instead a remark on their isolation from mainstream mathe-
matics. The notion of an “ecological niche” is a better metaphor, I think. In
academic circles niches are essential for incubation of new ideas, for protec-
tion against skepticism and competing ideas until they are mature enough to
stand on their own. Workshops on specialized subjects serve as one kind of
niche, but they cannot support sustained incubation.
Richard Delange is rightfully regarded as the father of Cliﬀord Analysis
[5]. He has done much more than create foundations and prove the central
theorem for the subject. At the Belgium University of Gent, he has created
and sustained a warm academic niche to cultivate the subject and train new
talent. Led by his talented students, most notably Frank Sommen, “Delange’s
Belgium school” has produced a steady stream of quality mathematics for
decades.
The scope and history of Cliﬀord Analysis is comprehensively reviewed
in [10] and, more recently, by Delange himself in [11]. Delange modestly notes
that his seminal discovery was more or less duplicated independently by oth-
ers, but that does not detract from his accomplishment. Multiple discoveries
are more common than singletons, especially when they are important [49].
Moreover, the research program he established to explore implications of the
discovery counts for at least as much. As John Wheeler responded when asked
if publishing ﬁrst is suﬃcient to establish scientiﬁc priority, “No, you have to
convince your colleagues!”
It is worth noting that a self-contained special case of Cliﬀord Analysis
called “Quaternion Analysis” was created independently [57] and is still pre-
sented as an independent subject today [14]. The ﬁne reviews of the subject
just cited make the subtle mistake, common to most quaternion applications,
of failing to discriminate between vectors and bivectors. However, that is eas-
ily remedied with GA [37] in a way that makes the results and techniques
immediately useful to physicists and engineers.
I submit that Cliﬀord Analysis should be advertised as the most natural
and straightforward generalization of classical functional analysis, including
and generalizing all special functions so crucial to practical applications in
physics and engineering. Practitioners may believe this, but the case must be
argued to convince others. Unfortunately, typical presentations of the sub-
ject, indeed, its very name suggests a minor specialty with esoteric concerns
of dubious practical value. I see little eﬀort to connect with the great classics
like Whittaker and Watson [60] that have been bread and butter for physi-
cists. I suppose that the name Cliﬀord Analysis is an established tradition by
now, but let me suggest the descriptive Geometric Function Theory (GFT)
Vol. 27 (2017)
The Genesis of Geometric Algebra
375
as a synonym, at least. The name GFT is already in use in the AMS mathe-
matical classiﬁcation system to designate a branch of complex analysis, but
Cliﬀord Analysis is legitimately regarded as a generalization of that branch,
indeed, a generalization by incorporating more geometry, as is abundantly
evident when regarding it as a branch of Geometric Calculus. The makeover
of Cliﬀord Analysis necessary to identify it with GFT as a branch of GC is
fairly simple to implement.
The essential ﬁrst step in the makeover is recognizing that the so-called
“Dirac operator” is nothing other than the vector derivative, so the name is
a terrible misnomer and must be dispensed with. Indeed, all the fundamen-
tal concepts in mathematics should be designated by descriptive names, and
there is no more fundamental concept in analysis than the “derivative!” We
don’t call the scalar derivative d/dx the “Leibniz operator!” The special vec-
tor derivatives gradient, divergence and curl are not named after Hamilton.
So the general notion of a vector derivative should not be named after Dirac,
who had even less to do with its invention than Hamilton. Of course, the
vector derivative presupposes the algebraic concept of ‘vector’ as deﬁned by
GA, just as the scalar derivative presupposes an algebraic concept of scalar.
Once the essential role of GA in deﬁning the concept of vector and
vector derivative is recognized, the embedding of Cliﬀord Analysis as GFT
in GC is straightforward. Here are some of the advantages:
Integration with diﬀerential forms: The entire calculus of diﬀerential
forms in GC is built around the vector derivative, so no distinct concept
of “exterior derivative” is needed, and the integral theorems are manifestly
complementary to the vector derivative.
Connection to physics and engineering: Facilitated by the smooth embedding
of STA in GC.
Connection to diﬀerential geometry: Facilitated by constructing diﬀerential
operators from the vector derivative.
Integration of complex analysis with real analysis: Facilitated by reduction
to real variables (vectors and multivectors as well as scalars). Integrating
analytic function theory of several complex variables into Cliﬀord Analysis
still faces problems [55]. GC can help.
New possibilities: For example, GA enables unique (possibly optimal) rep-
resentation of the mixed quantum states that are fundamental to quantum
computation [17]. Therein lie new opportunities for functional analysis.
The ultimate: Of course, the ultimate advantage (or goal, if you will) of inte-
grating Cliﬀord Analysis into Geometric Calculus is contributing to uniﬁca-
tion of mathematics.
13. Geometric Algebra for the Future
Geometric Algebra simpliﬁes and uniﬁes mathematics and physics at every
level from the most elementary to the most advanced [37]. These facts are
undeniable.
376
D. Hestenes
Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras
“But, if GA is so good,” I have often been asked, “why is it not more
widely used?” I can only reply, “Its time will come!”
The published GA literature is more than suﬃcient to support instruc-
tion with GA at intermediate and advanced levels in physics, mathematics,
engineering and computer science. Though few faculty are conversant with
GA now, most could easily learn what they need while teaching.
At the introductory level GA textbooks and teacher training will be
necessary before GA can be widely taught in the schools. There is steady
progress in this direction, but funding is needed to accelerate it.
Malcolm Gladwell [15] has discussed social conditions for a “tipping
point” when the spread of an idea suddenly goes viral.
Place your bets now on a Tipping Point for Geometric Algebra!
Open Access.
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Com-
mons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes
were made.
References
[1] Arnold,
V.I.:
On
Teaching
Mathematics.
Paris
(1997).
http://pauli.
uni-muenster.de/∼munsteg/arnold.html
[2] Artin, E.: Geometric Algebra. Wiley, New York (1957)
[3] Boudet, R.: Relativistic Transitions in the Hydrogenic Atoms. Springer,
Berlin (2009)
[4] Boudet, R.: Quantum Mechanics in the Geometry of Space-Time. Springer,
Berlin (2011)
[5] Brackx, F., Chisholm, J.S.R., Souchek, V.: Cliﬀord Analysis and its Applica-
tions. Kluwer, Dordrecht (2001)
[6] Chevalley, C.: Algebraic Theory of Spinors. Columbia University Press, New
York (1955)
[7] Chisholm, J.S.R., Common, A.K.: Cliﬀord Algebras and their Applications in
Mathematical Physics. Reidel, Dordrecht (1986)
[8] Cliﬀord, W.K.: Mathematical Papers. Chelsea, New York (1968). Reprint of
the 1882 edition edited by Robert Tucker
[9] Dechant, P.: Cliﬀord algebra is the natural framework for root systems and
Coxeter groups. Group theory: Coxeter, conformal and modular groups. Clif-
ford Anal. Appl. 25, 1–12 (2015)
[10] Delange, R., Brackx, F., Sommen, F.: Cliﬀord Analysis. Pitman, Boston
(1982)
[11] Delanghe, R.: Cliﬀord Analysis: History and Perspective. Comput. Methods
Funct. Theory 1, 107–153 (2001)
[12] Doran, C., Lasenby, A.: Geometric Algebra for Physicists. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge (2003)
Vol. 27 (2017)
The Genesis of Geometric Algebra
377
[13] Doran, C., Hestenes, D., Sommen, F., Van Acker, N.: Lie groups as spin
groups. J. Math. Phys. 34, 3642–3669 (1993)
[14] Fokas, A., Pinotsis, D.: Quaternions, evaluation of integrals and boundary value
problems. Comput. Methods Funct. Theory. 7(2), 443–476 (2007)
[15] Gladwell, M.: The Tipping Point. Back Bay Books, New York (2000)
[16] Gurtler, R., Hestenes, D.: Consistency in the formulation of the Dirac, Pauli
and Schr¨odinger theories. J. Math. Phys. 16, 573–584 (1975)
[17] Havel, T.F., Doran, C.: Geometric algebra in quantum information process-
ing. Contemp. Math. 305, 81–100 (2002)
[18] Hestenes, D.: Geometric Calculus and Elementary Particles. University of Cal-
ifornia at Los Angeles, doctoral thesis (1963)
[19] Hestenes, D.: Space Time Algebra. Gordon and Breach, New York (1966)
[20] Hestenes, D.: Space Time Algebra, 2nd edn. Birkh¨auser, New York (2015)
[21] Hestenes, M.R.: Calculus of Variations and Optimal Control. Wiley, New
York (1966)
[22] Hestenes, D.: Real Spinor Fields. J. Math. Phys. 8, 798–808 (1967)
[23] Hestenes, D.: Multivector calculus. J. Math. Anal. Appl. 24, 313–325 (1968)
[24] Hestenes, D.: Multivector functions. J. Math. Anal. Appl. 24, 467–473 (1968)
[25] Hestenes, D., Gurtler, R.: Local observables in quantum theory. J. Math.
Phys. 39, 1028 (1971)
[26] Hestenes, D.: Local observables in the Dirac theory. J. Math. Phys. 14, 893–
905 (1973)
[27] Hestenes, D.: Spin and uncertainty in the interpretation of quantum mechan-
ics. Am. J. Phys. 47, 399–415 (1979)
[28] Hestenes, M.R.: Conjugate Direction Methods in Optimization. Springer, New
York (1980)
[29] Hestenes, D.: Geometry of the Dirac theory. In: Keller, J. (ed.) A Symposium
on the Mathematics of Physical Space-Time, pp. 67–96. Facultad de Quimica,
Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico, Mexico City (1981)
[30] Hestenes, D.: Space-time structure of weak and electromagnetic interac-
tions. Found. Phys. 12, 153–168 (1982)
[31] Hestenes, D.: Cliﬀord algebra and the interpretation of quantum mechanics.
In: Chisholm, J.S.R., Common, A.K. (eds.) Cliﬀord Algebras and Their Ap-
plications in Mathematical Physics, pp. 321–346. Reidel, Dordrecht/Boston
(1986)
[32] Hestenes, D.: New Foundations for Classical Mechanics. Kluwer, Dor-
drecht/Boston (1986)
[33] Hestenes, D.: A uniﬁed language for mathematics and physics. In: Chisholm,
J.S.R., Common, A.K. (eds.) Cliﬀord Algebras and Their Applications in
Mathematical Physics, pp. 1–23. Reidel, Dordrecht/Boston (1986)
[34] Hestenes, D.: How the brain works: the next great scientiﬁc revolution. In:
Smith, C.R., Erickson, G.J. (eds.) Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Spectral
Analysis and Estimation Problems, pp. 173–205. Reidel, Dordrecht/Boston
(1987)
[35] Hestenes, D.: Old wine in new bottles: a new algebraic framework for com-
putational geometry. In: Bayro-Corrochano, E., Sobczyk, G. (eds.) Advances
378
D. Hestenes
Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras
in Geometric Algebra with Applications in Science and Engineering, pp. 1–14.
Birkh¨auser, Boston (2001)
[36] Hestenes, D.: Spacetime physics with geometric algebra. Am. J. Phys. 71, 691–
704 (2003)
[37] Hestenes, D.: Oersted Medal Lecture 2002: Reforming the Mathematical Lan-
guage of Physics. Am. J. Phys. 71, 104–121 (2003)
[38] Hestenes,
D.:
Gauge
theory
gravity
with
geometric
calculus.
Found.
Phys. 36, 903–970 (2006)
[39] Hestenes, D.: Modeling theory for math and science education. In: Lesh, R.,
Galbraith, P., Hines, C., Hurford, A. (eds.) Modeling Students’ Mathematical
Competencies. Springer, New York (2008)
[40] Hestenes, D.: Gauge gravity and electroweak theory. In: Kleinert, H., Jantzen,
R.T., Ruﬃ, R. (eds.) Proceedings of the Eleventh Marcel Grossmann Meeting
on General Relativity, pp. 629–647. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (2008)
[41] Hestenes, D.: Grassmann’s legacy. In: Petsche, H.-J., Lewis, A., Liesen, J.,
Russ, S. (eds.) From Past to Future: Grassmann’s Work in Context. Birkh¨auser,
Berlin (2011). http://geocalc.clas.asu.edu/html/Overview.html
[42] Hestenes, D., Jaynes, E.T.: Papers on probability, statistics and statistical
physics. Found. Phys. 14, 187–191 (1984)
[43] Hestenes, D., Lounesto, P.: Geometry of spinor regularization. Celest.
Mech. 30, 171–179 (1983)
[44] Hestenes, D., Sobczyk, G.: Cliﬀord Algebra to Geometric Calculus, a Uniﬁed
Language for Mathematics and Physics. Kluwer, Dordrecht/Boston (1984)
[45] Jaynes, E.T.: Probability Theory: The Logic of Science. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge (2003)
[46] Lasenby, A., Doran, C., Gull, S.: Gravity, gauge theories and geometric algebra.
Philos. Trans. R. Lond. A 355, 487–582 (1998)
[47] Lipschitz, R.: Principes d’un calcul alg´ebrique qui contient comme esp`eces
particuli`eres le calcul des quantit´es imaginaires et des quaternions. C. R. Acad.
Sci. Paris 91, 619–621, 660–664 (1880)
[48] Lounesto, P.: Cliﬀord Algebras and Spinors. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge (1997)
[49] Merton, R.K.: Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investiga-
tions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1973)
[50] O’Neill, B.: Elementary Diﬀerential Geometry. Academic Press, New York
(1966). Now free online
[51] Oziewicz, Z.: In Memoriam Jaime Keller (1936–2011). Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Al-
gebras 25, 1–12 (2001)
[52] Riesz, M.: L’integral de Riemann–Liouville et le Probl`eme de Cauchy. Acta
Math. 81, 1–223 (1949)
[53] Riesz, M.: Marcel Riesz: Collected Papers. Springer, Berlin (1988). Edited by
L. Garding and L. H¨ormander
[54] Riesz, M.: Cliﬀord Numbers and Spinors. Kluwer, Dordrecht/Boston (1993).
Reprint of Riesz’s lectures at the University of Maryland. Edited by E. Folke
Bolinder and Pertti Lounesto (1958)
[55] Rocha-Chavez, R., Shapiro, M., Sommen, F.: Integral theorems for functions
and diﬀerential forms in C(m). Chapman & Hall, Boca Raton (2002)
Vol. 27 (2017)
The Genesis of Geometric Algebra
379
[56] Schroedinger, E.: Spacetime Structure. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge (1950)
[57] Sudbury, A.: Quaternion analysis. Math. Proc. Camb. Philos. Soc. 85, 199–
225 (1979)
[58] Tits, J.L.: Review of “Cliﬀord Numbers and Spinors” by Marcel Riesz. Math.
Rev. 31, 6177 (1966)
[59] Vrbik, J.: New Methods of Celestial Mechanics. Bentham ebooks (2010)
[60] Whittaker, E.T., Watson, G.N.: A Course on Modern Analysis, 4th edn. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge (1952)
David Hestenes
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287
USA
e-mail: hestenes@asu.edu
Received: March 17, 2016.
Accepted: March 30, 2016.
