Oersted Medal Lecture 2002: Reforming
the Mathematical Language of Physics
David Hestenes
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287-1504
The connection between physics teaching and research at its deepest level
can be illuminated by Physics Education Research (PER). For students and
scientists alike, what they know and learn about physics is profoundly shaped
by the conceptual tools at their command. Physicists employ a miscellaneous
assortment of mathematical tools in ways that contribute to a fragmenta-
tion of knowledge.
We can do better!
Research on the design and use of
mathematical systems provides a guide for designing a uniﬁed mathemati-
cal language for the whole of physics that facilitates learning and enhances
physical insight. This has produced a comprehensive language called Geo-
metric Algebra, which I introduce with emphasis on how it simpliﬁes and
integrates classical and quantum physics. Introducing research-based re-
form into a conservative physics curriculum is a challenge for the emerging
PER community. Join the fun!
I. Introduction
The relation between teaching and research has been a perennial theme in
academia as well as the Oersted Lectures, with no apparent progress on re-
solving the issues. Physics Education Research (PER) puts the whole matter
into new light, for PER makes teaching itself a subject of research. This shifts
attention to the relation of education research to scientiﬁc research as the central
issue.
To many, the research domain of PER is exclusively pedagogical. Course
content is taken as given, so the research problem is how to teach it most eﬀec-
tively. This approach to PER has produced valuable insights and useful results.
However, it ignores the possibility of improving pedagogy by reconstructing
course content. Obviously, a deep knowledge of physics is needed to pull oﬀ
anything more than cosmetic reconstruction. It is here, I contend, in addressing
the nature and structure of scientiﬁc subject matter, that PER and scientiﬁc
research overlap and enrich one another with complementary perspectives.
The main concern of my own PER has been to develop and validate a sci-
entiﬁc Theory of Instruction to serve as a reliable guide to improving physics
teaching. To say the least, many physicists are dubious about the possibility.
Even the late Arnold Arons, patron saint of PER, addressed a recent AAPT
session with a stern warning against any claims of educational theory. Against
this backdrop of skepticism, I will outline for you a system of general principles
that have guided my eﬀorts in PER. With suﬃcient elaboration (much of which
1
already exists in the published literature), I believe that these principles provide
quite an adequate Theory of Instruction.
Like any other scientiﬁc theory, a Theory of Instruction must be validated by
testing its consequences. This has embroiled me more than I like in developing
suitable instruments to assess student learning. With the help of these instru-
ments, the Modeling Instruction Program has amassed a large body of empirical
evidence that I believe supports my instructional theory. We cannot review that
evidence here, but I hope to convince you with theoretical arguments.
A brief account of my Theory of Instruction sets the stage for the main
subject of my lecture: a constructive critique of the mathematical language used
in physics with an introduction to a uniﬁed language that has been developed
over the last forty years to replace it.
The generic name for that language
is Geometric Algebra (GA). My purpose here is to explain how GA simpliﬁes
and clariﬁes the structure of physics, and thereby convince you of its immense
implications for physics instruction at all grade levels.
I expound it here in
suﬃcient detail to be useful in instruction and research and to provide an entre´e
to the published literature.
After explaining the utter simplicity of the GA grammar in Section V, I
explicate the following unique features of the mathematical language:
(1) GA seamlessly integrates the properties of vectors and complex numbers
to enable a completely coordinate-free treatment of 2D physics.
(2) GA articulates seamlessly with standard vector algebra to enable easy
contact with standard literature and mathematical methods.
(3) GA Reduces “grad, div, curl and all that” to a single vector derivative
that, among other things, combines the standard set of four Maxwell equations
into a single equation and provides new methods to solve it.
(4) The GA formulation of spinors facilitates the treatment of rotations and
rotational dynamics in both classical and quantum mechanics without coordi-
nates or matrices.
(5) GA provides fresh insights into the geometric structure of quantum me-
chanics with implications for its physical interpretation.
All of this generalizes smoothly to a completely coordinate-free language for
spacetime physics and general relativity to be introduced in subsequent papers.
The development of GA has been a central theme of my own research in
theoretical physics and mathematics. I confess that it has profoundly inﬂuenced
my thinking about PER all along, though this is the ﬁrst time that I have made
it public. I have refrained from mentioning it before, because I feared that my
ideas were too radical to be assimilated by most physicists. Today I am coming
out of the closet, so to speak, because I feel that the PER community has reached
a new level of maturity. My suggestions for reform are oﬀered as a challenge
to the physics community at large and to the PER community in particular.
The challenge is to seriously consider the design and use of mathematics as an
important subject for PER. No doubt many of you are wondering why, if GA is
so wonderful – why have you not heard of it before? I address that question in
the penultimate Section by discussing the reception of GA and similar reforms
by the physics community and their bearing on prospects for incorporating GA
2
into the physics curriculum. This opens up deep issues about the assimilation
of new ideas – issues that are ordinarily studied by historians, but, I maintain,
are worthy subjects for PER as well.
II. Five Principles of Learning
I submit that the common denominator of teaching and research is learning
– learning by students on the one hand – learning by scientists on the other.
Psychologists distinguish several kinds of learning. Without getting into the
subtleties in the concept of “concept,” I use the term “conceptual learning” for
the type of learning that concerns us here, especially to distinguish it from “rote
learning.” Here follows a brief discussion of ﬁve general principles of conceptual
learning that I have incorporated into my instructional theory and applied re-
peatedly in the design of instruction:
1. Conceptual learning is a creative act.
This is the crux of the so-called constructivist revolution in education, most
succinctly captured in Piaget’s maxim: “To understand is to invent!”1 Its mean-
ing is best conveyed by an example: For a student to learn Newtonian physics is
a creative act comparable to Newton’s original invention. The main diﬀerence
is that the student has stronger hints than Newton did. The conceptual tran-
sition from the student’s naive physics to the Newtonian system recapitulates
one of the great scientiﬁc revolutions, rewriting the codebook of the student’s
experience. This perspective has greatly increased my respect for the creative
powers of individual students. It is antidote for the elitist view that creativity
is the special gift of a few geniuses.
2. Conceptual learning is systemic.
This means that concepts derive their meaning from their place in a co-
herent conceptual system. For example, the Newtonian concept of force is a
multidimensional concept that derives its meaning from the whole Newtonian
system.2 Consequently, instruction that promotes coordinated use of Newton’s
Laws should be more eﬀective than a piecemeal approach that concentrates on
teaching each of Newton’s Laws separately.
3. Conceptual learning depends on context.
This includes social and intellectual context. It follows that a central problem
in the design of instruction is to create a classroom environment that optimizes
student opportunities for systemic learning of targeted concepts.3 The context
for scientiﬁc research is equally important, and it is relevant to the organization
and management of research teams and institutes.
4.
The quality of learning is critically dependent on conceptual
tools at the learner’s command.
The design of tools to optimize learning is therefore an important subject
for PER. As every physical theory is grounded in mathematics, the design of
math tools is especially important. Much more on that below.
3
5. Expert learning requires deliberate practice with critical feed-
back.
There is substantial evidence that practice does not signiﬁcantly improve
intellectual performance unless it is guided by critical feedback and deliberate
attempts to improve.4
Students waste an enormous amount of time in rote
study that does not satisfy this principle.
I believe that all ﬁve principles are essential to eﬀective learning and instruc-
tional design, though they are seldom invoked explicitly, and many eﬀorts at
educational reform founder because of insuﬃcient attention to one or more of
them. The terms “concept” and “conceptual learning” are often tossed about
quite cavalierly in courses with names like “Conceptual Physics.” In my expe-
rience, such courses fall far short of satisfying the above learning principles, so
I am skeptical of claims that they are successful in teaching physics concepts
without mathematics.
The degree to which physics concepts are essentially
mathematical is a deep problem for PER.
I should attach a warning to the First (Constructivist) Learning Principle.
There are many brands of constructivism, diﬀering in the theoretical context
aﬀorded to the constructivist principle. An extreme brand called “radical con-
structivism” asserts that constructed knowledge is peculiar to an individual’s
experience, so it denies the possibility of objective knowledge. This has radi-
calized the constructivist revolution in many circles and drawn severe criticism
from scientists.5 I see the crux of the issue in the fact that the constructivist
principle does not specify how knowledge is constructed.
When this gap is
closed with the other learning principles and scientiﬁc standards for evidence
and inference, we have a brand that I call scientiﬁc constructivism.
I see the ﬁve Learning Principles as equally applicable to the conduct of
research and to the design of instruction. They support the popular goal of
“teaching the student to think like a scientist.” However, they are still too
vague for detailed instructional design. For that we need to know what counts
as a scientiﬁc concept, a subject addressed in the next Section.
III. Modeling Theory
Modeling Theory is about the structure and acquisition of scientiﬁc knowledge.
Its central tenet is that scientiﬁc knowledge is created, ﬁrst, by constructing
and validating models to represent structure in real objects and processes, and
second, by organizing models into theories structured by scientiﬁc laws. In other
words, Modeling Theory is a particular brand of scientiﬁc epistemology that
posits models as basic units of scientiﬁc knowledge and modeling (the process
of creating and validating models) as the basic means of knowledge acquisition.
I am not alone in my belief that models and modeling constitute the core
of scientiﬁc knowledge and practice. The same theme is prominent in recent
History and Philosophy of Science, especially in the work of Nancy Nercessian
and Ronald Giere,6 and in some math education research.7 It is also proposed as
a unifying theme for K-12 science education in the National Science Education
4
Standards and the AAAS Project 2061. The Modeling Instruction Project has
led the way in incorporating it into K-12 curriculum and instruction.3
Though I ﬁrst introduced the term “Modeling Theory” in connection with
my Theory of Instruction,8 I have always conceived of it as equally applicable
to scientiﬁc research. In fact, Modeling Theory has been the main mechanism
for transferring what I know about research into designs for instruction.
In so far as Modeling Theory constitutes an adequate epistemology of sci-
ence, it provides a reliable framework for critique of the physics curriculum and
a guide for revising it. From this perspective, I see the standard curriculum as
seriously deﬁcient at all levels from grade school to graduate school. In partic-
ular, the models inherent in the subject matter are seldom clearly delineated.
Textbooks (and students) regularly fail to distinguish between models and their
implications.2 This results in a cascade of student learning diﬃculties. However,
we cannot dwell on that important problem here.
I have discussed Modeling Theory and its instructional implications at some
length elsewhere,2,8–10 although there is still more to say. The brief account
above suﬃces to set the stage for application to the main subject of this lecture.
Modeling Theory tells us that the primary conceptual tools mentioned in the 4th
Learning Principle are modeling tools. Accordingly, I have devoted considerable
PER eﬀort to classiﬁcation, design, and use of modeling tools for instruction.
Heretofore, emphasis has been on the various kinds of graphs and diagrams used
in physics, including analysis of the information they encode and comparison
with mathematical representations.9,10 All of this was motivated and informed
by my research experience with mathematical modeling.
In the balance of this lecture, I draw my mathematics research into the PER
domain as an example of how PER can and should be concerned with basic
physics research.
IV. Mathematics for Modeling Physical Reality
Mathematics is taken for granted in the physics curriculum—a body of im-
mutable truths to be assimilated and applied. The profound inﬂuence of math-
ematics on our conceptions of the physical world is never analyzed. The pos-
sibility that mathematical tools used today were invented to solve problems in
the past and might not be well suited for current problems is never considered.
I aim to convince you that these issues have immense implications for physics
education and deserve to be the subject of concerted PER.
One does not have to go very deeply into the history of physics to discover
the profound inﬂuence of mathematical invention. Two famous examples will
suﬃce to make the point: The invention of analytic geometry and calculus was
essential to Newton’s creation of classical mechanics.2 The invention of tensor
analysis was essential to Einstein’s creation of the General Theory of Relativity.
Note my use of the terms “invention” and “creation” where others might
have used the term “discovery.” This conforms to the epistemological stance
of Modeling Theory and Einstein himself, who asserted that scientiﬁc theories
5
“cannot be extracted from experience, but must be freely invented.”11 Note also
that Einstein’s assertion amounts to a form of scientiﬁc constructivism in accord
with the Learning Principles in Section II.
The point I wish to make by citing these two examples is that without
essential mathematical concepts the two theories would have been literally in-
conceivable. The mathematical modeling tools we employ at once extend and
limit our ability to conceive the world. Limitations of mathematics are evident
in the fact that the analytic geometry that provides the foundation for classical
mechanics is insuﬃcient for General Relativity. This should alert one to the
possibility of other conceptual limits in the mathematics used by physicists.
Since Newton’s day a variety of diﬀerent symbolic systems have been in-
vented to address problems in diﬀerent contexts. Figure 1 lists nine such systems
in use by physicists today. Few physicists are proﬁcient with all of them, but
each system has advantages over the others in some application domain. For ex-
ample, for applications to rotations, quaternions are demonstrably more eﬃcient
than the vectorial and matrix methods taught in standard physics courses. The
diﬀerence hardly matters in the world of academic exercises, but in the aerospace
industry, for instance, where rotations are bread and butter, engineers opt for
quaternions.
  	



 	


 



 
 




 

	



Fig. 1. Multiple mathematical systems contribute to the fragmentation
of knowledge, though they have a common geometric nexus.
Each of the mathematical systems in Fig. 1 incorporates some aspect of
geometry. Taken together, they constitute a highly redundant system of mul-
tiple representations for geometric concepts that are essential in physics. As a
mathematical language for physics, this Babel of mathematical tongues has the
following defects:
1. Limited access. The ideas, methods and results of theoretical physics
are distributed broadly across these diverse mathematical systems. Since most
physicists are proﬁcient with only a few of the systems, their access to knowledge
formulated in other systems is limited or denied. Of course, this language barrier
is even greater for students.
2. Wasteful redundancy. In many cases, the same information is repre-
6
sented in several diﬀerent systems, but one of them is invariably better suited
than the others for a given application. For example, Goldstein’s textbook on
mechanics12 gives three diﬀerent ways to represent rotations: coordinate matri-
ces, vectors and Pauli spin matrices. The costs in time and eﬀort for translation
between these representations are considerable.
3. Deﬁcient integration. The collection of systems in Fig. 1 is not an
integrated mathematical structure. This is especially awkward in problems that
call for the special features of two or more systems. For, example, vector algebra
and matrices are often awkwardly combined in rigid body mechanics, while Pauli
matrices are used to express equivalent relations in quantum mechanics.
4. Hidden structure. Relations among physical concepts represented in
diﬀerent symbolic systems are diﬃcult to recognize and exploit.
5.
Reduced information density.
The density of information about
physics is reduced by distributing it over several diﬀerent symbolic systems.
Evidently elimination of these defects will make physics easier to learn and
apply. A clue as to how that might be done lies in recognizing that the various
symbolic systems derive geometric interpretations from a common coherent core
of geometric concepts. This suggests that one can create a uniﬁed mathematical
language for physics by designing it to provide an optimal representation of
geometric concepts. In fact, Hermann Grassmann recognized this possibility
and took it a long way more than 150 years ago.13 However, his program to
unify mathematics was forgotten and his mathematical ideas were dispersed,
though many of them reappeared in the several systems of Fig. 1. A century
later the program was reborn, with the harvest of a century of mathematics
and physics to enrich it. This has been the central focus of my own scientiﬁc
research.
Creating a uniﬁed mathematical language for physics is a problem in the
design of mathematical systems.
Here are some general criteria that I have
applied to the design of Geometric Algebra as a solution to that problem:
1. Optimal algebraic encoding of the basic geometric concepts: magni-
tude, direction, sense (or orientation) and dimension.
2. Coordinate-free methods to formulate and solve basic equations of
physics.
3. Optimal uniformity of method across classical, quantum and relativis-
tic theories to make their common structures as explicit as possible.
4. Smooth articulation with widely used alternative systems (Fig. 1) to
facilitate access and transfer of information.
5. Optimal computational eﬃciency. The uniﬁed system must be at
least as eﬃcient as any alternative system in every application.
Obviously, these design criteria ensure built-in beneﬁts of the uniﬁed lan-
guage. In implementing the criteria I deliberately sought out the best available
mathematical ideas and conventions. I found that it was frequently necessary
to modify the mathematics to simplify and clarify the physics.
This led me to coin the dictum: Mathematics is too important to be
left to the mathematicians! I use it to ﬂag the following guiding principle
for Modeling Theory: In the development of any scientiﬁc theory, a
7
major task for theorists is to construct a mathematical language that
optimizes expression of the key ideas and consequences of the theory.
Although existing mathematics should be consulted in this endeavor, it should
not be incorporated without critically evaluating its suitability. I might add that
the process also works in reverse. Modiﬁcation of mathematics for the purposes
of science serves as a stimulus for further development of mathematics. There
are many examples of this eﬀect in the history of physics.
Perhaps the most convincing evidence for validity of a new scientiﬁc theory
is successful prediction of a surprising new phenomenon. Similarly, the most
impressive beneﬁts of Geometric Algebra arise from surprising new insights into
the structure of physics.
The following Sections survey the elements of Geometric Algebra and its
application to core components of the physics curriculum. Many details and
derivations are omitted, as they are available elsewhere. The emphasis is on
highlighting the unique advantages of Geometric Algebra as a uniﬁed mathe-
matical language for physics.
V. Understanding Vectors
A recent study on the use of vectors by introductory physics students summa-
rized the conclusions in two words: “vector avoidance!”14 This state of mind
tends to propagate through the physics curriculum. In some 25 years of graduate
physics teaching, I have noted that perhaps a third of the students seem inca-
pable of reasoning with vectors as abstract elements of a linear space. Rather,
they insist on conceiving a vector as a list of numbers or coordinates. I have
come to regard this concept of vector as a kind of conceptual virus, because it
impedes development of a more general and powerful concept of vector. I call
it the coordinate virus! 15
Once the coordinate virus has been identiﬁed, it becomes evident that the
entire physics curriculum, including most of the textbooks, is infected with the
virus. From my direct experience, I estimate that two thirds of the graduate
students have serious infections, and half of those are so damaged by the virus
that they will never recover. What can be done to control this scourge? I suggest
that universal inoculation with Geometric Algebra could eventually eliminate
the coordinate virus altogether.
I maintain that the origin of the problem lies not so much in pedagogy
as in the mathematics.
The fundamental geometric concept of a vector as
a directed magnitude is not adequately represented in standard mathematics.
The basic deﬁnitions of vector addition and scalar multiplication are essential
to the vector concept but not suﬃcient. To complete the vector concept we
need multiplication rules that enable us to compare directions and magnitudes
of diﬀerent vectors.
8
A. The Geometric Product
I take the standard concept of a real vector space for granted and deﬁne the
geometric product ab for vectors a, b, c by the following rules:
(ab)c = a(bc) ,
associative
(1)
a(b + c) = ab + ac ,
left distributive
(2)
(b + c)a = ba + ca ,
right distributive
(3)
a2 = | a |2 .
contraction
(4)
where | a | is a positive scalar called the magnitude of a, and | a | = 0 implies
that a = 0.
All of these rules should be familiar from ordinary scalar algebra. The main
diﬀerence is absence of a commutative rule. Consequently, left and right dis-
tributive rules must be postulated separately. The contraction rule (4) is pecu-
liar to geometric algebra and distinguishes it from all other associative algebras.
But even this is familiar from ordinary scalar algebra as the relation of a signed
number to its magnitude.
The rules for multiplying vectors are the basic grammar rules for GA, and
they can be applied to vector spaces of any dimension. The power of GA derives
from
• the simplicity of the grammar,
• the geometric meaning of multiplication,
• the way geometry links the algebra to the physical world.
My next task is to elucidate the geometric meaning of vector multiplication.
From the geometric product ab we can deﬁne two new products, a symmetric
inner product
a· b = 1
2(ab + ba) = b·a,
(5)
and an antisymmetric outer product
a ∧b = 1
2(ab −ba) = −b ∧a.
(6)
Therefore, the geometric product has the canonical decomposition
ab = a· b + a ∧b .
(7)
From the contraction rule (4) it is easy to prove that a · b is scalar-valued, so
it can be identiﬁed with the standard Euclidean inner product.
The formal
legitimacy and geometric import of adding scalars to bivectors as well as to
vectors is discussed in Section VIA.
The geometric signiﬁcance of the outer product a ∧b should also be familiar
from the standard vector cross product a × b. The quantity a ∧b is called a
bivector, and it can be interpreted geometrically as an oriented plane segment, as
shown in Fig. 2. It diﬀers from a × b in being intrinsic to the plane containing
a and b, independent of the dimension of any vector space in which the plane
lies.
9
a
b
a
b
=
=
a b
a
b
Fig. 2.
Bivectors a ∧b and b ∧a represent plane segments of op-
posite orientation as speciﬁed by a “parallelogram rule” for drawing the
segments.
From the geometric interpretations of the inner and outer products, we can
infer an interpretation of the geometric product from extreme cases. For or-
thogonal vectors, we have from (5)
a· b = 0
⇐⇒
ab = −ba.
(8)
On the other hand, collinear vectors determine a parallelogram with vanishing
area (Fig. 2), so from (6) we have
a ∧b = 0
⇐⇒
ab = ba.
(9)
Thus, the geometric product ab provides a measure of the relative direction
of the vectors. Commutativity means that the vectors are collinear. Anticom-
mutativity means that they are orthogonal. Multiplication can be reduced to
these extreme cases by introducing an orthonormal basis.
B. Basis and Bivectors
For an orthonormal set of vectors {σ1, σ2, ...}, the multiplicative properties can
be summarized by putting (5) in the form
σi · σj = 1
2(σiσj + σjσi) = δij
(10)
where δij is the usual Kroenecker delta. This relation applies to a Euclidean
vector of any dimension, though for the moment we focus on the 2D case.
A unit bivector i for the plane containing vectors σ1 and σ2 is determined
by the product
i = σ1σ2 = σ1 ∧σ2 = −σ2σ1
(11)
The suggestive symbol i has been chosen because by squaring (11) we ﬁnd that
i2 = −1
(12)
Thus, i is a truly geometric √−1. We shall see that there are others.
From (11) we also ﬁnd that
σ2 = σ1i = −i σ1
and
σ1 = iσ2.
(13)
10
In words, multiplication by i rotates the vectors through a right angle. It follows
that i rotates every vector in the plane in the same way. More generally, it
follows that every unit bivector i satisﬁes (12) and determines a unique plane in
Euclidean space. Each i has two complementary geometric interpretations: It
represents a unique oriented area for the plane, and, as an operator, it represents
an oriented right angle rotation in the plane.
C. Vectors and Complex Numbers
Assigning a geometric interpretation to the geometric product is more subtle
than interpreting inner and outer products — so subtle, in fact, that the ap-
propriate assignment has been generally overlooked to this day. The product of
any pair of unit vectors a, b generates a new kind of entity U called a rotor, as
expressed by the equation
U = ab.
(14)
The relative direction of the two vectors is completely characterized by the
directed arc that relates them (Fig. 3), so we can interpret U as representing
that arc. The name “rotor” is justiﬁed by the fact that U rotates a and b into
each other, as shown by multiplying (14) by vectors to get
b = aU
and
a = Ub .
(15)
Further insight is obtained by noting that
a· b = cos θ
and
a ∧b = i sin θ,
(16)
where θ is the angle from a to b. Accordingly, with the angle dependence made
explicit, the decomposition (7) enables us to write (14) in the form
Uθ = cos θ + i sin θ = ei θ .
(17)
It follows that multiplication by Uθ, as in (15), will rotate any vector in the
i-plane through the angle θ.
This tells us that we should interpret Uθ as a
directed arc of ﬁxed length that can be rotated at will on the unit circle, just as
we interpret a vector a as a directed line segment that can be translated at will
without changing its length or direction (Fig. 4).
.
b
a
.
θ
 Fig. 3. A pair of unit vectors a, b determine a directed arc on the
unit circle that represents their product U = ab. The length of the arc
is (radian measure of) the angle θ between the vectors.
11
.
   a
a
a
Fig. 4. All directed arcs with equivalent angles are represented by a
single rotor Uθ, just as line segments with the same length and direction
are represented by a single vector a.
ϕ
ϕ
θ
θ +
   Fig. 5. The composition of 2D rotations is represented algebraically by
the product of rotors and depicted geometrically by addition of directed
arcs.
With rotors, the composition of 2D rotations is expressed by the rotor prod-
uct
UθUϕ = Uθ+ϕ
(18)
and depicted geometrically in Fig. 5 as addition of directed arcs.
The generalization of all this should be obvious. We can always interpret
the product ab algebraically as a complex number
z = λU = λeiθ = ab,
(19)
with modulus | z | = λ = | a || b |. And we can interpret z geometrically as a
directed arc on a circle of radius | z | (Fig. 6). It might be surprising that this
geometric interpretation never appears in standard books on complex variables.
Be that as it may, the value of the interpretation is greatly enhanced by its use
in geometric algebra.
The connection to vectors via (19) removes a lot of the mystery from complex
numbers and facilitates their application to physics. For example, comparison
of (19) to (7) shows at once that the real and imaginary parts of a complex
number are equivalent to inner and outer products of vectors. The complex
conjugate of (19) is
z† = λU † = λe−i θ = ba,
(20)
which shows that it is equivalent to reversing order in the geometric product.
This can be used to compute the modulus of z in the usual way:
| z |2 = zz† = λ2 = baab = a2b2 = | a |2| b |2
(21)
12
U
.
0
1
λ
   .
0
1
λ
Fig. 6. A complex number z = λU with modulus λ and angle θ can
be interpreted as a directed arc on a circle of radius λ.
Its conjugate
z† = λU † represents an arc with opposite orientation
Anyone who has worked with complex numbers in applications knows that
it is usually best to avoid decomposing them into real and imaginary parts.
Likewise, in GA applications it is usually best practice to work directly with
the geometric product instead of separating it into inner and outer products.
GA gives complex numbers new powers to operate directly on vectors. For
example, from (19) and (20) we get
b = a−1z = z†a−1,
(22)
where the multiplicative inverse of vector a is given by
a−1 = 1
a = a
a2 =
a
| a |2 .
(23)
Thus, z rotates and rescales a to get b. This makes it possible to construct and
manipulate vectorial transformations and functions without introducing a basis
or matrices.
This is a good point to pause and note some instructive implications of
what we have established so far. Every physicist knows that complex numbers,
especially equations (17) and (18), are ideal for dealing with plane trigonometry
and 2D rotations. However, students in introductory physics are denied access to
this powerful tool, evidently because it has a reputation for being conceptually
diﬃcult, and class time would be lost by introducing it.
GA removes these
barriers to use of complex numbers by linking them to vectors and giving them
a clear geometric meaning.
GA also makes it possible to formulate and solve 2D physics problems in
terms of vectors without introducing coordinates. Conventional vector algebra
cannot do this, in part because the vector cross product is deﬁned only in 3D.
That is the main reason why coordinate methods dominate introductory physics.
The available math tools are too weak to do otherwise. GA changes all that!
For example, most of the mechanics problems in introductory physics are 2D
problems. Coordinate-free GA solutions for the standard problems are worked
out in my mechanics book.16 Although the treatment there is for a more ad-
vanced course, it can easily be adapted to the introductory level. The essential
GA concepts for that level have already been presented in this section.
13
Will comprehensive use of GA signiﬁcantly enhance student learning in in-
troductory physics?
We have noted theoretical reasons for believing that it
will. To check this out in practice is a job for PER. However, mathematical
reform at the introductory level makes little sense unless it is extended to the
whole physics curriculum. The following sections provide strong justiﬁcation
for doing just that. We shall see how simpliﬁcations at the introductory level
get ampliﬁed to greater simpliﬁcations and surprising insights at the advanced
level.
VI. Classical Physics with Geometric Algebra
This section surveys the fundamentals of GA as a mathematical framework
for classical physics and demonstrates some of its unique advantages. Detailed
applications can be found in the references.
A. Geometric Algebra for Physical Space
The arena for classical physics is a 3D Euclidean vector space P3, which serves
as a model for “Physical Space.” By multiplication and addition the vectors
generate a geometric algebra G3 = G(P3). In particular, a basis for the whole
algebra can be generated from a standard frame {σ1, σ2, σ3}, a righthanded set
of orthonormal vectors.
With multiplication speciﬁed by (10), the standard frame generates a unique
trivector (3-vector) or pseudoscalar
i = σ1σ2σ3,
(24)
and a bivector (2-vector) basis
σ1σ2 = iσ3,
σ2σ3 = iσ1,
σ3σ1 = iσ2.
(25)
Geometric interpretations for the pseudoscalar and bivector basis elements are
depicted in Figs. 7 and 8.
σ2
σ1
σ2
σ2
σ1
σ1
σ2
σ1σ2
σ1
σ3
σ3
σ3
σ3
Fig. 7.
Unit pseudoscalar i represents an oriented unit volume.
The volume is said to be righthanded, because i can be generated from a
righthanded vector basis by the ordered product σ1σ2σ3 = i.
14
σ1
σ1
σ2
σ2
σ2σ3
σ3σ1
σ3
Fig. 8. Unit bivectors representing a basis of directed areas in planes
with orthogonal intersections
The pseudoscalar i has special properties that facilitate applications as well
as articulation with standard vector algebra. It follows from (24) that
i2 = −1,
(26)
and it follows from (25) that every bivector B in G3 is the dual of a vector b as
expressed by
B = ib = bi .
(27)
Thus, the geometric duality operation is simply expressed as multiplication by
the pseudoscalar i. This enables us to write the outer product deﬁned by (6) in
the form
a ∧b = i a × b .
(28)
Thus, the conventional vector cross product a × b is implicitly deﬁned as the
dual of the outer product. Consequently, the fundamental decomposition of the
geometric product (7) can be put in the form
ab = a·b + i a × b .
(29)
This is the deﬁnitive relation among vector products that we need for smooth ar-
ticulation between geometric algebra and standard vector algebra, as is demon-
strated with many examples in my mechanics book.16
The elements in any geometric algebra are called multivectors. The special
properties of i enable us to write any multivector M in G3 in the expanded form
M = α + a + ib + iβ,
(30)
where α and β are scalars and a and b are vectors. The main value of this form
is that it reduces multiplication of multivectors in G3 to multiplication of vec-
tors given by (29). Note that the four terms in (30) are linearly independent, so
scalar, vector, bivector and pseudoscalar parts combine separately under multi-
vector addition, though they are mixed by multiplication. Thus, the Geometric
Algebra G3 is a linear space of dimension 1 + 3 + 3 + 1 = 23 = 8.
The expansion (30) has the formal algebraic structure of a “complex scalar”
α + iβ added to a “complex vector” a + ib, but any physical interpretation
15
attributed to this structure hinges on the geometric meaning of i. The most
important example is the expression of the electromagnetic ﬁeld F in terms of
an electric vector ﬁeld E and a magnetic vector ﬁeld B:
F = E + iB .
(31)
Geometrically, this is a decomposition of F into vector and bivector parts. In
standard vector algebra E is said to be a polar vector while B is an axial vector,
the two kinds of vector being distinguished by a diﬀerence in sign under space
inversion. GA reveals that an axial vector is just a bivector represented by its
dual, so the magnetic ﬁeld in (31) is fully represented by the complete bivector
iB, rather than B alone. Thus GA makes the awkward distinction between
polar and axial vectors unnecessary. The vectors E and B in (31) have the
same behavior under space inversion, but an additional sign change comes from
space inversion of the pseudoscalar.
To facilitate algebraic manipulations, it is convenient to introduce a special
symbol for the operation (called reversion) of reversing the order of multiplica-
tion. The reverse of the geometric product is deﬁned by
(ab)† = ba.
(32)
We noted in (20) that this is equivalent to complex conjugation in 2D. From
(24) we ﬁnd that the reverse of the pseudoscalar is
i† = −i.
(33)
Hence the reverse of an arbitrary multivector in the expanded form (30) is
M † = α + a −ib −iβ,
(34)
The convenience of this operation is illustrated by applying it to the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld F in (31) and using (29) to get
1
2FF † = 1
2(E + iB)(E −iB) = 1
2(E2 + B2) + E × B,
(35)
which is recognized as an expression for the energy and momentum density of
the ﬁeld. Note how this diﬀers from the ﬁeld invariant
F 2 = (E + iB)2 = E2 −B2 + 2i(E·B),
(36)
which is useful for classifying EM ﬁelds into diﬀerent types.
You have probably noticed that the expanded multivector form (30) violates
one of the basic math strictures that is drilled into our students, namely, that
“it is meaningless to add scalars to vectors,” not to mention bivectors and
pseudoscalars.
On the contrary, GA tells us that such addition is not only
geometrically meaningful, it is essential to simplify and unify the language of
physics, as can be seen in many examples that follow.
Shall we say that this stricture against addition of scalars to vectors is a
misconception or conceptual virus that infects the entire physics community?
16
At least it is a design ﬂaw in standard vector algebra that has been almost
universally overlooked. As we have just seen, elimination of the ﬂaw enables us
to combine electric and magnetic ﬁelds into a single electromagnetic ﬁeld. And
we shall see below how it enables us to construct spinors from vectors (contrary
to the received wisdom that spinors are more basic than vectors)!
B. Reﬂections and Rotations
Rotations play an essential role in the conceptual foundations of physics as well
as in many applications, so our mathematics should be designed to handle them
as eﬃciently as possible. We have noted that conventional treatments employ
an awkward mixture of vector, matrix and spinor or quaternion methods. My
purpose here is to show how GA provides a uniﬁed, coordinate-free treatment
of rotations and reﬂections that leaves nothing to be desired.
The main result is that any orthogonal transformation U can be expressed
in the canonical form16
U x = ±Ux U †,
(37)
where U is a unimodular multivector called a versor, and the sign is the parity
of U, positive for a rotation or negative for a reﬂection. The condition
U †U = 1.
(38)
deﬁnes unimodularity. The underbar notation serves to distinguish the linear
operator U from the versor U that generates it. The great advantage of (37)
is that it reduces the study of linear operators to algebraic properties of their
versors. This is best understood from speciﬁc examples.
The simplest example is reﬂection in a plane with unit normal a (Fig. 9),
x′ = −axa = −a(x⊥+ x∥)a = x⊥−x∥.
(39)
To show how this function works, the vector x has been decomposed on the
right into a parallel component x∥= (x·a)a that commutes with a and an
orthogonal component x⊥= (x ∧a)a that anticommutes with a. As can be
seen below, it is seldom necessary or even advisable to make this decomposition
in applications. The essential point is that the normal vector deﬁning the direc-
tion of a plane also represents a reﬂection in the plane when interpreted as a
versor. A simpler representation for reﬂections is inconceivable, so it must be
the optimal representation for reﬂections in every application, as shown in some
important applications below. Incidentally, the term versor was coined in the
19th century for an operator that can re-verse a direction. Likewise, the term is
used here to indicate a geometric operational interpretation for a multivector.
The reﬂection (39) is not only the simplest example of an orthogonal trans-
formation, but all orthogonal transformations can be generated by reﬂections of
this kind. The main result is expressed by the following theorem: The product
of two reﬂections is a rotation through twice the angle between the normals of
17
a
x
x
x
x
-x
'
Fig. 9. Reﬂection in a plane.
the reﬂecting planes. This important theorem seldom appears in standard text-
books, primarily, I presume, because its expression in conventional formalism is
so awkward as to render it impractical. However, it is an easy consequence of
a second reﬂection applied to (39). Thus, for a plane with unit normal b, we
have
x′′ = −b x′ b = baxab = Ux U †,
(40)
where a new symbol has been introduced for the versor product U = ba. The
theorem is obvious from the geometric construction in Fig. 10. For an algebraic
proof that the result does not depend on the reﬂecting planes, we use (17) to
write
U = ba = cos 1
2θ + i sin 1
2θ = e
1
2 i θ,
(41)
where, anticipating the result from Fig. 9, we denote the angle between a and b
by 1
2θ and the unit bivector for the b ∧a-plane by i. Next, we decompose x into
a component x⊥orthogonal to the i-plane and a component x∥in the plane.
Note that, respectively, the two components commute (anticommute) with i, so
x⊥U † = U †x⊥,
x∥U † = Ux∥.
(42)
Inserting this into (40) with x = x∥+ x⊥, we obtain
x′′ = Ux U † = x⊥+ U 2x∥.
(43)
These equations show how the two-sided multiplication by the versor U picks
out the component of x to be rotated, so we see that one-sided multiplication
works only in 2D. As we learned from our discussion of 2D rotations, the versor
U 2 = ei θ rotates x⊥through angle θ, in agreement with the half-angle choice
in (41).
The great advantage of the canonical form (37) for an orthogonal trans-
formation is that it reduces the composition of orthogonal transformations to
versor multiplication. Thus, composition expressed by the operator equation
U2 U1 = U3
(44)
is reduced to the product of corresponding versors
U2 U1 = U3.
(45)
18
a
b
x
x'
x''
θ
θ
1
2
Fig. 10. Rotation as double reﬂection, depicted in the plane containing
unit normals a, b of the reﬂecting planes.
The orthogonal transformations form a mathematical group with (44) as the
group composition law. The trouble with (44) is that abstract operator algebra
does not provide a way to compute U3 from given U1 and U2. The usual solution
to this problem is to represent the operators by matrices and compute by matrix
multiplication. A much simpler solution is to represent the operators by versors
and compute with the geometric product. We have already seen how the product
of reﬂections represented by U1 = a and U2 = b produces a rotation U3 = ba.
Matrix algebra does not provide such a transparent result.
As is well known, the rotation group is a subgroup of the orthogonal group.
This is expressed by the fact that rotations are represented by unimodular
versors of even parity, for which the term rotor was introduced earlier. The
composition of 2D rotations is described by the rotor equation (18) and depicted
in Fig. 5. Its generalization to composition of 3D rotations in diﬀerent planes
is described algebraically by (45) and depicted geometrically in Fig. 11. This
deserves some explanation.
U
a
c
b
2
U3
U1
Fig. 11. Addition of directed arcs in 3D depicting the product of rotors.
Vectors a, b, c all originate at the center of the sphere.
19
In 3D a rotor is depicted as a directed arc conﬁned to a great circle on the
unit sphere. The product of rotors U1 and U2 is depicted in Fig. 11 by connecting
the corresponding arcs at a point c where the two great circles intersect. This
determines points a = cU1 and b = U2c, so the rotors can be expressed as
products with a common factor,
U1 = ca,
U2 = bc.
(46)
Hence (44) gives us
U3 = U2U1 = (bc)(ca) = ba,
(47)
with the corresponding arc for U3 depicted in Fig. 11. It should not be for-
gotten that the arcs in Fig. 11 depict half-angles of the rotations. The non-
commutativity of rotations is illustrated in Fig. 12, which depicts the construc-
tion of arcs for both U1U2 and U2U1.
U2
U2
U1
U1
U1
U2
U2
U1
Fig. 12. Noncommutativity of rotations depicted in the construction of
directed arcs representing rotor products
Those of you who are familiar with quaternions will have recognized that
they are algebraically equivalent to rotors, so we might as well regard the two
as one and the same. Advantages of the quaternion theory of rotations have
been known for the better part of two centuries, but to this day only a small
number of specialists have been able to exploit them. Geometric algebra makes
them available to everyone by embedding quaternions in a more comprehen-
sive mathematical system. More than that, GA makes a number of signiﬁcant
improvements in quaternion theory — the most important being the integration
of reﬂections with rotations as described above. To make this point more ex-
plicit and emphatic, I describe two important practical applications where the
generation of rotations by reﬂections is essential.
Multiple reﬂections. Consider a light wave (or ray) initially propagating
with direction k and reﬂecting oﬀa sequence of plane surfaces with unit normals
20
a1, a2, . . . , an (Fig. 12). By multiple applications of (39) we ﬁnd that it emerges
with direction
k
k
1
a
n
a
2
a
'
Fig. 13. Multiple reﬂections
k′ = (−1)nan...a2a1k a1a2...an
(48)
The net reﬂection is completely characterized by a single unimodular multivector
U = an...a2a1, which, according to (30), can be reduced to the form U = a+iβ
if n is an odd integer, or U = α + ib if n is even. This is one way that GA
facilitates modeling of the interaction of light with optical devices.
a
x
b
c
=
1
x6
x5
x4
6
x3
3
x2
π
π/
/
Fig. 14. Symmetry vectors for the benzene molecule.
Point Symmetry Groups. Molecules and crystals can be classiﬁed by
their symmetries under reﬂections and rotations in planes through a ﬁxed point.
Despite the increasing importance of this subject in the modern molecular age,
it is addressed only in advanced specialty courses after lengthy mathematical
preparation. GA changes the ground rules drastically, making it possible to
investigate point symmetries without any special preparation as soon as reﬂec-
tions have been introduced. Students can investigate interesting point groups
as exercises in learning the properties of versors. From there it is only a small
step to characterize all the point groups systematically.
21
Fig. 15. Symmetry vectors for the methane molecule.
c
π/3
π/2
2
b
2
a
c'
b
2
'
3
a'
π/4
Fig. 16. Symmetry vectors for crystals with cubic symmetry. Vectors
a, b, c generate reﬂection symmetries. Vectors a′, b′, c′ specify axes of
rotation symmetries.
22
Remarkably, every point symmetry group is generated multiplicatively by
some combination of three unit vectors a, b, c satisfying the versor conditions
(ab)p = (bc)q = (ca)r = −1,
(49)
where {p, q, r} is a set of three integers that characterize the symmetry group.
These conditions describe p-fold, q-fold and r-fold rotation symmetries.
For
example, the set is {6, 2, 2} for the planar benzene molecule (Fig. 14), and
(ab)6 = −1 represents a sixfold rotation that brings all atoms back to their
original positions.
The methane molecule (Fig. 15) has tetrahedral symmetry characterized by
{3, 3, 3}, which speciﬁes the 3-fold symmetry of the tetrahedron faces.
This
particular symmetry cannot be extended to a space-ﬁlling crystal, for which it
can be shown that at least one of the symmetries must be 2-fold.
There are precisely 32 crystallographic point groups distinguished by a small
set of allowed values of p and q in {p, q, 2}. For example, generating vectors
for the case {4, 3, 2} of crystals with cubic symmetry are shown in Fig. 16. A
complete analysis of all the point groups is given elsewhere,17 along with an
extension of GA techniques to handle the 230 space groups.
The point symmetry groups of molecules and crystals are increasing in im-
portance as we enter the age of nanoscience and molecular biology. Yet the
topic remains relegated to specialized courses, no doubt because the standard
treatment is so specialized. However, we have just seen that the GA approach
to reﬂections and rotations brings with it an easy treatment of the point groups
at no extra cost.
This is a good place to summarize with a list of the advantages of the GA
approach to rotations, including some to be explained in subsequent Sections:
1. Coordinate-free formulation and computation.
2. Simple algebraic composition.
3. Geometric depiction of rotors as directed arcs.
4. Rotor products depicted as addition of directed arcs.
5. Integration of rotations and reﬂections in a single method.
6. Eﬃcient parameterizations (see ref.16 for details).
7. Smooth articulation with matrix methods.
8. Rotational kinematics without matrices.
Moreover, the approach generalizes directly to Lorentz transformations, as will
be demonstrated in a subsequent paper.
C. Frames and Rotation Kinematics
Any orthonormal righthanded frame {ek , k = 1, 2, 3} can be obtained from our
standard frame {σk} by a rotation in the canonical form
ek = UσkU †.
(50)
Alternatively, the frames can be related by a rotation matrix
ek = αkjσj.
(51)
23
These two sets of equations can be solved for the matrix elements as a function
of U, with the result
αkj = ek · σj = ⟨UσkU †σj⟩,
(52)
where ⟨...⟩means scalar part. Alternatively, they can be solved for the rotor as
a function of the frames or the matrix.16 One simply forms the quaternion
ψ = 1 + ekσk = 1 + αkjσjσk
(53)
and normalizes to get
U =
ψ
(ψψ†)
1
2 .
(54)
This makes it easy to move back and forth between matrix and rotor representa-
tions of a rotation. We have already seen that the rotor is much to be preferred
for both algebraic computation and geometric interpretation.
Let the frame {ek} represent a set of directions ﬁxed in a rigid body, perhaps
aligned with the principal axes of the inertia tensor. For a moving body the ek =
ek(t) are functions of time, and (50) reduces the description of the rotational
motion to a time dependent rotor U = U(t). By diﬀerentiating the constraint
UU † = 1, it is easy to show that the derivative of U can be put in the form
dU
dt = 1
2ΩU,
(55)
where
Ω= −i ω
(56)
is the rotational (angular) velocity bivector. By diﬀerentiating (50) and using
(55), (56), we derive the familiar equations
dek
dt = ω × ek
(57)
employed in the standard vectorial treatment of rigid body kinematics.
The point of all this is that GA reduces the set of three vectorial equations
(57) to the single rotor equation (55), which is easier to solve and analyze for
given Ω= Ω(t). Speciﬁc solutions for problems in rigid body mechanics are
discussed elsewhere.16 However, the main reason for introducing the classical
rotor equation of motion in this lecture is to show its equivalence to equations
in quantum mechanics given below.
24
D. Maxwell’s Equation
We have seen how electric and magnetic ﬁeld vectors can be combined into a
single multivector ﬁeld
F(x, t) = E(x, t) + iB(x, t)
(58)
representing the complete electromagnetic ﬁeld. Standard vector algebra forces
one to consider electric and magnetic parts separately, and it requires four ﬁeld
equations to describe their coordinated action. GA enables us to put Humpty
Dumpty together and describe the complete electromagnetic ﬁeld by a single
equation. But ﬁrst we need to learn how to diﬀerentiate with respect to the
position vector x.
We can deﬁne the derivative ∇= ∂x with respect to the vector x most
quickly by appealing to your familiarity with the standard concepts of divergence
and curl. Then, since ∇must be a vector operator, we can use (29) to deﬁne
the vector derivative by
∇E = ∇· E + i ∇× E = ∇· E + ∇∧E .
(59)
This shows the divergence and curl as components of a single vector derivative.
Both components are needed to determine the ﬁeld. For example, for the ﬁeld
due to a static charge density ρ = ρ(x), the ﬁeld equation is
∇E = ρ.
(60)
The advantage of this form over the usual separate equations for divergence and
curl is that ∇can be inverted to solve for
E = ∇−1ρ.
(61)
Of course ∇−1 is an integral operator determined by a Green’s function, but GA
provides new insight into such operators. For example, for a source ρ with 2D
symmetry in a localized 2D region R with boundary ∂R, the E ﬁeld is planar
and ∇−1 can be given the explicit form18,19
E(x) = 1
2π

R
| d2x′ |
1
x′ −xρ(x′) +
1
2πi

∂R
1
x′ −xdx′E(x′),
(62)
where i is the unit bivector for the plane. In the absence of sources, the ﬁrst
integral on the right vanishes and the ﬁeld within R is given entirely by a line
integral of its value over the boundary. The resulting equation is precisely equiv-
alent to the celebrated Cauchy integral formula, as is easily shown by changing
to the complex variable z = xa, where a is a ﬁxed unit vector in the plane that
deﬁnes the “real axis” for z. Thus GA automatically incorporates the full power
of complex variable theory into electromagnetic theory. Indeed, formula (62)
generalizes the Cauchy integral to include sources and the generalization can be
extended to 3D with arbitrary sources.18,19 But this is not the place to discuss
such matters.
25
An electromagnetic ﬁeld F = F(x, t) with charge density ρ = ρ(x, t) and
charge current J = J(x, t) as sources is determined by Maxwell’s Equation
 1
c ∂t + ∇

F = ρ −1
c J .
(63)
To show that this is equivalent to the standard set of four equations, we employ
(58), (59) and (30) to separate, respectively, its scalar, vector, bivector, and
pseudoscalar parts:
∇· E = ρ,
(64)
1
c ∂tE −∇× B = −1
c J,
(65)
i 1
c ∂tB + ∇× E = 0,
(66)
i∇· B = 0
(67)
Here we see the standard set of Maxwell’s equations as four geometrically dis-
tinct parts of one equation. Note that this separation into several parts is similar
to separately equating real and imaginary parts in an equation for complex vari-
ables.
Of course, it is preferable to solve and analyze Maxwell’s Equation without
decomposing it into parts. This is especially true for propagating wave solutions.
For example, monochromatic plane waves in a vacuum have solutions with the
familiar form
F(x, t) = fe±i(ωt−k·x).
(68)
What may not be so familiar to physicists is that
F 2 = f 2 = 0
(69)
is required here, the i is the unit pseudoscalar and the two signs in (68) represent
the two states of circular polarization. A more detailed GA treatment of plane
waves was published in this journal three decades ago.20
VII. Real Quantum Mechanics
Schroedinger’s version of quantum mechanics requires that the state of an elec-
tron be represented by a complex wave function ψ = ψ(x, t), and Born added
that the real bilinear function
ρ = ψψ†
(70)
should be interpreted as a probability density for ﬁnding the electron at point
x at time t. This mysterious relation between probability and a complex wave
26
function has stimulated a veritable orgy of philosophical speculation about the
nature of matter and our knowledge of it. Curiously, virtually all philosophizing
about the interpretation of quantum mechanics has been based on Schroedinger
theory, despite the fact that electrons, like all other fermions, are known to
have intrinsic spin. We shall see that that is a serious mistake, for it is only in
a theory with electron spin that one can see why the wave function is complex.
You may wonder why this fact is not common knowledge.
The reason is that the geometric meaning of the wave function lies buried
in the standard matrix version of the Pauli theory.
We shall exhume it by
translating the matrix wave function Ψ into a real spinor ψ in GA where, as
we have seen, every √−1 has a geometric meaning. We discover then that the
√−1 in Schroedinger theory emerges in the real Pauli version as a bivector that
is related to spin in an essential way. In other words, we see that geometry
dictates that spin is not a mere add-on in quantum mechanics, but an essential
feature of fermion wave functions.
By reformulating quantum mechanics in terms of real spinors, we establish
GA as a common mathematical language for quantum mechanics and classical
mechanics as formulated in preceding Sections. This simpliﬁes and clariﬁes the
relation of classical theory to quantum theory. In particular, we ﬁnd that the
spinor wave function operates as a rotor in essentially the same way as rotors in
classical mechanics. This suggests that the bilinear dependence of observables
on the wave function is not unique to quantum mechanics — it is equally natural
in classical mechanics for geometrical reasons.
Though the relation of spin to the unit imaginary was ﬁrst discovered in the
Dirac theory,21,22 it is easiest to see in the Pauli theory. The resulting real spinor
wave equation leads to the surprising conclusion that spin was inadvertently
incorporated into the original Schroedinger equation in the guise of the distinctive
factor √−1¯h. Extension to the Dirac theory will be covered in a sequel to this
paper.
A. Vectors vs. Matrices
No doubt some of you noticed in Section VB the similarity of the basis vectors σi
to the Pauli spin matrices. Indeed, the Pauli algebra is a matrix representation
of the geometric algebra G3. I have co-opted the standard symbols σi for Pauli
matrices to make the correspondence as obvious as possible. To emphasize that
correspondence, I use the same symbols σi for the basis vectors and the Pauli
matrices that represent them.
My purpose is to lay bare some serious misconceptions that complicate quan-
tum mechanics and obscure its relation to classical mechanics. The most basic of
these misconceptions is that the Pauli matrices are intrinsically related to spin.
On the contrary, I claim that their physical signiﬁcance is derived solely from
their correspondence with orthogonal directions in space. The representation of
σi by 2×2 matrices is irrelevant to physics. That being so, it should be possible
to eliminate matrices altogether and make the geometric structure of quantum
mechanics explicit through direct formulation in terms of GA. How to do that
27
is explained below. For the moment, we note the potential for this change in
perspective to bring classical mechanics and quantum mechanics closer together.
Texts on quantum mechanics describe the three σi as a vector σ with ma-
trices for components. They combine σ with an ordinary vector a with scalar
components ai by writing
σ · a = aiσi.
(71)
(sum over repeated indices). Then they derive the identity
σ · a σ · b = a· b I + iσ ·(a × b).
(72)
where I is the identity matrix. This formula relating vector algebra to Pauli
algebra is a prime example of wasteful redundancy in standard physics, for we
know that the two algebras have common geometric content. GA eliminates
this redundancy entirely. Indeed, (72) is the matrix representation of the GA
product formula (29), where it is seen not as a relation between diﬀerent algebras
but between diﬀerent geometric products.
B. Pauli’s Matrix Theory
To set the stage for deriving the GA version of nonrelativistic quantum me-
chanics, a brief review of Pauli’s matrix theory is in order.
To describe an
electron with spin, Pauli generalized Schroedinger’s complex wave function to
a column matrix Ψ with two complex components representing “spin up” and
“spin down” states. The two spin states with Ψ± are eigenstates of a hermitian
spin operator
σ3Ψ± = ±Ψ±.
(73)
A complete set of hermitian spin operators is given by the Pauli matrices
σ1 =

0
1
1
0

,
σ2 =

0
−i′
i′
0

,
σ3 =

1
0
0
−1

,
(74)
where i′ = √−1 is a scalar imaginary with no geometric signiﬁcance, so (as we
shall see) no physical signiﬁcance!
To describe the interaction of electron spin with an external magnetic ﬁeld
B, Pauli added an interaction term to Schroedinger’s equation for his two com-
ponent wave function, with the result
i′¯h ∂tΨ = HS Ψ −e¯h
2mcσ ·BΨ
(75)
where HS is the Schroedinger hamiltonian and σ ·B is as deﬁned in (71). Pauli
inserted the coeﬃcient of the interaction term “by hand,” assuming a gyromag-
netic ratio g = 2 to agree with experiment.
When Dirac derived it shortly
thereafter, the result was regarded as conﬁrmation of the Dirac equation and a
consequence of relativity theory. However, it was realized much later that the
28
coeﬃcient can be derived by mimicking Dirac’s argument in the nonrelativistic
domain, so spin is not a “relativistic phenomenon” after all. The trick is to
deﬁne a momentum operator
σ · p = σ · (−i′¯h∇−e
cA)
(76)
and assume a hamiltonian of the form
HP =
1
2m(σ · p )2 + V (x) .
(77)
When this is expanded with the help of the identity (72), it gives the result
in (75). I do not know who originated this argument, but I learned it from
Feynman, who gave me the impression that he had devised it himself. As we
see below, the deﬁnition (76) of the momentum operator is less mysterious in
GA, where it is apparent that the appearance of σ in it has nothing to do with
spin. Indeed, the “trick” (76) is justiﬁed by GA, where σi appear naturally as
basis for the vector A and the vector derivative ∇.
C. Real Pauli-Schroedinger Theory
This section proves that the Pauli wave function can be represented as a real
spinor (or quaternion) satisfying a real wave equation in the geometric algebra
G3 = G(P3) introduced in Section VI for classical physics. The resulting real
version of Pauli-Schroedinger electron theory is isomorphic to the standard ma-
trix version, but it has a more transparent geometric structure that elucidates
and simpliﬁes physical interpretation and relations to classical mechanics. The
objective here is to develop the “real theory” to the point where it is ready to
be used in applications with no further appeal to the matrix theory, except to
make contact with the literature.
We can extract the “real” version of the Pauli theory from the matrix version
in the following way.23 Consistent with the representation of Pauli matrices (74),
let u be a basis spinor for the “spin-up” eigenstate of σ3, so we can write
σ3u = u,
where
u =

1
0

.
(78)
Then(74) gives us
σ1σ2u = i′u.
(79)
Now write Ψ in the form
Ψ = ψu,
(80)
where ψ is a polynomial in the Pauli matrices. The coeﬃcients in this polynomial
can be taken as real, for if there is a term with an imaginary coeﬃcient, we can
use (79) to replace i′ by multiplication with σ1σ2 on the right side of the term.
29
Furthermore, the polynomial can be taken as an even multivector, for if any
term is odd, then (78) allows us to make it even by multiplying it on the right
by σ3. Therefore, we can assume with complete generality that ψ in (80) is a
real even multivector. Now we can reinterpret the σk in ψ as vectors in GA
instead of matrices.
Thus, we have established a one-to-one correspondence
between Pauli spinors Ψ and even multivectors ψ in GA.
Since the ungeometrical imaginary i′ has been thereby eliminated, I refer to
ψ as a real spinor (or quaternion). Note that ψ has four degrees of freedom, one
for its scalar part and three for its bivector part, as does Ψ in its two complex
matrix components. The big gain in replacing Ψ by ψ is that the latter has a
more transparent geometric interpretation, as shown below.
Now, it is easy to extract a real wave equation for the real spinor wave
function from the matrix equation (75).
Thus we arrive at the real Pauli-
Schroedinger (PS) equation
∂t ψ iσ3¯h = HS ψ −e¯h
2mcB ψσ3,
(81)
where i is now the unit pseudoscalar so iσ3 = σ1σ2, and σ ·B is replaced by
B for reasons explained above. I have inserted Schroedinger’s name here to
emphasize the fact (explained below) that in this real theory the Schroedinger
wave function is the same real spinor, and (81) reduces to the Schroedinger
equation by dropping the last term. In the same way, equations (76) and (77)
can be re-expressed in the real theory, but we will not have need of them below.
The equivalence of (81) to the matrix equation (75) is easily proved by
interpreting (81) as a matrix equation, multiplying on the right by the basis
spinor u and using (78), (79) and (80). Note that the σ3 on the right side of
(81) is essential to make the last term have even parity, for the vector B is odd
while ψ is an even multivector. Thus all terms in (81) are even.
It should be noted that the condition imposed in the Pauli theory by as-
suming that the Pauli spin matrices are hermitian is equivalent to the deﬁnition
(34) of reversion in GA. Thus we see that the standard association of “spin
observables” with hermitian operators amounts to declaring that they represent
vectors. Evidently, this is an assumption about geometry rather than spin —
a critical geometric assumption that has been inadvertently incorporated into
quantum mechanics. Spin must get into the theory some other way. This raises
serious questions about the physical signiﬁcance of the common association of
physical observables with hermitian operators.
The explicit σ3 in equation (81) may make it look less general than (75),
but that is an illusion, because σ3 is an arbitrarily chosen constant vector. It
can be related to any other choice σ′
3 by a constant rotation
σ′
3 = CσkC†,
(82)
Thus, multiplication of (81) on the right by C† gives
(ψσ3)C† = ψC†Cσ3C† = ψ′σ′
3,
(83)
30
where ψ′ = ψC† is the wave function relative to the alternative quantization
axis σ′
3. The matrix analog of this transformation is a change in matrix repre-
sentation for the column spinor Ψ.
D. Interpretation of the Real Wave Function.
Having established equivalence to the standard matrix theory, from now on we
can work with the real theory alone. Our main objective is to establish the
physical meaning of the real wave function ψ = ψ(x, t). Adopting the Born
probability assumption (70), we can write
ψ = ρ
1
2 U,
where
UU † = 1.
(84)
This determines a frame of bilinear “local observables”
ψσkψ† = ρ ek,
(85)
where {σk} is a standard frame and, of course,
ek = UσkU †.
(86)
These observables are invariant under the change in choice of standard frame
ψσkψ† = ψ′σ′
kψ′† deﬁned by (82).
Thus, the wave function determines an
invariant time-dependent ﬁeld of frames {ek(x, t)} attached to each position x.
We show below that
s = 1
2¯h e3 = 1
2¯h Uσ3U †
(87)
can be interpreted as a spin vector, so ρ s is a spin density. Actually, angular
momentum is a bivector quantity, so it is more correct to represent spin by the
bivector
S = i s = ¯h
2 Ui U † = ¯h
2 e1e2,
(88)
where
i ≡iσ3 = σ1σ2
(89)
plays the role of √−1 in the real PS equation (81).
The hidden relation of spin to the imaginary i′ in the matrix theory can be
made more manifest by regarding S = Sijσjσi as a spin operator on the wave
function. Multiplying (88) on the right by (84) we get
S ψ = ψi ¯h
2 .
(90)
Regarding this as a matrix equation, we use (80) and (79) to get
S Ψ = 1
2i′¯h Ψ.
(91)
31
Thus, 1
2i′¯h is the eigenvalue of the “spin operator” S. Otherwise said, the factor
i′¯h in the Pauli matrix equation (75) is a representation of the spin bivector by
its eigenvalue. The eigenvalue is imaginary because the spin tensor Sij = −Sji
is skewsymmetric. We can conclude, therefore, that spin was originally intro-
duced into quantum mechanics with the factor i′¯h in the original Schroedinger
equation.
Spin components sk = s·σ3 = ⟨sσ3⟩are related to conventional matrix
elements by
ρsk = ¯h
2 ⟨σkψσ3ψ†⟩= ¯h
2 Tr (σkΨΨ†) = ¯h
2 Ψ†σkΨ,
(92)
where the scalar part ⟨M⟩of a real multivector M corresponds to the Trace
Tr (M) of its matrix representation.
In conventional Pauli theory,31 the σk are regarded as “spin operators” with
eigenvalues corresponding to results of spin measurements in orthogonal direc-
tions. However, (92) shows that in Real PS Theory the σk are operators only
in the trivial sense of basis vectors that pick out components of the spin vector
determined by the wave function. Conventional theory also interprets the non-
vanishing commutator [σ1, σ2] = σ1σ2 −σ2σ1 as a measure of incompatibility
in spin measurements. Whereas, according to (11) and (25), the real theory
interprets
[σ1, σ2] = 2σ1 ∧σ2 = 2iσ3
(93)
as a geometric product with no particular relation to spin. This raises serious
questions about the conventional view of spin in quantum mechanics. More
questions are raised by further study of the real theory.24
The role of spin in the PS equation (81) can be made explicit by using (87)
to write the last term in the form
−e¯h
2mcB ψσ3 = 1
2
 e
mci B

ψi¯h = −e
mcB s ψ.
(94)
Note that
B s = B· s + i(B × s)
(95)
splits into terms proportional to magnetic energy and torque.
A physical interpretation of the PS equation is supplied by Schroedinger’s
assumption that the energy E of a stationary state is given by the eigenvalue
equation
∂t ψ i¯h = Eψ.
(96)
Pauli’s additional term changes this to
E = ES −e
mcB· s,
(97)
32
where ES is the Schroedinger energy. For a stationary solution with B × s = 0,
s must be parallel or antiparallel to B and we have
B· s = ±¯h
2 | B |.
(98)
This is the basis for declaring that spin is “two-valued.” However, when B is
variable the vectorial nature of s becomes apparent.
We can generalize (96) to arbitrary states by interpreting
ρE = ⟨∂t ψ iσ3¯hψ†⟩.
(99)
as energy density. Here the energy E = E(x, t) can be a variable function, and
we see that an energy eigenstate is deﬁned by the assumption that E is uniform.
Inserting (84) into (99), we discover that the density ρ drops out to give us
E = ⟨∂t U iσ3¯hU †⟩.
(100)
To interpret this expression we need to relate it to observables, in particular,
the spin.
As we have seen before, the unimodularity condition on U implies that its
derivative can be written in the form
∂t U = −1
2iωU,
(101)
so that (86) gives us
∂t ek = ω × ek,
(102)
in exact correspondence with the classical equations (55) and (57). In particular,
(102) gives us the kinematic equation for spin precession
∂t s = ω × s.
(103)
Inserting (101) into (100) and using (87) we get
E = ω ·s = 1
2ω ·2s.
(104)
This is identical to the classical expression for the rotational kinetic energy of
a rigid body with angular momentum 2s.16 All this suggests that the rotor U
describes continuous kinematics of electron motion rather than a probabilistic
combination of spin-up and spin-down states as asserted in conventional Pauli
theory.
The most surprising thing about the energy expression (104) is that it applies
to any solution of the Schroedinger equation, where ω × s = 0. But, according
to (102), e1 and e2 are spinning about the spin axis with angular velocity ω,
and (104) associates energy with the rotation rate. The big question is, “What is
the physical meaning of this spinning?” I have discussed one intriguing answer
33
at some length before,24 and I will return to it in a subsequent paper within the
context of the Dirac theory.
When the magnetic ﬁeld B = B(t) is a function of time alone, we can deﬁne
a rotor D by assuming that it satisﬁes the equation
dD
dt = 1
2
 e
mciB

D.
(105)
and factoring the wave function into
ψ = ψ(x, t) = D(t)ψS(x, t).
(106)
Substituting this into the PS-equation (81) separates the factors so that D
satisﬁes (105) and ψS satisﬁes Schroedinger’s equation
∂t ψS i¯h = HS ψS.
(107)
The rotor equation (105) exhibits a magnetic torque (e/m)B in perfect agree-
ment with the classical model of magnetic resonance discussed in my book.16
This exact analogy with classical physics is a great help in interpreting magnetic
resonance experiments, and it raises more questions about the interpretation of
electron spin.
Note that the factor 1
2 on the right side of (105) is the same factor that,
following Pauli, was attributed to spin in (87) and (98). However, (105) and
(101) suggest that the 1
2 is more correctly associated with the rotational velocity
in a rotor equation.
Although our real version of the Pauli theory gives new insight into the
geometric properties of the wave function, spin and interaction with the mag-
netic ﬁeld, it is mathematically isomorphic with the standard matrix version,
so no new physical consequences are to be expected, and it is straightforward
to translate results from one version to the other. More details about the real
PS theory have been published in this journal before.24
Standard techniques for analyzing angular momentum and solving the Pauli
equation31 can be converted to GA,25 where they yield some surprises and
simpliﬁcations that deserve further study.
Without delving into the complexities of angular momentum analysis, it is
obvious that the standard Schroedinger wave function is a solution the Schroe-
dinger equation (107), but with the bivector i = iσ3 as unit imaginary, so there
is no way to eliminate spin from the theory without eliminating complex num-
bers. It must be concluded, therefore, that standard Schroedinger theory does
not describe electrons without spin, but rather electrons with constant spin (or,
equivalently, electrons in a spin eigenstate).
The diﬀerence between Pauli and Schroedinger solutions of (107) is in the
class of eigenfunctions allowed. The simple Schroedinger hamiltonian HS does
not discriminate between them. A distinction is forced when the hamiltonian is
generalized to include spin-orbit interactions,31 but this is not the place to go
into details.
34
This discussion has been limited to single particle Pauli theory.
But in
closing, it should be mentioned that GA methods for spin representations of
many particle systems is currently an area of active research,32,38 where GA
gives fresh insights into entangled states, quantum computing and the like.
To summarize, let me highlight the most provocative conclusions from this
section:
• The explicit √−1 in fermion wave functions represents a bivector specifying
the direction of spin.
• i¯h = iσ3¯h represents spin in Schroedinger’s equation. This implies that
spin is not a simple add-on in quantum mechanics but an essential ingredient
of the theory. That is likely to be true for all fermions and bosons that are
composites of fermions.
• Pauli matrices represent vectors, not spin operators in quantum mechanics.
• Bilinear observables are geometric consequences of rotational kinematics,
so they are as natural in classical mechanics as in quantum mechanics.
• The real spinor wave function is easier to interpret and solve than the
matrix version.
VIII. Prospects for Curriculum Reform
Our physics curriculum has been largely shaped by the eﬀorts of “lone wolf”
textbook writers, and we owe them a debt of gratitude for their ﬁne contribu-
tions. Nevertheless, the curriculum would be well served by scholarly critique
and analysis to identify weaknesses and promote constructive innovation. I sub-
mit that this is worthy activity for the PER community. A community is needed
to incubate innovations and promote them when they are ready for wide adop-
tion. The prevailing laissez-faire process of textbook adoption has suppressed
many ﬁne contributions. It also fails to address problems of integration and
coherence of the whole curriculum, as textbook reform tends to be conﬁned to a
single course. As a case in point, I submit the problem of integrating geometric
algebra into the physics curriculum.
Assuming, for the sake of argument, that there is strong support for GA in
the physics community, what will it take to integrate it into the curriculum?
History tells us that it will take a long time if left to normal evolutionary pro-
cesses. In a perceptive essay on “fashionable pursuits” in science,28 Freeman
Dyson argues that innovations in mathematical physics are almost always un-
fashionable when they are introduced, and he estimates that it takes ﬁfty to
a hundred years for them to achieve general recognition. It is clear that new
mechanisms for curriculum reform will be needed to accelerate adoption of GA,
or any other substantial reform for that matter. As an indicator of diﬃculties
involved and prospects for success, I oﬀer a brief account of my own experience
with GA and discuss some hurdles to broad adoption.
35
A. History and reception of geometric algebra
Geometric algebra originated in the work of Hermann Grassmann (1809–1877)
and William Kingdon Cliﬀord (1845–1879).
Cliﬀord provided the axiomatic
formulation for the geometric product in Section VA, so the system is called
Cliﬀord algebra in most of the mathematics literature. However, Cliﬀord him-
self called it geometric algebra, and he acknowledged the primary contribution
of Grassmann. He recognized its unique signiﬁcance as an algebraic represen-
tation of geometric concepts as conceived by Grassmann. Unfortunately, his
deep insight into the geometric foundations of algebra did not survive his early
death. Mathematicians abstracted Cliﬀord algebra from its geometric origins,
and, for the better part of a century, it languished as a minor subdiscipline of
mathematics — one more algebra among so many others.
Grassmann’s program to develop a universal geometric algebra for mathe-
matics and physics was revived in 1966 with my book Space Time Algebra.21
Actually, it was many years later before I realized how much of my own research
program for developing a universal mathematical language had been anticipated
by Grassmann.13 Of course, I had an additional century of mathematics and
physics to draw on, so geometric algebra today is vastly more developed with a
scope that was inconceivable in Grassmann’s day.
My 1966 book introduced the critical innovations that made the uniﬁed
language in this paper possible. It developed a coordinate-free formulation of
spacetime physics that will be discussed in the sequel to this paper.
After
employing it exclusively in my research and teaching over the next few years,
my own perspective on GA in physics was consolidated around the essential
form and content in this lecture. I found GA so empowering that ever since I
have not been satisﬁed with my understanding of any subject in physics until I
have formulated it in terms of GA. Invariably I have found that GA simpliﬁes
and illuminates every subject.
My 1966 book had a serious limitation.
Though it simpliﬁed the funda-
mental equations of physics, applications required access to the great repertoire
of available mathematical methods, and translation into standard formulations
often destroyed the advantages of geometric algebra.
This motivated me to
extend geometric algebra to a uniﬁed language for mathematics that incorpo-
rated all the methods needed in physics. Besides, I must confess to an abiding
interest in pure mathematics for its own sake. I consider myself equal parts
mathematician and physicist. This ambitious program to redesign mathematics
was greatly stimulated by an amazing early success: the realization that GA
enables a natural generalization and extension to arbitrary dimension of the
central result of complex variable theory, Cauchy’s integral formula.18 This re-
sult has been independently discovered by several others, and mathematicians
have developed it in recent years into a vigorous new branch of mathematics
called Cliﬀord analysis. Unfortunately, most practitioners in this ﬁeld pay insuf-
ﬁcient attention to the geometric meaning of their results that is needed for easy
application to physics. Consequently, the evolution of geometric algebra into a
comprehensive Geometric Calculus to serve as a uniﬁed language for both math-
36
ematics and physics has so far proceeded independently of Cliﬀord analysis.29
The development of Geometric Calculus culminated in the 1986 publication of
a comprehensive mathematics monograph19 and has continued to this day. To
my knowledge, no other mathematical system integrates such a broad range of
mathematics, just about all the mathematics needed for physics.
For the ﬁrst 20 years of my professional life my research on developing and
applying geometric algebra proceeded in almost complete isolation, except for
interaction with a few students. During that period I published regularly, but
there were only a handful of citations to my papers and no positive feedback from
colleagues. I learned to be very careful about when, where and how I presented
my work to other physicists, because the reaction was invariably dismissive as
soon as they detected deviation from standard practice or beliefs.27
I did not even try to publish in Physical Review.
Instead, I conducted
a sociological experiment by submitting proposals to the NSF for support of
my work on relativistic electron theory. After the ﬁrst couple of tries I was
convinced that it would never get funded, but I continued to submit 12 times in
all as an experiment on how the system works. I found that there was always
a split opinion on my proposal that typically fell into three groups.
About
one third dismissed me outright as a crank.
About one third was intrigued
and sometimes gave my proposal an Excellent rating.
The other third was
noncommittal, mainly because they were not sure they understood what I was
talking about. The fate of the proposal was always decided by averaging the
scores from the reviewers, despite the fact that the justiﬁcations for diﬀerent
scores were blatantly contradictory. Such is the logic of the funding process.
I thought that my last proposal was particularly strong.
But one reviewer
torpedoed it with an exceptionally long and impressively documented negative
opinion that overwhelmed the positive reviews. He was factually and logically
wrong, however, and I could prove it. So I decided to appeal the decision. I
wanted to challenge the NSF to resolve serious contradictions among reviews
before making a funding decision.
I learned that the ﬁrst two stages of the
appeal process were entirely procedural without considering merits of the case.
In the third stage, the appeal had to be submitted through the Oﬃce of Research
at my university. The functionaries in the Oﬃce worried that the appeal would
irritate the NSF, so it was delayed until the deadline passed. Such is the politics
of grant proposals.
The prospects for dissemination of GA were suddenly changed about 1986
by two new developments. The ﬁrst was an “International Conference on Clif-
ford Algebras and their Applications in Mathematical Physics” conceived and
organized by Roy Chisholm.30 I was invited as keynote speaker on the strength
of my STA book. There I learned that my book had impressed a lot of people,
though they did not see how to use it in their own work. I was fortunate to
have it published in a series with many distinguished authors that was aﬀordably
priced and widely marketed. Chisholm’s conference precipitated the formation
of an international community of researchers in mathematics and physics, and
the sixth in the series of international conferences that he started was held in
May 2002.
37
The second new development to enhance dissemination of GA was publi-
cation of my mechanics and mathematics books.16,19
Early in my career, I
naively thought that if you give a good idea to competent mathematicians or
physicists, they will work out its implications for themselves. I have learned
since that most of them need the implications spelled out in utter detail. For
example, I published the ideas in Section V in a 1971 AJP article20 with the
expectation that others would ﬁnd them as compelling as I do. But there was
no noticeable reaction until the implications for mechanics were fully worked
out in my book.16 To be fair, the implications turned out to be a lot richer than
I had anticipated. I learned that only when I taught the graduate mechanics
course where I was forced to work out the details.
I measure the impact of my work, not by words of praise or approval, but
by evidence of inﬂuence in the published work of others, not including papers
where GA has been incompetently used. I regard the impact as strong when GA
is employed in essentially the way that I would do it, and exceptional when GA
is used in a way that surprises me. By those criteria, my work had little impact
before the late 1980s, but its impact has accelerated during the 1990s as more
and more able researchers adopt GA as their mathematical language of choice.
During the last decade GA has started spreading to engineering and computer
science with applications to robotics, computer vision, space ﬂight navigation
and control, collision detection, optical design and much more. In the last year
alone, several volumes of applications have been published.33–35 This lively use
of GA in the research domain has convinced me at last that it is time to press
for GA in the physics curriculum.
B. GA in the physics curriculum.
At most universities it is easy to introduce GA into graduate courses, given
the autonomy for structuring the course that professors enjoy. I was able to
negotiate an agreement allowing me to do that immediately when I was hired
in 1966. Since that time I have employed GA exclusively in graduate courses
in mechanics, E&M and relativity over more than twenty years. I adopted the
textbooks Goldstein for mechanics and Jackson for E&M and assigned most
of the problems in them, because they set the standard for problems on the
graduate comprehensive exams prepared by my colleagues. In my lectures, I
often used GA as a framework for critique of the textbooks, and I emphasized
how smoothly GA articulates with standard methods while demonstrating its
advantages.
The response of the graduate students was the usual mixed bag. About a
third were very excited about it; another third was opposed to learning anything
that is not required for the comprehensive exam; the remaining third just went
through the motions. Unbeknownst to my colleagues or the students, I tracked
the exam performance of every student who went through my courses. Though
we have a high failure rate on our comprehensive exams, no student who took
my courses on mechanics or E&M failed that portion of the exam. At least my
teaching with GA was not impeding their careers.
38
Many of the theoretically inclined students in my courses wanted to pursue
doctoral research with me. Unfortunately, it takes something like three years to
develop suﬃcient proﬁciency with GA to use it in research (unless one has an
exceptionally strong background in mathematical physics). Since GA was not
used in any courses besides mine, the students had to get the rest by independent
study. This meant an exceptionally long induction time before starting research.
Besides, I was acutely aware of the reception they were likely to get for a GA
based dissertation. Consequently, I took on only a few of the most dedicated
students. Then when I took my turn teaching introductory physics the supply
of doctoral students dried up completely.
I have not ventured to teach GA in undergraduate courses. However, one
young professor at a prestigious liberal arts college adopted my mechanics book
for an upper division mechanics course and published two pedagogical papers on
GA in the AJP36 that editor Bob Romer put on the list of his favorite papers
in 1993. His reward was denial of tenure. This is not an unfamiliar fate for
untenured faculty who attempt teaching innovation of any kind.
There is really no point in introducing GA into the core undergraduate
curriculum unless it is employed in a suﬃcient number of courses to develop
proﬁciency in the language. That requires collaboration of several faculty mem-
bers, at least, and the blessing of the rest of the physics department — a near
impossibility in most departments. However, we have already noted two good
reasons why departments need not fear that introducing GA in the undergrad-
uate curriculum will impede students in subsequent graduate studies where GA
is not used. First, after a working proﬁciency with GA has been acquired, it
is easy to translate to other formalisms. Second, such translation is a powerful
stimulant to understanding.
The usual mechanism for curriculum reform through textbooks is as slow as
it is perilous for the author. Any GA-based textbook is unlikely to be taken
on by a major textbook publisher, no matter how superb it might be, because
the prevailing demand is near zero. For that reason, I was forced to publish my
mechanics textbook in a series for advanced monographs in physics. Since few
such monographs are purchased by anyone but libraries, prices are necessarily
high for the publisher to break even on most books, too high for the competitive
textbook market. Moreover, the advertising does not reach the textbook market.
Though my book has been a continual best seller in the series for well over a
decade, it is still unknown to most teachers of mechanics in the U.S. To be
suitable for the series, I had to design it as a multipurpose book, including a
general introduction to GA and material of interest to researchers, as well as
problem sets for students. It is not what I would have written to be a mechanics
textbook alone. Most students need judicious guidance by the instructor to get
through it.
Despite the perils, there are other authors writing GA based textbooks.37,38
But history tells us that incremental change is the most we can expect from
textbooks, while revolutionary change will be needed to give GA a powerful
presence in the curriculum within, say, ten years.
That will require a new
mechanism for curriculum change. I suggest that PER can play that role with a
39
strong program of scholarly research and consensus building. I suggest further
that GA is only one among many topics that need to be addressed. The physics
curriculum has many other deﬁciencies that should be subjected to scholarly
scrutiny.
C. GA in the mathematics curriculum
If GA is to be adopted throughout the physics curriculum, there must be con-
comitant reform of the mathematics curriculum for physics majors. Even today
the math curriculum is not well matched to the needs of physics, so most physics
departments have their own course in mathematical methods for physicists.
Anyway, theoretical physicists are conﬁdent in their ability to teach any math
that physicists need, so it will not be necessary to reform the mathematicians,
who may be even more recalcitrant to reform than physicists.
My monograph on Geometric Algebra and Calculus as a uniﬁed language
for mathematics19 is the most comprehensive reference on the subject, but it
is not suitable as a textbook, except perhaps for a graduate course in mathe-
matics. Besides there have been some important developments since it was ﬁrst
published. A GA textbook for physics students is soon to be published.38 Of
course, it will take more than one book to deﬁne a full curriculum.
As it does for physics, GA provides a framework for critique of the current
math curriculum. I mention only courses that are mainstays of mathematical
physics.
A full critique of these courses requires much more space than we
can aﬀord here. By ﬁrst introducing GA as the basic language, the course in
linear algebra can be simpliﬁed and enriched.39
For example, we have seen
how GA facilitates the treatment of rotations and reﬂections. GA will then
supplant matrix algebra as the basic computation system. Of course, matrix
algebra is a very powerful and well-developed system, but it is best developed
from GA rather than the other way around.
Courses on advanced calculus
and multivariable calculus with diﬀerential forms and diﬀerential geometry are
uniﬁed and simpliﬁed by geometric calculus.26 Likewise, GA uniﬁes courses on
real and complex analysis. Group theory can also be developed within the GA
framework,17,40 but much work remains to incorporate the full range of methods
and results used by physicists.
X. Challenge
Let me close with a challenge to PER and the physics community to critically
examine the following claims supported by the argument in this paper:
• GA provides a uniﬁed language for the whole of physics that is conceptu-
ally and computationally superior to alternative mathematical systems in every
application domain.
• GA can enhance student understanding and accelerate student learning of
physics.
40
• GA is ready to incorporate into the physics curriculum.
• GA provides new insight into the structure and interpretation of quantum
mechanics as well as its relation to quantum mechanics.
• Research on the design and use of mathematical tools is equally important
for instruction and for theoretical physics.
• Reforming the mathematical language of physics is the single most essen-
tial step toward simplifying physics education at all levels from high school to
graduate school.
Note.
Most of my papers listed in the references are available on line.
PER papers can be accessed from <http://modeling.asu.edu>. GA papers can
be accessed from <http://modelingnts.la.asu.edu>. Many ﬁne papers on GA
applications in physics and engineering are available at the Cambridge website
<http://www.mrao.cam.ac.uk/˜cliﬀord/>.
References
[1] J. Piaget, To Understand Is To Invent (Grossman, New York, 1973). pp.
15–20.
[2] D. Hestenes, “Modeling Games in the Newtonian World,” Am. J. Phys. 60:
732–748 (1992).
[3] M. Wells, D. Hestenes, and G. Swackhamer, “A Modeling Method for High
School Physics Instruction,” Am. J. Phys. 63: 606-619 (1995).
[4] K. Ericsson & J. Smith (Eds.), Toward a general theory of expertise:
prospects and limits (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1991).
[5] A. Cromer, Connected Knowledge (Oxford, New York, 1997).
[6] L. Magnani, N. Nercessian & P. Thagard (Eds). Model-Based Reasoning
in Scientiﬁc Discovery (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht/Boston, 1999).
[7] H. Doerr, “Integrating the Study of Trigonometry, Vectors and Force
Through Modeling,” School Science and Mathematics 96, 407–418 (1996).
[8] D. Hestenes, “Toward a Modeling Theory of Physics Instruction,” Am. J.
Phys. 55, 440–454 (1987).
[9] D. Hestenes, “Modeling Methodology for Physics Teachers.” In E. Redish
& J. Rigden (Eds.) The changing role of the physics department in modern
universities, Part II. (American Institute of Physics, 1997). pp. 935–957.
[10] D. Hestenes, Modeling Software for learning and doing physics. In C.
Bernardini, C. Tarsitani & M. Vincentini (Eds.), Thinking Physics for
Teaching (Plenum, New York, 1996). pp. 25–66.
41
[11] A. Einstein, Ideas and Opinions (Three Rivers Press, New York, 1985). p.
274.
[12] H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics, Second Edition (Addison-Wesley, Read-
ing MA, 1980).
[13] D. Hestenes, “Grassmann’s Vision.” In G. Schubring (Ed.), Hermann
Gunther Grassmann (1809–1877) — Visionary Scientist and Neohumanist
Scholar (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht/Boston, 1996). pp. 191–201.
[14] E. Redish & G. Shama, “Student diﬃculties with vectors in kinematics
problems,” AAPT Announcer 27, 98 (July 1997).
[15] D. Hestenes, “Mathematical Viruses.” In A. Micali, R. Boudet, J. Helm-
stetter (Eds.), Cliﬀord Algebras and their Applications in Mathematical
Physics. (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht/Boston, 1991). p. 3–16.
[16] D. Hestenes, New Foundations for Classical Mechanics, (Kluwer, Dor-
drecht/Boston, 1986). Second Edition (1999).
[17] D. Hestenes, “Point Groups and Space Groups in Geometric Algebra,” In L.
Doerst, C. Doran & J. Lasenby (Eds.), Applications of Geometric Algebra
in Computer Science and Engineering (Birkh¨auser, Boston, 2002). pp. 3–34
[18] D. Hestenes, “Multivector Functions,” J. Math. Anal. and Appl. 24, 467–
473 (1968).
[19] D. Hestenes & G. Sobczyk, CLIFFORD ALGEBRA to GEOMETRIC
CALCULUS, a Uniﬁed Language for Mathematics and Physics (Kluwer
Academic, Dordrecht/Boston, 1986).
[20] D. Hestenes,“Vectors, Spinors and Complex Numbers in Classical and
Quantum Physics,” Am. J. Phys. 39, 1013–1028 (1971).
[21] D. Hestenes, Space-Time Algebra, (Gordon & Breach, New York, 1966).
[22] D. Hestenes, “Real Spinor Fields,” J. Math. Phys. 8, 798–808 (1967).
[23] D. Hestenes & R. Gurtler, “Local Observables in Quantum Theory,” Am.
J. Phys. 39, 1028–1038 (1971).
[24] D. Hestenes, “Spin and Uncertainty in the Interpretation of Quantum Me-
chanics,” Am. J. Phys. 47, 399–415 (1979).
[25] C. Doran, A. Lasenby, S. Gull, S. Somaroo & A. Challinor, “Spacetime
Algebra and Electron Physics,” Adv. Imag. & Elect. Phys. 95, 271–365
(1996).
[26] D. Hestenes, “Diﬀerential Forms in Geometric Calculus.” In F. Brackx et
al. (eds), Cliﬀord Algebras and their Applications in Mathematical Physics
(Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht/Boston, 1993). pp. 269–285.
42
[27] D. Hestenes, “Cliﬀord Algebra and the Interpretation of Quantum Me-
chanics.” In J.S.R. Chisholm & A. K. Common (eds.), Cliﬀord Algebras
and their Applications in Mathematical Physics, (Reidel Publ. Co., Dor-
drecht/Boston, 1986), pp. 321–346.
[28] F. Dyson, From Eros to Gaia (Pantheon books, New York, 1992). Chap.
14.
[29] D. Hestenes, “A Uniﬁed Language for Mathematics and Physics.” In J.S.R.
Chisholm & A. K. Common (eds.), Cliﬀord Algebras and their Applications
in Mathematical Physics, (Reidel Publ. Co., Dordrecht/Boston, 1986), pp.
1–23.
[30] In J. Chisholm & A. Common (eds.), Cliﬀord Algebras and their Applica-
tions in Mathematical Physics (Reidel Publ. Co., Dordrecht/Boston, 1986).
[31] D. Bohm, Quantum Theory (Prentice-Hall, New York, 1951).
[32] T. Havel, D. Cory, S. Somaroo, C.-H. Tseng, “Geometric Algebra Methods
in Quantum Information Processing by NMR Spectroscopy. In E. Bayro
Corrochano & G. Sobczyk (Eds.), Geometric Algebra with Applications in
Science and Engineering (Birkh¨auser, Boston 2001). pp. 281–308.
[33] R. Ablamowicz & B. Fauser (Eds.), Cliﬀord Algebras and their Applications
in Mathematical Physics, Vol. 1 & 2 (Birkh¨auser, Boston, 2000).
[34] E. Bayro Corrochano & G. Sobczyk (Eds.), Geometric Algebra with Appli-
cations in Science and Engineering (Birkh¨auser, Boston 2001).
[35] L. Doerst, C. Doran & J. Lasenby (Eds.), Applications of Geometrical Al-
gebra in Computer Science and Engineering (Birkh¨auser, Boston, 2002).
[36] T. Vold, “An introduction to geometric algebra with an application to
rigid body mechanics,” Am. J. Phys. 61, 491 (1993); “An introduction to
geometric calculus and its application to electrodynamics,” Am. J. Phys.
61, 505 (1993).
[37] W. Baylis, Electrodynamics: A Modern Geometric Approach (Birkh¨auser,
Boston, 1999).
[38] A. Lasenby & C. Doran, Geometric Algebra for Physicists (Cambridge U.
Press, Cambridge 2002).
[39] D. Hestenes, “The Design of Linear Algebra and Geometry,” Acta Appli-
canda Mathematicae 23, 65–93 (1991).
[40] C. Doran, D. Hestenes, F. Sommen & N. Van Acker, “Lie Groups as Spin
Groups,” J. Math. Phys. 34, 3642–3669 (1993).
43
