BRUCE J. HUNT*
Maxwell, Measurement, and the Modes
of Electromagnetic Theory
ABSTRACT
In 1861–62, James Clerk Maxwell published ‘‘On Physical Lines of Force,’’ in which
he laid out a detailed mechanical model of the ether and argued that it could account
not only for electromagnetic phenomena but for light as well. In 1864, he followed
with ‘‘A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field,’’ in which he derived the
electromagnetic equations from general dynamical considerations without invoking
any mechanical model of the ether. Why the shift? Did Maxwell regard his mechanical
model as mere scaffolding, to be cast aside once it had led him to the proper ﬁeld
equations? Or did he remain committed to the goal of a purely mechanical expla-
nation, but ﬁnd it useful to free his main results, particularly his electromagnetic theory
of light, from dependence on the speciﬁcs of an admittedly speculative model?
To understand the apparent shift Maxwell’s thinking underwent between 1862 and
1864, I propose that we look closely at what he was doing in 1863. He spent that year
working hard for the British Association Committee on Electrical Standards, collab-
orating with telegraph engineers to establish the value of the ohm and laying the
groundwork for measuring the ratio of electrostatic to electromagnetic units, a key
quantity in his electromagnetic theory of light. This experience led Maxwell to adopt
for a time an engineering approach that focused on establishing relationships
between measureable quantities rather than devising hypothetical mechanisms.
Maxwell’s electromagnetic work thus had closer ties to the technological context of
the day than has generally been recognized.
*Department of History, University of Texas, 128 Inner Campus Drive, Austin, TX, 78712;
bjhunt@austin.utexas.edu.
The following abbreviations are used: PM, Philosophical Magazine; SP, James Clerk Maxwell,
Scientiﬁc Papers of James Clerk Maxwell, ed. W. D. Niven, 2 vols. (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1891); SLP, James Clerk Maxwell, Scientiﬁc Letters and Papers of James Clerk
Maxwell, ed. P. M. Harman, 3 vols. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990–2002);
Treatise: James Clerk Maxwell, Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1873), which will be cited by article number.
|
3 0 3
Historical Studies in the Natural Sciences, Vol. 45, Number 2, pps. 303–339. ISSN 1939-1811,
electronic ISSN 1939-182X. © 2015 by the Regents of the University of California. All rights
reserved. Please direct all requests for permission to photocopy or reproduce article content
through the University of California Press’s Rights and Permissions website, http://
www.ucpressjournals.com/reprintinfo.asp. DOI: 10.1525/hsns.2015.45.2.303.
KEY WORDS: James Clerk Maxwell, electromagnetic theory, ether models, ohm, electrical
standards, velocity of light, Fleeming Jenkin
One of the classic questions in the history of nineteenth-century physics
centers on James Clerk Maxwell’s attitude toward his mechanical models of
the ether. Did he look on them as no more than heuristic tools, to be tossed
aside once they had helped him ﬁnd the proper ﬁeld equations, or did he
instead regard them as steps toward a realistic representation of the actual
structure of the electromagnetic medium? In his long paper ‘‘On Physical
Lines of Force,’’ published in installments in 1861–62, Maxwell laid out an
elaborate model of the ether, picturing it as an array of tiny spinning vortices
interspersed with layers of even smaller ‘‘idle wheel’’ particles.1 He showed that
such a vortex medium could reproduce the main phenomena of electricity and
magnetism, including the production of magnetic ﬁelds and the induction of
electric currents, and could also convey transverse waves very much like—
perhaps identical with—those of light. ‘‘Physical Lines’’ marked a major step in
the development of ﬁeld theory and the uniﬁcation of optics with electromag-
netism; with it, Maxwell appeared to be well on his way toward delineating the
real mechanical structure of the electromagnetic ether. Yet just over two and
a half years later, he sent the Royal Society of London his ‘‘Dynamical Theory
of the Electromagnetic Field,’’ in which he seemingly abandoned his vortex
model and instead derived the equations of the electromagnetic ﬁeld from
general dynamical principles, without invoking any hypothetical mechanical
microstructure.2 Why the shift? Had Maxwell really renounced his vortex
model? Had he ever really believed in it, or had he always regarded it as mere
scaffolding, to be cast aside when no longer needed? Why had he taken one
approach to electromagnetic theory in 1862, and such a seemingly different one
in 1864? What does this sequence of moves by Maxwell tell us about the roots
and development of his theory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, as well as about the
deeper attitudes of Victorian physicists toward the nature of physical reality
and the means by which they might best seek to grasp and describe it?
1. James Clerk Maxwell, ‘‘On Physical Lines of Force,’’ PM 21 (1861): 161–75, 281–91, 338–48,
and 23 (1862): 12–24, 85–95, repr. in SP 1: 451–513.
2. James Clerk Maxwell, ‘‘A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field,’’ Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London 155 (1865): 459–512, repr. in SP 1: 526–97.
3 0 4
|
H U N T
To understand the apparent shift Maxwell’s thinking underwent between
1862 and 1864, we should, I will argue, look closely at what he was doing in
1863. It turns out he spent much of that year, and some months both before
and after, working hard for the British Association Committee on Electric
Standards, establishing the value of the ohm, clarifying the relationships
among electrical measurements, and laying the groundwork for a careful exper-
imental determination of the ratio of electrostatic to electromagnetic units.
Maxwell’s close collaboration in this period with Fleeming Jenkin and other
telegraph engineers led him to adopt, at least for a time and for the purposes at
hand, an ‘‘engineering approach’’ to electrical questions in which he focused
not on devising hypothetical mechanisms but on formulating demonstrable
relations between quantities he could measure and manipulate. Maxwell was
not wedded to just one way of doing physics. Sometimes he found it useful to
devise hypothetical microscopic mechanisms and trace out their consequences,
with hopes of penetrating to the real mechanical substructure of the physical
world; other times, he sought instead to formulate macroscopic laws that
would be independent of such hypotheses.3 These shifts did not represent his
abandonment of one approach or the other, but rather his attempts to advance
scientiﬁc understanding at different times along different fronts. Maxwell’s
work on the British Association Committee shaped his thinking not only
about the ohm and electrical measurement, but also about the range of ana-
lytical approaches and expository strategies that could be useful in physics, and
it became a signiﬁcant thread not just in his ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ but also in
his later Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism (1873) and other works.
MODELS AND STANDARDS
Over the years, many historians, philosophers, and physicists have discussed
a sequence of three papers on electromagnetism that Maxwell published
between the mid-1850s and the mid-1860s:
3. Note that while the mechanism of the electromagnetic medium that Maxwell discussed in
‘‘Physical Lines’’ was characterized by equations of continuum mechanics that had the same form
as the equations used for macroscopic bodies, it was differentiated microscopically by the motion
of its parts, as was the version of the kinetic theory of gases Maxwell was developing at the same
time; cf. M. Norton Wise, ‘‘The Maxwell Literature and British Dynamical Theory,’’ HSPS 13,
no. 1 (1982): 175–205, esp. 188–89 and 200–201.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 0 5
1856: ‘‘On Faraday’s Lines of Force,’’ in which he laid out a ﬂuid-ﬂow
analogy to the distribution and interaction of lines of electric and
magnetic force;
1861–62: ‘‘On Physical Lines of Force,’’ in which he presented his vortex and
idle wheel model of the electromagnetic ether and introduced the ﬁrst
‘‘electromechanical’’ version of his electromagnetic theory of light;
1864: ‘‘A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field,’’ in which he
formulated a set of electromagnetic ﬁeld equations, including a fully
electromagnetic theory of light, based on the general dynamics of a
connected system, independently of any detailed model of the
medium.
The move from ‘‘Physical Lines’’ to ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ has drawn particular
attention, and it will be my main focus here.4 The key question has been
whether Maxwell believed his vortex model represented the real structure of
the ether, at least in part, or instead regarded it as no more than a convenient
ﬁction he could use to help him ﬁnd the ﬁeld equations that, on this account,
were always his real and ﬁnal goal.
The evidence pulls in two directions. In ‘‘Physical Lines,’’ Maxwell certainly
spoke of the vortices very much as if he regarded them as real. Citing Michael
Faraday’s 1845 discovery of magneto-optic rotation, he declared that William
Thomson’s 1856 analysis of it proved that ‘‘the cause of the magnetic action on
light must be a real rotation going on in the magnetic ﬁeld,’’ and he thought it
sufﬁciently likely that the rotation was performed by tiny ‘‘molecular vortices’’
that, in 1861, he had a special apparatus built with which he tried to measure
4. The sequence from ‘‘Faraday’s Lines’’ to ‘‘Physical Lines’’ to ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ was ﬁrst
emphasized by W. D. Niven in his preface to SP 1: xix–xxii. Among subsequent discussions, see
Joseph Turner, ‘‘Maxwell on the Logic of Dynamical Explanation,’’ Philosophy of Science 23 (1956):
36–47; Robert Kargon, ‘‘Model and Analogy in Victorian Science: Maxwell’s Critique of the
French Physicists,’’ Journal of the History of Ideas 30 (1969): 423–36; C.W.F. Everitt, James Clerk
Maxwell: Physicist and Natural Philosopher (New York: Scribner’s, 1975), 108–9; Ole Knudsen,
‘‘The Faraday Effect and Physical Theory, 1845–1873,’’ Archive for History of Exact Sciences 15
(1976): 235–81, on 248–55; Daniel Siegel, ‘‘The Origin of the Displacement Current,’’ HSPS 17,
no. 1 (1986): 99–146; Daniel Siegel, Innovation in Maxwell’s Electromagnetic Theory: Molecular
Vortices, Displacement Current, and Light (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991); P. M.
Harman, The Natural Philosophy of James Clerk Maxwell (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1998), 71–90, 98–124; Crosbie Smith, The Science of Energy: A Cultural History of Energy
Physics in Victorian Britain (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 218–38; Bruce
J. Hunt, Pursuing Power and Light: Technology and Physics from James Watt to Albert Einstein
(Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2010), 94–110.
3 0 6
|
H U N T
their expected gyroscopic effect.5 The experiment was inconclusive; terrestrial
magnetism interfered with the expected effect and prevented Maxwell from
establishing more than that the vortices, if they existed at all, must be
extremely small. He still believed the magneto-optic evidence to be very
strong, however, and he continued to speak of the existence of the vortices
as highly probable. On the other hand, he was much more tentative about the
idle wheel particles, presenting them as no more than a concrete and readily
investigated way to connect the rotations of adjacent layers of vortices. As he
acknowledged near the end of the second part of ‘‘Physical Lines,’’
The conception of a particle having its motion connected with that of
a vortex by perfect rolling contact may appear somewhat awkward. I do not
bring it forward as a mode of connexion existing in nature, or even as that
which I would willingly assent to as an electrical hypothesis. It is, however,
a mode of connexion which is mechanically conceivable, and easily inves-
tigated, and it serves to bring out the actual mechanical connexions between
the known electro-magnetic phenomena; so that I venture to say that any
one who understands the provisional and temporary character of this
hypothesis, will ﬁnd himself rather helped than hindered by it in his search
after the true interpretation of the phenomena.6
This passage has often been cited as evidence that Maxwell regarded his entire
vortex model as ‘‘awkward,’’ ‘‘provisional and temporary,’’ and frankly unre-
alistic.7 But in fact Maxwell used such terms only about the idle wheel particles
and the supposition that they were in perfect rolling contact with the vortices;
it was only the ‘‘mode of connexion’’ of the vortices that he presented as
awkward and unrealistic, not the vortices themselves. From the time he ﬁrst
introduced the idle wheel particles in Part II of ‘‘Physical Lines,’’ Maxwell
explicitly distinguished their status, which he characterized as merely ‘‘provi-
sional,’’ from that of the vortices, whose existence he regarded as ‘‘probable.’’8
Moreover, when he took up the Faraday effect in his Treatise in 1873, he
5. Maxwell, ‘‘Physical Lines’’ (ref. 1), 23: 88, repr. in SP 1: 505. On Maxwell’s gyroscopic vortex
experiment, see ibid., 21: 345n, repr. in SP 1: 485–86n; Maxwell to Michael Faraday, 19 Oct 1861,
SLP 1: 688 and Plate X; and Treatise, § 575.
6. Maxwell, ‘‘Physical Lines’’ (ref. 1), 21: 346, repr. in SP 1: 486.
7. See, for example, John Hendry, James Clerk Maxwell and the Theory of the Electromagnetic
Field (Bristol: Adam Hilger, 1986), 174; and Nancy J. Nersessian, Faraday to Einstein: Con-
structing Meaning in Scientiﬁc Theories (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1984), 84.
8. Maxwell, ‘‘Physical Lines’’ (ref. 1), 21: 282, repr. in SP 1: 468. Knudsen, ‘‘Faraday Effect ’’
(ref. 4), 551–53, and Siegel, Innovation (ref. 4), 47, emphasize that Maxwell continued to believe in
the reality of the vortices.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 0 7
returned to the vortices, saying he could ﬁnd no other way to account for the
action of magnetism on polarized light.9
Such is the case for concluding that Maxwell really believed in his vortices.
On the other side, we have the fact that in ‘‘Dynamical Theory,’’ he only
brieﬂy mentioned his vortex model and formulated his entire theory of the
electromagnetic ﬁeld simply in terms of the dynamics of a connected mechan-
ical system, without reference to any hypothetical structure of the ether. Citing
‘‘Physical Lines,’’ he said he had ‘‘on a former occasion attempted to describe
a particular kind of motion and a particular kind of strain, so arranged as to
account for the phenomena,’’ but declared that ‘‘in the present paper I avoid
any hypothesis of this kind’’; his use in ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ of such terms as
‘‘electric momentum’’ and ‘‘electric elasticity’’ was, he said, merely ‘‘illustrative,
not . . . explanatory.’’10 However conﬁdently Maxwell may have spoken of his
vortices in ‘‘Physical Lines,’’ it certainly appeared that by 1864, he had left them
behind. Writing a few years later, the Edinburgh physicist Peter Guthrie Tait,
who was presumably in a position to know his close friend’s mind, declared
that Maxwell had ‘‘discarded’’ his ‘‘particular hypotheses as to the molecular
vortices’’ in favor of a theory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld founded solely on
general dynamical principles.11 One can easily understand how later observers
could conclude, as L. Pearce Williams did, that Maxwell had ‘‘quietly aban-
doned’’ his vortex model.12
But why would Maxwell discard the vortices if he continued to believe that
the Faraday effect gave strong evidence of their existence? Why, after 1862, did
he not turn his efforts to digging out the true microscopic structure of the
ether, rather than formulating ﬁeld equations that ignored any such structure?
There are many reasons for the move Maxwell made in 1864, but an espe-
cially important one grew out of his work at just that time for the British
Association Committee on Electrical Standards. The committee had been
formed at the Manchester meeting of the British Association for the Advance-
ment of Science in September 1861, largely in response to the perceived needs
of the British submarine telegraph industry.13 When British ﬁrms began laying
9. Maxwell, Treatise, §§ 806–31, esp. § 831.
10. Maxwell, ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ (ref. 2), 487, repr. in SP 1: 563–64.
11. P. G. Tait, Sketch of Thermodynamics (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1868), 74;
Tait repeated this passage in the 2nd ed. (1877), 90.
12. L. Pearce Williams, The Origins of Field Theory (New York: Random House, 1966), 133.
13. Bruce J. Hunt, ‘‘Michael Faraday, Cable Telegraphy, and the Rise of British Field The-
ory,’’ History of Technology 13 (1991): 1–19; Simon Schaffer, ‘‘A Manufactory of Ohms: Late
3 0 8
|
H U N T
telegraph cables in the early 1850s, they initially paid little attention to the
electrical condition of their conductors and insulation; they simply covered
a length of wire with gutta-percha (a rubber-like natural plastic extracted from
Malayan trees), laid it beneath the sea, and hoped for the best. Several early
successes were followed by a series of catastrophic failures, culminating in the
breakdown of the ﬁrst Atlantic cable in 1858 and the costly collapse of the Red
Sea cable the next year. These reverses prompted a government inquiry whose
report called, amongst much else, for the adoption of accurate and agreed
standards of electrical resistance. As the report noted, cable manufacturers and
operators needed to be able to cite such standards in their contract speciﬁca-
tions, and engineers needed reliable resistance coils they could use to help them
monitor the condition of their cables and locate faults for repair.14
In 1860, Werner Siemens, a leading German electrical industrialist with
close ties to the British cable industry, proposed a standard based on the
resistance of a thread of mercury one meter long and one square millimeter
in section.15 The new unit began to catch on, but soon drew critics, particu-
larly in Britain. The prominent cable engineers Latimer Clark and Sir Charles
Bright presented a paper at the 1861 British Association meeting calling for
a connected system of units not only of resistance but also of charge, current,
and electromotive force, all to be named for ‘‘our most eminent philosophers’’:
‘‘ohma,’’ ‘‘farad,’’ ‘‘volt,’’ and so on.16 Given its resemblance to the system that
was eventually adopted, it is understandable that many writers have cited Clark
-
Victorian Metrology and its Instrumentation,’’ in Susan Cozzens and Robert Bud, eds., Invisible
Connections: Instruments, Institutions, and Science (Bellingham, WA: SPIE Optical Engineering
Press, 1992), 23–56; Bruce J. Hunt, ‘‘The Ohm is Where the Art Is: British Telegraph Engineers
and the Development of Electrical Standards,’’ Osiris 9 (1994): 48–63.
14. Report of the Joint Committee to Inquire into the Construction of Submarine Telegraph
Cables, British Parliamentary Papers, 2744 (1860), vol. 62 (London: Her Majesty’s Stationery
Ofﬁce, 1861), xvi; see also the testimony of William Thomson, 118, and Fleeming Jenkin, 139.
15. Werner Siemens, ‘‘Vorschlag eines Reproducibaren Widerstandsmasses,’’ Annalen der
Physik 110 (1860): 1–20, translated as Siemens, ‘‘Proposal for a New Reproducible Standard
Measure of Resistance to Galvanic Circuits,’’ PM 21 (1861): 25–38. On the ensuing controversy
between Siemens and the British, see Kathryn Olesko, ‘‘Precision, Tolerance, and Consensus:
Local Cultures in German and British Resistance Standards,’’ in Scientiﬁc Credibility and
Technical Standards in 19th and Early 20th-Century Germany and Britain, ed. Jed Z. Buchwald
(Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1996), 117–56; and Graeme J. N. Gooday, The Morals of Measurement:
Accuracy, Irony, and Trust in Late Victorian Electrical Practice (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2004), 82–127.
16. Latimer Clark and Sir Charles Bright, ‘‘Measurement of Electrical Quantities and
Resistance,’’ Electrician 1 (1861), 3–4.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 0 9
and Bright’s proposal as the origin of the British Association Committee.17 In
fact the committee got its start from a separate effort led by William Thomson
(later Lord Kelvin), and most of the arrangements were already in place before
Clark and Bright appeared on the scene. Thomson had taken an active part in
the Atlantic cable project and the subsequent inquiry, and was held in high
esteem by both scientists and telegraph engineers. He strongly believed that
laboratory physicists and practical engineers should adopt a shared set of
electrical standards, and though a broken leg kept him from attending the
1861 meeting, he was able, acting largely through his prot´eg´e, the cable engineer
Fleeming Jenkin, to secure appointment of a committee and the appropriation
of £50 from the British Association to fund its work.18 Initially the terms of the
committee focused solely on establishing a standard of electrical resistance, but
it soon absorbed Clark and Bright’s call for a connected system of units. Bright
himself was added to the committee in 1862 and Clark in 1866.19
Cable engineers and electrical scientists interacted in important ways on the
British Association committee; in particular, Thomson and other scientists
used the committee, with considerable though not uncontested success, to
assert scientiﬁc control over important practices in the cable industry, espe-
cially concerning electrical measurement. Over the initial objections of Clark
and other engineers, Thomson advocated adoption of the ‘‘absolute’’ system
devised in Germany by C. F. Gauss and Wilhelm Weber, in which electric and
magnetic units were not founded on the properties of particular material
objects, such as Siemens’s thread of mercury, but were derived from the
fundamental units of time, length, and mass. Thus in Gauss and Weber’s system
of electromagnetic units, electrical resistance came out as a velocity, which they
measured in millimeters per second; as the committee later expressed it, ‘‘the
17. See, for example, A. C. Lynch, ‘‘History of the Electrical Units and Early Standards,’’
Proceedings of the Institution of Electrical Engineers 132A (1985): 564–73; and Graeme Gooday,
‘‘Precision Measurement and the Genesis of Physics Teaching Laboratories in Victorian Britain,’’
British Journal for the History of Science 23 (1990): 25–51, on 34.
18. Report of the Thirty-First Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science,
held at Manchester in September 1861 (London: John Murray, 1862), xxxix–xl; Hunt, ‘‘Ohm’’ (ref.
13), 57–59.
19. A brief history of the committee can be found in F. E. Smith, ed., Reports of the Committee
on Electrical Standards appointed by the British Association for the Advancement of Science (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1913), xvii–xxiii; a convenient list of members and their dates
of service appears on xxiii–xxiv. Though originally named the ‘‘Committee to Report on Stan-
dards of Electrical Resistance,’’ from 1862 it was usually known as the ‘‘Committee on Electrical
Standards’’ and sometimes the ‘‘Committee on Electrical Measurements.’’
3 1 0
|
H U N T
resistance of a circuit is the velocity with which a conductor of unit length
must move across a magnetic ﬁeld of unit intensity in order to generate a unit
current in the circuit.’’20 The committee noted that Gauss and Weber’s system
also had the great merit of tying all electric and magnetic units to the unit of
work, ‘‘the great connecting link between all physical measurements.’’21 Thus,
for instance, a unit of current passing through a unit of potential difference
delivered one unit of power. (In a later version of the terminology the com-
mittee itself introduced, 1 amp  1 volt ¼ 1 watt). Where the values of Gauss
and Weber’s absolute units were inconveniently large or small, the committee
adopted appropriate decimal multiples to adjust them to the needs of telegra-
phers; for example, it set the value of the ‘‘British Association unit of resis-
tance’’ (later dubbed the ‘‘ohm’’) at 107 meters per second, equal to the
resistance of about a tenth of a mile of ordinary telegraph cable (and, as
the committee noted, very close to the value of Siemens’s mercury unit).22
The trafﬁc between the scientists and engineers on the committee thus ran
both ways, as the scientists brought their expertise to bear on the needs of the
telegraph industry, while also absorbing and transmitting to the broader sci-
entiﬁc community some of the techniques and approaches to electrical mea-
surement that prevailed among engineers.
Maxwell, then a young professor of natural philosophy at King’s College
London, was not initially a member of the British Association Committee, but
he was added to it in 1862 and soon took an active part in its work. Why did he
join up and what did he draw from the experience? Maxwell had long taken an
interest in new technologies, including telegraphy, but mostly as an observer
rather than, like Thomson, a direct participant.23 Thomson, based in industrial
Glasgow, would go on to develop a substantial and lucrative business as a con-
sulting telegraph engineer and instrument manufacturer; Maxwell, a Scottish
20. ‘‘Report of the Committee Appointed by the British Association on Standards of Elec-
trical Resistance,’’ Report of the Thirty-Third Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement
of Science, held at Newcastle-upon-Tyne in August and September 1863 (London: John Murray,
1864), 111–24, on 118, repr. in Smith, ed., Reports (ref. 19), 58–78, on 69.
21. ‘‘Provisional Report of the Committee Appointed by the British Association on Standards
of Electrical Resistance,’’ Report of the Thirty-Second Meeting of the British Association for the
Advancement of Science, held at Cambridge in October 1862 (London: John Murray, 1863), 125–
35 on 126, repr. in Smith, ed., Reports (ref. 19), 1–16, on 2.
22. Ibid., 126–27, 129, repr. in Smith, ed., Reports (ref. 19), 2–3, 7.
23. On Thomson’s deep involvement in technology and commerce, see Crosbie Smith and
M. Norton Wise, Energy and Empire: A Biographical Study of Lord Kelvin (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1989), 687–98.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 1 1
country gentleman with family roots in Edinburgh, always stood somewhat aside
from trade and industry, and there is little evidence that he joined the British
Association Committee out of a desire to serve the needs of the cable industry,
much less to ﬁnd a place for himself within it. Rather, he appears to have
turned to the committee in 1862 in hopes of obtaining measurements to test
and if possible conﬁrm his new electromagnetic theory of light, particularly by
verifying that the ratio of electrostatic to electromagnetic units was equal, as
his theory required, to the speed of light. In this he was only partially success-
ful, but the effort had other important consequences, as Maxwell’s exposure to
the work of the committee and to engineers’ characteristic attitudes toward the
quantities they measured led him to reframe his electromagnetic theory in
fundamental ways.
MAKING MEASUREMENTS
The most famous and important result in ‘‘Physical Lines’’ was Maxwell’s iden-
tiﬁcation of light with waves in his electromagnetic medium. This, however, was
not at all part of the paper as he initially conceived it. In its ﬁrst installments,
published in the Philosophical Magazine in March, April, and May 1861, he
showed how his vortices and idle wheels could account mechanically for the
existence and operation of magnetic ﬁelds, electric currents, and electromagnetic
induction, and he closed the May installment with some general remarks about
the use of models and analogies in physical theorizing. The tone and structure of
this section make it clear that Maxwell considered the paper completed at this
point; he gave no hint of more parts to come. But while spending the summer at
Glenlair, his estate in Scotland, he returned to his ether model and asked how he
might make it account for electrostatic phenomena. His answer—by making the
vortex cells elastic—carried with it an unexpected bonus, for he found that his
newly elastic medium could carry transverse waves very much like those of light.
Moreover, after making some simplifying (and rather questionable) assumptions
about the moduli of elasticity of his vortex cells, he found that the speed of the
waves came out equal to the ratio of electrostatic to electromagnetic units,
a quantity he came to designate as v.24
24. Maxwell, ‘‘Physical Lines’’ (ref. 1), 23: 15–22, repr. in SP 1: 492–500. Siegel, Innovation
(ref. 4), 136–41, discusses the questionable steps in Maxwell’s derivation of the wave speed; see
also Simon Schaffer, ‘‘Accurate Measurement is an English Science,’’ in The Values of Precision,
ed. M. Norton Wise (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995), 135–72, esp. 137 and 145.
3 1 2
|
H U N T
Maxwell later told Faraday that he had ‘‘worked out the formulae in the
country,’’ with no access to published measurements of v and no way to put
an actual number on the speed with which waves would travel in his vortex
medium; he knew only that it would equal the ratio of units.25 Only after he
returned to London, probably in late September 1861, did he ﬁnd that in 1857,
Wilhelm Weber and Rudolf Kohlrausch had measured the ratio to be 310,740
x 106 millimeters per second, or 193,088 miles per second. To his evident
delight, he also found in J. A. Galbraith and Samuel Haughton’s Manual of
Astronomy that Hippolyte Fizeau had measured the speed of light to be 193,118
miles per second.26 Weber and Kohlrausch had noted the closeness of the
two quantities (though they cited a slightly different value for the speed of
light), but said it had no real physical signiﬁcance; in Weber’s theory, the
ratio of units was related to the speed at which the electrostatic attraction
between two oppositely charged particles of electricity would balance their
electromagnetic repulsion, and had nothing to do with waves of light.27
Maxwell saw the matter very differently; as he wrote to Faraday on October
19, 1861, he was convinced that ‘‘this coincidence is not merely numerical,’’
but reﬂected a deep connection between light and electromagnetism. ‘‘I think
we have now strong reason to believe,’’ he declared, ‘‘whether my theory is
-
Siegel rightly emphasizes that Maxwell had settled on identifying v with the speed of the waves
before he saw Weber and Kohlrausch’s measurement; see Daniel M. Siegel, ‘‘Author’s Response,’’
Metascience 4 (1993), 31.
25. Maxwell to Michael Faraday, 19 Oct 1861, SLP 1: 685.
26. Ibid.; also Maxwell to C. J. Monro, ca. 20 Oct 1861, SLP 1: 690. Joseph Galbraith and
Samuel Haughton, Manual of Astronomy (London: Longmans, 1855), 36, gave Fizeau’s value of the
speed of light as 169,944 ‘‘geographical miles’’ (of 6000 feet) per second; converting to statute
miles, Maxwell arrived at 193,118 miles per second. Fizeau’s own published value, reported in
H. Fizeau, ‘‘Sur une exp´erience relative a` la vitesse de propagation de la lumie`re,’’ Comptes Rendus
29 (1849): 90–92, was in fact 70,948 ‘‘lieues de 25 au degr´e’’; this converts to 195,937 miles per
second, but in ‘‘Physical Lines’’ (ref. 1), 23: 22, repr. in SP 1: 500, Maxwell mistakenly transcribed
Fizeau’s number as 70,843, and so gave the speed of light as 195,647 miles per second; see Siegel,
Innovation (ref. 4), 211–12, n. 21, and Schaffer, ‘‘English Science’’ (ref. 24), 145–47.
27. On Weber and Kohlrausch’s measurement of the ratio of units, see Oliver Darrigol,
Electrodynamics from Ampe`re to Einstein (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 66. Darrigol
also discusses Gustav Kirchhoff’s 1857 derivation, based on Weber’s theory, of the speed with
which electricity would propagate in a thin wire, and Weber’s reasons for concluding that the
closeness of this value to the speed of light was not physically signiﬁcant; see 72–73. Note that
Weber’s conception of electric currents as counterﬂowing streams of oppositely charged particles
led him to focus on the ratio of electrostatic to electrodynamic units, which was larger than
Maxwell’s ratio of electrostatic to electromagnetic units by a factor of p2.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 1 3
a fact or not, that the luminiferous and the electromagnetic medium are
one.’’28
That v should equal the speed of light was not the only empirically testable
consequence of Maxwell’s vortex theory, and his immediate motive in writing
to Faraday was to obtain other experimental data. As he told Faraday, his
vortex model had led him to ‘‘some very interesting results, capable of testing
my theory, and exhibiting numerical relations between optical, electric and
electromagnetic phenomena, which I hope soon to verify more completely.’’29
In particular, Maxwell’s model predicted that the speciﬁc inductive capacity (or
relative permittivity) of a transparent dielectric would be equal to the square of
its index of refraction, and he asked Faraday if he knew of good measurements
of these quantities for different substances. Maxwell’s theory of the Faraday
effect also implied that the rotation of a beam of polarized light would be
proportional to the strength of the magnetic ﬁeld through which it passed, and
so to the size, density, and rotational speed of the underlying vortices, and he
asked if Faraday could point him toward any measurements bearing on the
question. Faraday pencilled ‘‘Verdet’’ in the margin of Maxwell’s letter, a refer-
ence to the experiments on magneto-optical phenomena that E´mile Verdet had
been publishing since 1854.30 By the time Maxwell sent an account of his vortex
model to William Thomson on December 10, 1861, he had worked Verdet’s
results into his developing theory, suggesting, for example, that he could explain
the seemingly anomalous results Verdet had found for light passing through
ferro-magnetic solutions by assuming that, in them, the magnetic vortices set
the iron molecules themselves spinning in the opposite direction.31
Maxwell wrote up two new installments of ‘‘Physical Lines,’’ published in
January and February 1862, in which he showed how making the vortex cells
elastic would enable his model to account for light waves and magneto-optic
rotation.32 In a much-quoted passage, he cited the closeness between the ratio
of units and the speed of light, and declared that ‘‘we can scarcely avoid the
inference that light consists in the transverse undulations of the same medium
which is the cause of electric and magnetic phenomena.’’33 He clearly thought he
28. Maxwell to Michael Faraday, 19 Oct 1861, SLP 1: 685–86.
29. Ibid., 683.
30. Ibid., 684–85 and n.10.
31. Maxwell to William Thomson, 10 Dec 1861, SLP 1: 692–98, esp. 697, n.28 and n.29;
Maxwell, ‘‘Physical Lines’’ (ref. 1), 23: 89–90, repr. in SP 1: 507–508.
32. Maxwell, ‘‘Physical Lines’’ (ref. 1), 23: 12–24, 85–95, repr. in SP 1: 489–513.
33. Ibid., 12: 22, repr. in SP 1: 500; emphasis in original.
3 1 4
|
H U N T
was onto something big and eagerly sought more and better experimental
evidence. Even when he found that other published measurements of the
speed of light did not match the ratio of units nearly as closely as did Galbraith
and Haughton’s report of Fizeau’s, Maxwell emphasized that the various values
lay on either side of Weber and Kohlrausch’s number, and he strongly implied
that he expected the values to converge as measurements of both quantities
improved. He also continued to seek better measurements of speciﬁc inductive
capacity, writing to Thomson that ‘‘I think Fleeming Jenkin has found that of
gutta percha caoutchouc &c.’’ and asking ‘‘where can one ﬁnd his method, and
what method do you recommend.’’34 This was Maxwell’s ﬁrst known mention
of Jenkin; it would be far from the last.
Very few letters to Maxwell from this period have survived, and we have no
record of any responses he may have received from Faraday or Thomson. Nor
do we have evidence of any direct contact between Maxwell and Jenkin at this
time. Both men were then in London, however, and Jenkin was just beginning
his work as Secretary of the British Association Committee. Given Maxwell’s
growing interest in electrical measurements and his question to Thomson, it
seems likely that he got in touch with Jenkin in the early months of 1862. In
any case, we know that Maxwell formally joined the British Association Com-
mittee in October 1862, and thereafter worked closely with Jenkin, ﬁrst assem-
bling the necessary apparatus and then performing the experiments that ﬁrst
established the value of the ohm.35
34. Maxwell to William Thomson, 10 Dec. 1861, SLP 1: 697. Although Maxwell and Jenkin
both attended the Edinburgh Academy in the 1840s, there is no evidence they were acquainted
then; see Gillian Cookson and Colin Hempstead, A Victorian Scientist and Engineer: Fleeming
Jenkin and the Birth of Electrical Engineering (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2000), 16–18. On Jenkin’s work
on the inductive capacities of gutta-percha and rubber, see Bruce J. Hunt, ‘‘Insulation for an
Empire: Gutta-Percha and the Development of Electrical Measurement in Victorian Britain,’’ in
Semaphores to Short Waves, ed. Frank A. J. L. James (London: Royal Society of Arts, 1998), 85–104,
on 98–99.
35. Bright’s brother and son later claimed that Bright and Clark’s 1861 British Association
paper ‘‘formed the sequel to a letter addressed by Bright to Prof. J. Clerk Maxwell, F. R. S., some
months previously, on the whole question of electrical standards and units’’; see E. B. Bright and
Charles Bright, The Life Story of the Late Sir Charles Tilston Bright, vol. 2 (2 vols., London:
Constable, 1899), 21. Maxwell, however, had not shown any interest in electrical units before Oct
1861, and it seems unlikely that months earlier Bright would have written to him out of the blue
on the subject. It seems more likely that Maxwell wrote to Bright in search of experimental data
in the fall of 1861, around the time of his letters to Faraday and Thomson, and perhaps elicited
a reply about electrical standards.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 1 5
In its 1862 report, the British Association Committee had adopted 107
meters per second as its unit of electrical resistance, but that was only the
prelude to the difﬁcult task of constructing a physical standard (essentially
a coil of wire) that would accurately embody the new unit.36 In the wake of the
1862 meeting, that task was assigned to a London-based subcommittee con-
sisting of Jenkin, Maxwell, and Balfour Stewart, the director of the Kew
Observatory and an expert on terrestrial magnetism. They planned to use
a method devised by Thomson in which a small magnet attached to a needle
was suspended within a large coil of wire. Initially the needle simply pointed
northward, but as the coil was spun around a vertical diameter, its motion
through the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld induced a current within it that deﬂected the
needle. The neat trick here was that since both the original force directing the
needle to the north and the new one arising from the induced current were
proportional to the strength of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, the net deﬂection was
independent of that ﬁeld and depended solely on the size of the coil, its speed
of rotation, and crucially, its electrical resistance. The spinning coil method
was conceptually simple, but carrying it out to high precision involved many
subtleties. For instance, the need for a very steady rate of spin prompted both
Maxwell and Jenkin to take up the theory of governors, while Maxwell’s
observations of the decaying oscillations of the deﬂected needle led him to
experiments on the viscosity of air that later provided a crucial test of his
kinetic theory of gases.37
Once they had set up and tested the apparatus, Maxwell, Jenkin, and
Stewart spent May and June 1863 spinning their coil and taking readings in
a basement room at King’s College London. As Maxwell later described the
procedure, ‘‘the Secretary’’ (Jenkin) cranked the driving wheel, ‘‘the Astrono-
mer’’ (Stewart) timed the rotation of the coil, and Maxwell himself tracked the
36. The British Association Committee initially intended to construct a material standard as
close to 107 meters per second as possible and then treat that as the unit, in much the same way
that the meter, though in principle set at 10–7 of the distance from the equator to the pole, came
to be deﬁned as a length marked on a metal bar kept near Paris. See ‘‘Provisional Report, 1862’’
(ref. 21), 129–30, repr. in Smith, ed., Reports (ref. 19), 7. Later the Committee simply deﬁned the
‘‘B. A. unit,’’ or ohm, as 107 meters per second, though it had continuing difﬁculties constructing
a material standard that matched its deﬁned value.
37. Maxwell to William Thomson, 11 Sep 1863, SLP 2: 112–16, includes discussion of ‘‘Jenkin’s
governor’’ and Maxwell’s own; see also James Clerk Maxwell, ‘‘On Governors,’’ Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London 16 (1868), 270–83, repr. SP 2: 105–20. Concerning Maxwell’s work on the
viscosity of air, see Maxwell to G. G. Stokes, 9 June 1863, SLP 2: 96, n.10.
3 1 6
|
H U N T
deﬂection of the needle through a telescope.38 Unexpected complications soon
turned up, arising from such things as small shifts in the direction of the earth’s
magnetic ﬁeld and difﬁculties in regulating the temperature of the coil; even
the passing of steamers on the Thames could affect the sensitive magnetic
needle. Maxwell’s biographer, Lewis Campbell, said in 1882 that Jenkin had
preserved ‘‘a mass of correspondence, containing numerous suggestions made
by Maxwell from day to day in 1863–64,’’ but apart from one quoted by
Campbell, those letters have all been lost.39 Maxwell also consulted with
Thomson, sending him accounts of the ‘‘spins’’ and inviting him to observe
a few and give advice when he was in London in early June.40
As Maxwell and Jenkin reﬁned their procedures, they became conﬁdent
they could bring their results to a high level of precision. They made more
spins over the winter and spring of 1863–64, with Stewart’s place being taken
by Charles Hockin, a recent Cambridge graduate who later became a leading
cable engineer.41 They had hoped to be able to issue certiﬁed coils at the
British Association meeting in September 1864, but the work of duplicating
the standards went slowly, and Elliott Brothers, the London instrument ma-
kers, began to sell unofﬁcial coils that autumn to ‘‘persons who were unwilling
to wait for the ﬁnal experiments by the Committee.’’42 Certiﬁed standards
were ﬁnally ready in February 1865, when Jenkin sent the Philosophical Mag-
azine a brief notice announcing that, for a small charge, ‘‘copies of the Standard
of Electrical Resistance chosen by the Committee on Electrical Standards
38. Maxwell to Robert Dundas Cay, 21 Aug 1863, SLP 2: 103; James Clerk Maxwell, Balfour
Stewart, and Fleeming Jenkin, ‘‘Description of an Experimental Measurement of Electrical
Resistance, made at King’s College,’’ Appendix D to ‘‘Report, 1863’’ (ref. 20), 163–76, on 174, repr.
in Smith, ed., Reports (ref. 19), 156. See also I. B. Hopley, ‘‘Maxwell’s Work on Electrical
Resistance: The Redetermination of the Absolute Unit of Resistance,’’ Annals of Science 13 (1957):
265–72. On the King’s College laboratory, see Jordi Cat, Maxwell, Sutton, and the Birth of Color
Photography: A Binocular Study (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013).
39. Lewis Campbell and William Garnett, The Life of James Clerk Maxwell (London: Mac-
millan, 1882), 317 and 336–37.
40. Maxwell to William Thomson, 29 May 1863, SLP 2: 88–92; also 93–94 and 98–101.
41. See the obituary of Hockin in Electrician 8 (1882): 409–10.
42. On standards made by Elliott Bros. in 1864, as well as a set made by Siemens and Halske
of Berlin for the government telegraphs in India, see ‘‘Report of the Committee on Standards of
Electrical Resistance,’’ Report of the Thirty-Fourth Meeting of the British Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, held at Bath in September 1864 (London: John Murray, 1865), 345–49, on 345, repr.
in Smith, ed., Reports (ref. 19), 159–66, on 159. See Maxwell to Hockin, 7 Sep 1864, SLP 2: 164,
expressing ‘‘hope there will be resistance coils at the British Association,’’ and Gooday, Morals
(ref. 15), 107–10, on Augustus Matthiessen’s laborious efforts with Hockin to make reliable
duplicates of the resistance standards.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 1 7
appointed by the British Association in 1861, can now be procured by appli-
cation to me as Secretary to the Committee.’’43 As Maxwell wrote to Tait on
March 7, 1865, ‘‘The true origin of Electrical Resistance as expressed in B. A.
units is Fleeming Jenkin Esqre 6 Duke Street Adelphi W. C. Price £2..10 in
a box.’’44 The committee also sent standard coils gratis to government tele-
graph departments around the world and to several eminent physicists, includ-
ing Weber, Gustav Kirchhoff, and James Joule.
The new standard was soon taken up by instrument makers, scientiﬁc
laboratories, and perhaps most importantly by the companies that made and
laid telegraph cables. In an 1873 review of Jenkin’s Electricity and Magnetism,
a textbook aimed at ‘‘practical men,’’ Maxwell made it clear that he believed
the real call for precision measurement and accurate electrical standards came
from engineers and businessmen rather than from academic scientists. Echoing
remarks Jenkin had made in the opening pages of his book, Maxwell observed:
At the present time there are two sciences of electricity—one that of the
lecture-room and the popular treatise; the other that of the testing-ofﬁce and
the engineer’s speciﬁcation. The ﬁrst deals with sparks and shocks which are
seen and felt, the other with currents and resistances to be measured and
calculated. The popularity of the one science depends on human curiosity;
the diffusion of the other is a result of the demand for electricians as
telegraph engineers.45
Agreed standards and reliable measurements were vital to any commercial
exchange, and those drawing up contracts for expensive telegraph systems and
submarine cables wanted to be sure they were getting exactly what they paid
for. Siemens’s mercury unit was cited in some telegraph speciﬁcations in the
early 1860s, but it largely gave way to the new British Association unit later in
the decade, particularly in cable telegraphy. The cable industry was dominated
by British ﬁrms and at the time constituted by far the largest market for
precision electrical measurement; the British Association Committee knew
that if it could persuade the cable industry to adopt its standards, the battle
would practically be won. In 1865 the committee boasted that ‘‘[t]he new unit
has been actually employed to express the tests of the Atlantic Telegraph
43. Fleeming Jenkin, ‘‘Electrical Standard,’’ PM 29 (1865): 248.
44. Maxwell to P. G. Tait, 7 Mar 1865, SLP 2: 214.
45. [James Clerk Maxwell], review of Electricity and Magnetism, by Fleeming Jenkin, Nature 8
(1873): 42–43, repr. in SLP 2: 842–44, on 842; Fleeming Jenkin, Electricity and Magnetism
(London: Longmans, 1873), vii.
3 1 8
|
H U N T
Cable,’’ but certiﬁed standards were not yet available when its speciﬁcations
(both for the cable that snapped during laying in August 1865 and the one that
was successfully completed the following year) were drawn up.46 There was
a brief lull in cable laying after 1866, but in 1868, companies led by ‘‘cable king’’
John Pender launched a wave of new projects that would set the pattern for the
entire industry. Beginning with the contract for the Malta–Alexandria cable,
drawn up in May 1868, these called for the resistance of both the copper
conductor and the gutta-percha insulation to be measured in ‘‘B. A. units’’
or, as they soon came to be called, ‘‘ohms’’ and ‘‘megohms.’’47
Problems with the British Association resistance standards began to turn up
in the 1870s, as we shall see, and their values later had to be adjusted. But in the
late 1860s, the new system appeared to be a clear success; its units and standards
had taken ﬁrm root in the cable industry and were rapidly becoming central to
the daily practice of telegraph engineers. Its work seemingly done, in 1870, the
British Association Committee dissolved itself.
‘‘ELEMENTARY RELATIONS’’
Maxwell’s work for the British Association Committee had two sides, exper-
imental and conceptual. His experimental work led to the establishment of the
ohm and the associated system of units and standards; his conceptual work
resulted in an important but often overlooked paper on ‘‘The Elementary
Relations Between Electrical Measurements.’’ Written with Jenkin and ﬁrst
published as an appendix to the committee’s 1863 report, ‘‘Elementary Relations’’
was devoted to formulating the basic principles of electrical measurement
as clearly and simply as possible, with a minimum of speculation or hypothesis.
46. ‘‘Report of the Committee on Standards of Electrical Resistance,’’ Report of the Thirty-
Fifth Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, held at Birmingham in
September 1865 (London: John Murray, 1866), 308–11, on 311, repr. in Smith, ed., Reports (ref. 19),
190–95, on 194. See Bern Dibner, The Atlantic Cable (Norwalk, CT: Burndy Library, 1959).
47. See the cable contracts in DOC/ETC/1/114, held by the Porthcurno Telegraph Museum,
Porthcurno, Cornwall. The ﬁrst, dated 11 May 1868, called for the resistance of the conductor of
a new cable from Malta to Alexandria to be ‘‘9 B. A. units per nautical mile’’ and that of its gutta
percha covering to be ‘‘not less than 200 millions of B. A. units per nautical mile.’’ By the time the
contract for a cable from Marseille to La Calle (Algeria) was signed on 5 Feb 1870, the terminology
had changed: resistance of the conductor was speciﬁed to be ‘‘not more than 12.15 ohms be
nautical mile’’ and that of the gutta percha covering ‘‘not less than 150 megohms per nautical
mile.’’ There was occasional confusion; for instance, the 15 Aug 1870 speciﬁcation for a new
Anglo-Mediterranean cable referred throughout to ‘‘shms’’ and ‘‘megshms.’’
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 1 9
It ﬁts right between ‘‘Physical Lines’’ and ‘‘Dynamical Theory,’’ and adding it to
our previous list of three papers helps clear up some otherwise puzzling aspects of
Maxwell’s apparent shift in approach between 1862 and 1864, and illuminates
themes that would run through his later work.48
In 1901, Richard Glazebrook, a leading ﬁgure for many years at the Cavend-
ish Laboratory in Cambridge, the ﬁrst head of the National Physical Labora-
tory (effectively the British standards bureau), and a great expert on precision
electrical measurement, declared with perhaps only slight exaggeration that
Maxwell and Jenkin’s 1863 paper laid ‘‘the foundation of everything that has
been done in the way of absolute electrical measurement since that date.’’49
Surveying the ﬁeld in 1907, E. B. Rosa and and N. E. Dorsey of the National
Bureau of Standards in Washington called the paper ‘‘masterly’’ and quoted
long passages from it; it long remained a touchstone for those engaged in
precision electrical measurement.50 ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ has attracted little
attention from historians, however, no doubt in part because it was omitted
from W. D. Niven’s 1890 edition of Maxwell’s Scientiﬁc Papers and also from
Peter Harman’s recent edition of Maxwell’s Scientiﬁc Letters and Papers. Sim-
ply getting its title straight has proven tricky; in his excellent Dictionary of
Scientiﬁc Biography article on Maxwell, later published separately as James Clerk
Maxwell: Physicist and Natural Philosopher, Francis Everitt inexplicably cited it
as ‘‘On the Elementary Relations of Electrical Quantities,’’ an error John
Hendry, Daniel Siegel, and Harman all later repeated.51
48. James Clerk Maxwell and Fleeming Jenkin, ‘‘On the Elementary Relations between
Electrical Measurements,’’ Report of the Thirty-Third Meeting of the British Association for the
Advancement of Science, held at Newcastle-upon-Tyne in August and September 1863 (London: John
Murray, 1864), 130–63, and in the separately issued Report of the Committee appointed by the British
Association on Standards of Electrical Resistance (London: Taylor and Francis, 1864), which
retained the same pagination. ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ appeared with minor revisions in PM 29
(1865): 436–60, 507–25, and with more extensive changes in Fleeming Jenkin, ed., Reports of the
Committee on Electrical Standards appointed by the British Association for the Advancement of
Science (London: Spon, 1873), 59–96; the latter version was reprinted in Smith, ed., Reports (ref.
19), 86–140. Citations here will be to the version in the 1863 British Association Report.
49. R. T. Glazebrook, James Clerk Maxwell and Modern Physics (London: Cassell, 1901), 55–56.
50. E. B. Rosa and N. E. Dorsey, ‘‘A Comparison of the Various Methods of Determining the
Ratio of the Electromagnetic to the Electrostatic Unit of Electricity,’’ Bulletin of the Bureau of
Standards 3 (1907): 605–22, on 605.
51. Everitt, Maxwell (ref. 4), 100; Hendry, Maxwell (ref. 7), 200, 294; Siegel, Innovation (ref.
4), 215 n.17; Harman, SLP 2: 8. The paper is brieﬂy discussed (under the correct title) in Harman,
Natural Philosophy (ref. 4), 64–65, mainly in connection with dimensional analysis, and in
Thomas K. Simpson, Maxwell on the Electromagnetic Field: A Guided Study (New Brunswick,
NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1997), 409 n.9. It is taken up more fully in Salvo d’Agostino,
3 2 0
|
H U N T
Set next to the path-breaking ‘‘Physical Lines’’ and the magisterial ‘‘Dynam-
ical Theory,’’ it is easy to see how ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ could be overlooked.
It is not a ﬂashy paper, and at least on the surface, it contains little that would
have seemed obviously new; long stretches are devoted to carefully deﬁning
such things as magnetic induction and electromotive force and to clarifying
how such quantities are related to each other. Instead of advancing dazzling
new experimental results or bold theoretical ideas, ‘‘Elementary Relations’’
sought simply to make readers’ ideas about electrical and magnetic phenomena
clearer and more deﬁnite, and to relate those ideas as closely as possible to
quantities that could actually be measured. Its ultimate aim was to facilitate
fruitful collaboration and exchange. ‘‘Whenever many persons are to act
together,’’ Maxwell and Jenkin observed, ‘‘it is necessary that they should have
a common understanding of the measures to be employed,’’ and their aim in
‘‘Elementary Relations,’’ they said, was ‘‘to assist in attaining this common
understanding as to electrical measurements.’’52 They were in effect seeking to
carve out what Peter Galison has called a ‘‘trading zone,’’ a realm in which
scientists and engineers who might have very different practical aims and
theoretical commitments could nonetheless act in concert when making and
comparing electrical measurements.53
Aside from a note toward the end that is credited to Maxwell, it is hard say
which of the coauthors wrote any particular part of ‘‘Elementary Relations,’’
and it is perhaps best to treat all of it as reﬂecting both men’s views.54 Maxwell
and Jenkin evidently saw eye-to-eye on most subjects, and they certainly
became close friends. Maxwell later took to calling Jenkin ‘‘the Fleemingo,’’
and Jenkin asked Maxwell to serve as the godfather of his youngest son,
Bernard Maxwell Jenkin, born in 1867.55
-
‘‘Experiment and Theory in Maxwell’s Work: The Measurements for Absolute Electromagnetic
Units and the Velocity of Light,’’ Scientia 113 (1978), 469–80, esp. 472, but d’Agostino’s argument
is vitiated by his misattribution to Maxwell of the 1863 ‘‘Report’’ of the Committee on Standards
of Electrical Resistance, which was written by William Thomson; see S. P. Thompson, Life of Sir
William Thomson, Baron Kelvin of Largs, vol. 1 (London: Macmillan, 1910), 419.
52. Maxwell and Jenkin, ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ (ref. 48), 130.
53. On ‘‘trading zones,’’ see Peter Galison, Image and Logic: A Material Culture of Microphysics
(Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1997), 803–05.
54. Maxwell and Jenkin, ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ (ref. 48), 160–61; this ‘‘Note,’’ including
a discussion of how magnetic measurements would differ if made in ‘‘a sea of melted bismuth’’
rather than in air, was omitted when the paper was reprinted in 1873 and 1913.
55. Maxwell to Tait, 7 Nov 1874, SLP 3: 135; on Maxwell as godfather to Bernard Maxwell
Jenkin, see Cookson and Hempstead, Jenkin (ref. 34), 17.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 2 1
In the opening lines of the paper, Maxwell and Jenkin placed their effort
squarely within a technological context. ‘‘The progress and extension of the
electric telegraph,’’ they declared, ‘‘has made a practical knowledge of electric
and magnetic phenomena necessary to a large number of persons who are more
or less occupied in the construction and working of the lines, and interesting to
many others who are unwilling to be ignorant of the use of the network of
wires which surrounds them.’’ The situation called for a careful analysis of
foundations, they said, for ‘‘between the student’s mere knowledge of the
history of discovery and the workman’s practical familiarity with particular
operations which can only be communicated to others by direct imitation, we
are in want to a set of rules, or rather principles,’’ to guide us in applying
abstract laws to achieve speciﬁc ends.56
The thrust of ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ is strongly anti-hypothetical, in places
what we might, a little anachronistically, call ‘‘operationalist.’’ Thus Maxwell
and Jenkin deﬁned ‘‘electric quantity’’ or ‘‘charge’’ not by invoking an impon-
derable ﬂuid, or even strains in a surrounding ﬁeld, but by noting that ‘‘[w]hen
two light conducting bodies are connected with the same pole of a voltaic
battery, while the other pole is connected to the earth, they may be observed to
repel one another. . . . Bodies, when in a condition to exert this peculiar force
one on the other, are said to be electriﬁed, or charged with electricity. These
words are mere names given to a peculiar condition of matter.’’57 For the
purposes of their paper, Maxwell and Jenkin did not wish to commit them-
selves to anything beyond what could be seen and measured; an electric
current, they said, did not necessarily represent the ﬂow of anything material,
and should be regarded as simply a state into which certain bodies are thrown
under certain circumstances, as when a wire is connected across the poles of
a battery. Similarly, they said, ‘‘in speaking of a quantity of electricity, we need
not conceive it as a separate thing, or entity distinct from ponderable matter,
any more than in speaking of sound we conceive it as having a distinct exis-
tence.’’ We nonetheless often ﬁnd it convenient to speak of the ‘‘velocity of
sound,’’ and in the same way ‘‘we may speak of electricity, without for
a moment imagining that any real electric ﬂuid exists.’’58 Jenkin would take
the same tack ten years later in his Electricity and Magnetism, saying that
although for convenience he sometimes spoke of electricity as ﬂowing like
56. Maxwell and Jenkin, ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ (ref. 48), 130.
57. Ibid., 136.
58. Ibid.
3 2 2
|
H U N T
a ﬂuid, ‘‘it is quite unnecessary to assume that the phenomena are due to one
ﬂuid, two ﬂuids, or any ﬂuid whatever.’’59
The members of the British Association Committee knew that to win the
widest possible acceptance for their proposed system of standards, they needed
to take care that it not be seen as tied to any one national tradition or any
particular theory of electromagnetism, whether Faraday and Maxwell’s ﬁeld
theory on the one hand or Weber’s action-at-a-distance theory on the other.
The committee sought, Maxwell and Jenkin said, to form a system that ‘‘bears
the stamp of the authority, not of this or that legislator or man of science, but
of nature.’’60 Toward that end, Maxwell and Jenkin formulated their deﬁni-
tions and accompanying equations in ways that simply related together mac-
roscopic objects and forces that one could measure and manipulate, while
founding the entire system on universal units of mass, length, and time. It
was an approach that George Chrystal and others would later describe as
‘‘businesslike’’; moreover, it reﬂected a characteristic engineering approach to
such problems.61
As Edwin Layton and others have observed, engineers typically focus on
macroscopic phenomena and seek to formulate empirically veriﬁable relations
between quantities they can measure and control. They are concerned with
practical outcomes and generally see little value in speculating about unseen
entities that will not affect the result. Physicists, on this account, are more
concerned with ferreting out the physical microstructure underlying such
macroscopic phenomena, and are not averse to introducing hypotheses about
molecules and the like to help them do so; indeed, Layton pointed to the
contrast between a macroscopic and a microscopic focus as one of the ‘‘mirror-
image’’ differences between engineers and scientists.62 Jenkin himself embod-
ied both sides of this divide. Well known for the great breadth of his interests,
59. Jenkin, Electricity and Magnetism (ref. 45), 1.
60. Ibid., 131.
61. George Chrystal, review of Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, by James Clerk Maxwell,
Nature 25 (21 Jan 1882): 237–40, on 238.
62. Edwin Layton, ‘‘Mirror-Image Twins: The Communities of Science and Technology in
19th-Century America,’’ Technology and Culture 12 (1971): 562–89, on 569. See also David Chan-
nell, ‘‘The Harmony of Theory and Practice: The Engineering Science of W.J.M. Rankine,’’
Technology and Culture 23 (1982): 39–52, on 51–52; and Walter G. Vincenti, What Engineers Know
and How They Know It: Analytical Studies from Aeronautical History (Baltimore, MD: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1990), 129–36. Of course, some branches of physics, notably thermo-
dynamics, focus on macroscopic phenomena and leave aside microphysical considerations, but
note that thermodynamics had strong engineering roots in the study of steam engines; see
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 2 3
he was on occasion happy to play the natural philosopher and speculate about
such things as the structure of atoms and the inner workings of the ether,
notably in an inﬂuential 1868 essay on Lucretian atomism.63 In his engineering
writings, however, Jenkin left such microphysical hypotheses ﬁrmly aside; his
concern there was solely with what he could measure and manipulate. His
Electricity and Magnetism contains scarcely a word about the ultimate nature or
microphysical foundations of its ostensible subjects; he opened it not by asking
‘‘What is Electricity?’’ but by describing how to detect and measure ‘‘Electric
Quantity.’’64
In an important 1987 paper on the ways science and technology interacted
in the development of the induction motor, Ronald Kline argued that in this
case Layton’s distinction did not hold, since everyone involved, both scientists
and engineers, used equations drawn from Maxwell’s 1864 ‘‘Dynamical The-
ory’’ that were already cast in macroscopic form and did not involve any
hypothetical microstructure. Kline wrote that ‘‘Maxwell [had] himself made
the fundamental translation of knowledge between electrophysics and electro-
technology,’’ driven by a desire to understand the workings of certain electrical
instruments, particularly ones involving spinning coils like those he had used
on the British Association Committee to establish the value of the ohm.65
I would go further and argue that Maxwell’s focus on such instruments, and his
characteristic way of dealing with them, were themselves driven by a larger
technological context, that associated with the formation of the British Asso-
ciation Committee itself. Maxwell’s 1861–62 ‘‘Physical Lines of Force’’ is about
the hypothetical microstructure of the ether; his 1864 ‘‘Dynamical Theory of
the Electromagnetic Field’’ is not. His 1863 paper with Jenkin on ‘‘Elementary
Relations’’ was in effect a transition piece that served to carry him, at least for
a time and for speciﬁc purposes, to a less hypothetical, more macroscopic—
and more engineering-oriented—approach to electrical phenomena.
-
D.S.L. Cardwell, From Watt to Clausius: The Rise of Thermodynamics in the Early Industrial Age
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1971).
63. Fleeming Jenkin, ‘‘The Atomic Theory of Lucretius,’’ North British Review 48 (1868): 211–
42, repr. as ‘‘Lucretius and the Atomic Theory’’ in Sidney Colvin and J. A. Ewing, eds., Papers
Literary, Scientiﬁc, &c. by the late Fleeming Jenkin, F. R. S., Vol. 1 (2 vols., London: Longmans,
1887), 177–214; see also Crosbie Smith, ‘‘Engineering the Universe: William Thomson and
Fleeming Jenkin on the Nature of Matter,’’ Annals of Science 37 (1980): 387–412.
64. Jenkin, Electricity and Magnetism (ref. 45), 1.
65. Ronald Kline, ‘‘Science and Engineering Theory in the Invention and Development of the
Induction Motor, 1880–1900,’’ Technology and Culture 28 (1987): 283–313, on 313.
3 2 4
|
H U N T
In ‘‘Elementary Relations,’’ Maxwell and Jenkin sought to place electrical
and magnetic measurements on a concrete, unhypothetical foundation that all
scientists and engineers could endorse. They saw this as a ﬁrst step toward
winning universal acceptance for the British Association system of units and
standards, particularly in the face of Siemens’s competing mercury unit. They
also needed to explain in a simple and accessible way the principles behind
‘‘absolute’’ electric and magnetic measurement—a subject that, as originally
presented by Gauss and Weber, struck most telegraph engineers as abstruse,
forbidding, and of little practical value. An arbitrary material standard of
resistance (such as Siemens’s column of mercury) combined with a similarly
arbitrary standard of electromotive force (such as that given by a Daniell’s cell
or other stable voltaic battery) would have provided a coherent system of
electrical units, as the British Association Committee freely admitted, and
would have met the main needs of telegraphers.66 Few engineers in the
1860s thus saw much value in relating their electrical measurements to mechan-
ical units of mass, force, and work, as was done in Weber’s system; telling them
the resistance of a length of wire could be expressed as so many meters per
second had little appeal to telegraphers who simply wanted to compare the
resistance of one wire to that of another. Latimer Clark was among those who
initially dismissed Weber’s units as impractical, saying in 1862 that he hoped
the newly formed British Association Committee would not ‘‘recommend the
adoption of Weber’s absolute units, or some other units of a magnitude ill
adapted to the peculiar and various requirements of the electric telegraph.’’67
In ‘‘Elementary Relations,’’ however, Maxwell and Jenkin reiterated that sim-
ple decimal multiples could be used to deﬁne practical units of convenient size,
while also emphasizing, as had Thomson, that the absolute system had the
great merit of linking all physical measurements to units of energy. For Thom-
son, energy (or work) was the ultimate measure of value, grounded, as Crosbie
Smith has shown, in an overarching view of what really counts in the physical
world.68 Moreover, in urging that the system of electrical units be tied to the
concept of energy, Thomson and the committee showed what proved to be
valuable foresight, for although energy considerations rarely came up in teleg-
raphy, the rise of the electric power industry later made them fundamental to
66. ‘‘Report, 1863’’ (ref. 20), 114, repr. in Smith, ed., Reports (ref. 19), 62–63.
67. Latimer Clark, letter to the editor, Electrician 1 (1862): 129.
68. Smith, Science of Energy (ref. 4), 121–25.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 2 5
electrical engineering practice. Indeed, Clark himself later acknowledged what
he called ‘‘the enormous value of an absolute system’’ of electrical units.69
Along with energy considerations, Maxwell and Jenkin made analysis of the
dimensions of physical quantities a central feature of ‘‘Elementary Relations.’’
Each time they introduced a quantity, they took care to express its dimensions
in terms of products and ratios of length, time, and mass, or L, T, and M, and
showed how attention to dimensions clariﬁed the relationships among quan-
tities. Thus energy, with the dimensions L2M/T2, could be regarded as the
product of force, LM/T2, and distance, L, or of momentum, LM/T, and
velocity, L/T. Joseph Fourier had drawn up a table of dimensions as early as
1822, but Maxwell and Jenkin appear to have worked out the underlying
principles independently, and their treatment of dimensional analysis in ‘‘Ele-
mentary Relations’’ played a major part in spreading knowledge of the subject
more widely. They introduced the now familiar bracket notation, [LM/T], in
the 1873 reprint of the British Association Committee reports, edited by
Jenkin.70
Maxwell and Jenkin made a special point of establishing the dimensions of
v, the ratio of electrostatic to electromagnetic units. By analyzing the force
between two charges, they had already shown that in the electrostatic system,
charge has the dimensions L3/2M1/2/T; similarly, by analyzing the force
between two current-carrying wires, they had shown that in the electromagnetic
system, charge has the dimensions L1/2M1/2. The ratio of the two systems’ units
thus came out as L/T, a velocity—one whose magnitude, they emphasized, was
independent of any particular theory of electrical action or choice of basic
units.71 Citing Weber and Kohlrausch’s measurement of v as 310,740,000
meters per second, they noted that this was ‘‘a velocity not differing from the
estimated velocity of light more than the different determinations of the latter
69. Latimer Clark to William Thomson, 3 May 1883, quoted in Smith and Wise, Energy and
Empire (ref. 23), 687.
70. On the history of dimensional analysis, including Fourier’s contributions, see John J.
Roche, The Mathematics of Measurement: A Critical History (London: Athlone Press, 1998), 188–
207, and the 1877 article by J. C. M[axwell], ‘‘On Dimensions,’’ Encyclopedia Britannica, 9th
edn., vol. 7, (Edinburgh, 1875–89), 240–41, repr. SLP 3: 517–20. Although Maxwell and Jenkin
did not mention Fourier’s earlier work in the original 1863 version of ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ (ref.
48), they added a note about it to the 1873 revision, 89n., repr. in Smith, ed., Reports (ref. 19), 132n.
71. Maxwell and Jenkin, ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ (ref. 48), 149; see also Treatise, § 768, and
James Clerk Maxwell, ‘‘On a Method of Making a Direct Comparison of Electrostatic and
Electromagnetic Force; with a Note on the Electromagnetic Theory of Light,’’ Philosophical
Transactions 158 (1868): 643–57, on 643–44, repr. in SP 2: 125–43, on 125–26.
3 2 6
|
H U N T
quantity differ from each other.’’72 Although Maxwell and Jenkin made no overt
reference in ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ to the electromagnetic theory of light, they
were clearly dropping hints.
Weber and Kohlrausch had found v by measuring a quantity of electricity
ﬁrst in electrostatic units, by charging a condenser of known capacity to
a potential that they measured with an electrometer, and then in electromag-
netic units, by discharging the condenser through an electrodynamometer and
gauging the degree and duration of its deﬂection.73 Over the summer of 1863,
Maxwell and Jenkin discussed two other methods, based on ﬁnding common
measures of electromotive force and of resistance, and in ‘‘Elementary Rela-
tions’’ they added two more, based on ﬁnding common measures of current
and of capacity; the capacity method, they said, ‘‘would probably yield very
accurate results,’’ as indeed later proved to be the case.74
Like Thomson before him, Maxwell emphasized that the ratio of units was
an important quantity quite apart from the electromagnetic theory of light. It
came into play whenever energy passed between its electromagnetic and elec-
trostatic forms, as in a submarine cable carrying a pulse of current and its
concomitant wave of voltage, and so ﬁgured in calculations of the limits on the
speed of signalling.75 Noting the practical and scientiﬁc importance of an
accurate knowledge of the ratio of units, Maxwell and Jenkin announced in
‘‘Elementary Relations’’ that ‘‘a redetermination of v will form part of the
present Committee’s business in 1863–64.’’76 However, the most promising
methods for ﬁnding v depended on comparing it to a resistance whose value
was already known in absolute units (so that v would actually be measured in
‘‘B. A. units,’’ or ohms), and the redetermination of v thus had to wait until the
committee had completed its work on the new resistance standard.
In the meantime, Maxwell set about refashioning his electromagnetic theory
to take maximum advantage of the new determination of v once it became
available. His experience on the British Association Committee and especially
72. Maxwell and Jenkin, ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ (ref. 48), 149.
73. Darrigol, Electrodynamics (ref. 27), 66.
74. Maxwell to Fleeming Jenkin, 27 Aug 1863, in Campbell and Garnett, Maxwell (ref. 39),
336–37; Maxwell and Jenkin, ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ (ref. 48), 153–54; Rosa and Dorsey,
‘‘Comparison’’ (ref. 50), 616–17. In a letter to G. G. Stokes, 15 Oct. 1864, SLP 2: 188, Maxwell said
he and Jenkin planned to measure v by the capacity method, but they never did so.
75. Maxwell, ‘‘Direct Comparison’’ (ref. 71), 644, repr. in SP 2: 126; see also Schaffer, ‘‘English
Science’’ (ref. 24), 149.
76. Maxwell and Jenkin, ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ (ref. 48), 149.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 2 7
in writing ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ had brought home to him the persuasive
value of basing his theoretical claims as directly as possible on measureable
quantities and the demonstrable relations among them. A speculative hypoth-
esis like his vortex and idle wheel model might be a wonderfully fruitful source
of new ideas, but it was unlikely to carry much weight with skeptical critics.
Once he had a reliable measurement of the ratio of units in hand, Maxwell
wanted to be able to cite it as evidence that light was indeed waves in the
electromagnetic medium without facing objections that he had derived the
supposed connection between v and the speed of light from a fanciful mechan-
ical model. As he and Jenkin had done in their examination of ‘‘The Elemen-
tary Relations Between Electrical Measurements,’’ Maxwell sought to strip his
theory of its hypothetical elements and reduce it to what could, he argued, be
derived from measureable phenomena. The result was his ‘‘Dynamical Theory
of the Electromagnetic Field.’’
‘‘DYNAMICAL THEORY’’ AND THE RATIO OF UNITS
Maxwell and Jenkin ﬁnished writing ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ in the fall of 1863
and, with Hockin, completed their spinning coil experiments the following
spring.77 While laying plans to measure the ratio of units, Maxwell turned to
composing his ‘‘Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field.’’ He began
by justifying its name: it was a theory of the ﬁeld, he said, because it concerned
the space surrounding electric and magnetic bodies, and a dynamical theory
‘‘because it assumes that in that space there is matter in motion, by which the
observed electromagnetic phenomena are produced.’’78 Unlike in ‘‘Physical
Lines,’’ however, he did not proceed to lay out a detailed mechanical model
of the medium and then set about explicating its workings. Instead, he simply
started with the laws of energy that governed any connected dynamical system
and, drawing on what had become the standard tools of Cambridge mathe-
matical physics, used a Lagrangian analysis to derive what he argued were the
necessary relations among electric and magnetic quantities. Maxwell’s methods
were those of a Cambridge wrangler, but his motivation for using them as he
did was rooted in the measurement-based approach of ‘‘Elementary Relations.’’
77. James Clerk Maxwell, Fleeming Jenkin, and Charles Hockin, ‘‘Description of a Further
Experimental Measurement of Electrical Resistance Made at King’s College,’’ Appendix A to
‘‘Report, 1864’’ (ref. 42), 350–51, repr. in Smith, ed., Reports (ref. 19), 166–67.
78. Maxwell, ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ (ref. 2), 460, repr. SP 1: 527.
3 2 8
|
H U N T
Maxwell wrote most of ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ at Glenlair over the summer
and added the ﬁnishing touches after returning to London in the fall; on
October 27, 1864, he submitted it to the Royal Society for publication in the
Philosophical Transactions, traditionally the favored repository for the least
speculative contributions to science.79 The way he described his paper in
letters to friends is revealing. Writing to Hockin from Glenlair on September
7, Maxwell said he had now ‘‘cleared the electromagnetic theory of light from
all unwarrantable assumption, so that we may safely determine the velocity of
light by measuring the attraction between bodies kept at a given difference of
potential, the value of which is known in electromagnetic measure’’—that is,
by measuring the ratio of units.80 Back in London on October 15, he sent
Thomson detailed plans for such a measurement, adding: ‘‘I can ﬁnd the
velocity of transmission of electromagnetic disturbances indep[enden]t of any
hypothesis now & it is ¼ v.’’81 Writing the same day to G. G. Stokes, Maxwell
said he now had ‘‘materials for calculating the velocity of transmission of
a magnetic disturbance through air founded on experimental evidence without
any hypothesis about the structure of the medium or any mechanical expla-
nation of electricity or magnetism.’’82
In all of these letters, Maxwell framed his ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ not as his
deﬁnitive formulation of ﬁeld theory, or even of the electromagnetic theory of
light, but primarily as a way to link the ratio of units to the speed of light
without relying on a mechanical hypothesis like that in ‘‘Physical Lines.’’ After
citing the wave theory of light to establish that space is ﬁlled with a medium
capable of storing and conveying energy by the motion and elasticity of its
parts, he used a Lagrangian analysis to show that any medium capable of
exerting the known electric and magnetic forces would also carry waves at
a speed given by the ratio of units—which Weber and Kohlrausch’s measure-
ments had shown to be the speed of light, or something very close to it.
Maxwell emphasized that in ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ he was able to do all of this
without invoking a detailed model like the vortices and idle wheels of ‘‘Physical
79. Maxwell moved from Glenlair to London between 27 Sep and 15 Oct 1864; see his letters
to William Thomson of those dates, SLP 2: 172 and 175. The Royal Society of London received
‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ on 27 Oct 1864; it was ‘‘read’’ at the meeting of 8 Dec 1864, and published
some time after Mar 1865; see SLP 2: 189 n.3.
80. Maxwell to Charles Hockin, 7 Sep 1864, in Campbell and Garnett, Maxwell (ref. 39), 340,
repr. in SLP 2: 164.
81. Maxwell to William Thomson, 15 Oct 1864, SLP 2: 180.
82. Ibid., 187–88.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 2 9
Lines.’’ In a sense he was extending to the electromagnetic medium the mac-
roscopic, measurement-based approach that he and Jenkin had followed in
‘‘Elementary Relations,’’ though now assisted by the full apparatus of analytical
dynamics.
Maxwell did not leave the vortices out of ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ altogether,
however. Having drawn on the wave theory of light to establish that space
must be ﬁlled with a medium possessing both density and elasticity, he cited
Thomson’s analysis of the Faraday effect as proof that, in a magnetic ﬁeld,
portions of this medium must be rotating around the lines of force—that is,
must form vortices. This led us, Maxwell said, ‘‘to the conception of a com-
plicated mechanism,’’ ﬁlling all space and ‘‘capable of a vast variety of motion,’’
yet with its parts all connected in deﬁnite but as yet unknown ways.83 But
instead of proceeding to imagine a speciﬁc mode of connection, as in ‘‘Physical
Lines,’’ Maxwell now asked how, on general dynamical principles, the observ-
able electric and magnetic phenomena must be related to one another, what-
ever the details of the underlying machinery.
Tait was right when he later wrote that Maxwell had based his ‘‘Dynamical
Theory’’ on energy principles rather than a detailed mechanical model, but he
went too far when he said that Maxwell had ‘‘discarded’’ his hypotheses about
molecular vortices.84 After seeing a draft of Tait’s chapters, Maxwell wrote to
him in December 1867. ‘‘There is a difference,’’ he said,
between a vortex theory ascribed to Maxwell at p. 57, and a dynamical theory
of Electromagnetics by the same author in Phil Trans 1865. The former is
built up to show that the phenomena are such as can be explained by
mechanism. The nature of this mechanism is to the true mechanism what an
orrery is to the Solar System. The latter is built on Lagranges Dynamical
Equation and is not wise about vortices.85
The point of the last remark, of course, was that Maxwell was wise about
vortices, and while he acknowledged that the connecting mechanism he had
described in ‘‘Physical Lines’’ was as awkward and artiﬁcial as that of an orrery,
he had scarcely more doubt that the vortices really existed and were spinning
on their axes than he did that the planets really circled the sun. Even as he
shifted his mode of formulating electromagnetic theory, Maxwell remained
convinced that the Faraday effect proved that molecular vortices (or something
83. Maxwell, ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ (ref. 2), 464, repr. in SP 1: 533.
84. Tait, Sketch (ref. 11), 74.
85. Maxwell to P. G. Tait, 23 Dec 1867, in SLP 2: 337.
3 3 0
|
H U N T
very much like them) must exist in a magnetic ﬁeld. His aim in ‘‘Dynamical
Theory’’ was not to do away with the vortices, but to see how far he could get
in explaining optical and electromagnetic phenomena without them.
Using Lagrangian methods, Maxwell proceeded to develop the equations of
the electromagnetic ﬁeld, taking the ‘‘electromagnetic momentum’’ or vector
potential as his starting point. Early on he introduced the ‘‘displacement’’ that
an electromotive force produces in a dielectric, comparing it to the elastic
yielding machinery undergoes when subjected to a force. Though not an
ongoing electric ﬂow, such displacement was ‘‘the commencement of a cur-
rent,’’ he said, and its variation constituted a transient current that, when
added to the conduction and convection currents, served to close otherwise
open circuits.86 After deriving a long list of relations among various electric and
magnetic quantities, Maxwell combined several of them to form a wave equa-
tion, from which he extracted what he regarded as his most important result:
that transverse waves of magnetic force would propagate through the electro-
magnetic medium at a speed of pk/4 —in free space, simply the ratio of
units.87
Maxwell drew several experimentally testable consequences from this result,
including that the square of the index of refraction of a transparent medium
would be equal to the product of its speciﬁc dielectric capacity and its speciﬁc
magnetic capacity.88 He noted with evident satisfaction that his theory
explained why most transparent solids are good insulators, whereas most good
conductors are opaque, and suggested that apparent exceptions, such as the
transparency of many electrolytes and the anomalously low opacity of gold leaf,
might be traced to lower resistive losses at very high frequencies.89 He also
discussed propagation in crystalline media, but said nothing about reﬂection or
refraction, having failed to satisfy himself concerning the proper boundary
conditions. Recalling that Stokes, who was far more expert in the intricacies
of the wave theory of reﬂection, had once told him that ‘‘the subject was a stiff
one to the best skilled in undulations,’’ Maxwell decided it would be best,
86. Maxwell, ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ (ref. 2), 462, 480, repr. in SP 1: 531, 554.
87. Ibid., 497–99, repr. in SP 1: 577–80.
88. Ibid., 466, repr. in SP 1: 535. When Ludwig Boltzmann measured these quantities for
various materials in 1873, he found they ﬁt Maxwell’s relationship reasonably well; see Darrigol,
Electrodynamics (ref. 27), 259 n.129, and Jed Z. Buchwald, The Creation of Scientiﬁc Effects:
Heinrich Hertz and Electric Waves (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press), 208–14.
89. Maxwell, ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ (ref. 2), 504–5, repr. in SP 1: 587.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 3 1
given the uncertainties, simply to leave it aside.90 Nor did he address magneto-
optic rotation in ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’—an ironic omission, since it had been
Thomson’s analysis of the Faraday effect that ﬁrst put Maxwell on the path
that led him to ‘‘Physical Lines of Force’’ and so to the electromagnetic theory
of light. Maxwell found, however, that the general Lagrangian methods to
which he had restricted himself in ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ were not competent
on their own to account for magneto-optic rotation; as he wrote to Thomson
in January 1873, while drafting the corresponding section of his Treatise, ‘‘It is
very remarkable that in spite of the curl in the electromagnetic equations of all
kinds Faradays twist of polarized light will not come out without what the
schoolmen call local motion.’’91 In ‘‘Dynamical Theory,’’ Maxwell had tried to
see how far he could get toward explaining optical and electromagnetic phe-
nomena without invoking his molecular vortices. Here was his answer: pretty
far, but not all the way to magneto-optics.
Having shown theoretically in ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ that the electromag-
netic medium would carry waves at a speed given by v, Maxwell next began
marshalling the experimental evidence that the measured value of v in fact
matched the measured speed of light. The best available value of the latter was
298,000 kilometers per second, measured just two years before by L´eon Fou-
cault using a rotating mirror apparatus. In ‘‘Dynamical Theory,’’ however,
Maxwell also cited Fizeau’s older ﬁgure of 314,858 kilometers per second, as
well as the value of 308,000 kilometers per second derived from the aberration
of starlight, perhaps because including the two latter numbers yielded an
average that, as he said, ‘‘agrees sufﬁciently well’’ with the only measurement
of v then available, Weber and Kohlrausch’s ﬁgure of 310,740 kilometers per
second.92 Maxwell, however, was clearly looking toward new and better mea-
surements of v, as he and Jenkin had declared in ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ and as
he had outlined in his letters to Hockin and Thomson. Indeed, the inclusion
of the last section of ‘‘Dynamical Theory,’’ on calculating the self-induction of
90. Maxwell to G. G. Stokes, 15 Oct 1864, in SLP 2: 186; see P. M. Harman, ‘‘Through the
Looking-Glass, and What Maxwell Found There,’’ in A. J. Kox and Daniel M. Siegel, eds., No
Truth Except in the Details: Essays in Honor of Martin J. Klein (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1995), 78–93.
See also SLP 2: 182–85, a draft section, not included in the published ‘‘Dynamical Theory,’’ in
which Maxwell wrestled with the boundary conditions for reﬂection. Later in the 1870s, H. A.
Lorentz and G. F. FitzGerald independently found ways to include reﬂection and refraction in
Maxwell’s theory; see Darrigol, Electrodynamics (ref. 27), 190–92, 323–24.
91. Maxwell to William Thomson, 22 Jan 1873, SLP 2: 784.
92. Maxwell, ‘‘Dynamical Theory’’ (ref. 2), 499, repr. in SP 1: 580.
3 3 2
|
H U N T
a coil of wire, made little sense except in this context. The problem had no
obvious connection to the rest of the paper, but it was important for the
experimental determination of the British Association ohm and so for Max-
well’s planned new determination of v.93
Maxwell hoped and expected that the measured values of v and the speed of
light would converge as new and better experiments were performed, but for
a long time, they stubbornly refused to do so. Once they had certiﬁed ‘‘B. A.’’
resistance standards in hand, Thomson and a team of his Glasgow students,
several of whom later became cable engineers, set about carefully measuring
the electromotive force of a battery with both an electrometer and an electro-
dynamometer, arriving by 1868 at a value for v of 28.25 ohms or (taking the
ohm at its intended value of 107 meters per second) 282,500 kilometers per
second.94 That same year Maxwell and Hockin, using a method that balanced
the electrostatic attraction of two disks against the electromagnetic repulsion of
two coils, found v to be 28.8 ohms or 288,000 kilometers per second. Given the
great difﬁculty of the measurements involved, this was arguably not a bad
match with Foucault’s 298,000 kilometers per second for the speed of light,
and it was certainly a striking fact that the two quantities should be even
approximately equal.95 But the 3% gap between Foucault’s value for the speed
of light and Maxwell and Hockin’s for v was a far cry from the margin of just
0.02% that had ﬁred Maxwell’s enthusiasm in 1861, when he ﬁrst compared
Fizeau’s reported value for the speed of light with Weber and Kohlrausch’s for
v. Throughout the 1860s and 1870s, the measured values of the two quantities
remained too discrepant and uncertain to win over those like Thomson who
doubted that light was really waves in the electromagnetic medium.
93. Ibid., 506–12, repr. in SP 1: 589–97. See also Kline, ‘‘Induction Motor’’ (ref. 65).
94. W. F. King, ‘‘Description of Sir Wm. Thomson’s Experiments made for the Determi-
nation of v, the Number of Electrostatic Units in the Electromagnetic Unit,’’ Report of the Thirty-
Ninth Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, held at Exeter in August 1869
(London: John Murray, 1870), 434–36; see also Schaffer, ‘‘English Science’’ (ref. 24), 150.
95. Maxwell, ‘‘Direct Comparison’’ (ref. 71), 644, 651, repr. in SP 2: 126, 135. See also I. B.
Hopley, ‘‘Maxwell’s Determination of the Number of Electrostatic Units in One Electromag-
netic Unit of Electricity,’’ Annals of Science 15 (1959): 91–108. Schaffer, ‘‘English Science’’ (ref. 24),
153, suggests that Maxwell took steps to ‘‘force’’ the measured value of v to match the known speed
of light more closely, but Maxwell insisted that the measurements he rejected ‘‘were condemned
on account of errors observed while they were being made,’’ before he had calculated the values of
v they implied; Maxwell, ‘‘Direct Comparison’’ (ref. 71), 650, repr. in SP 2: 135. Jenkin’s 1873
reprint of Reports of the Committee on Electrical Standards (ref. 48), 92, included Foucault’s value
for the speed of light, given as 29.8 ohms, in the list of values of v.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 3 3
A further complication arose from the fact that the values of v found by
Maxwell, Thomson, and several later experimenters were based on the putative
value of the ohm, and as time went on it became increasingly clear that all was
not well with the original British Association standards. Although the com-
mittee had expressed conﬁdence that the resistance of its coils lay within 0.1%
of their intended value, tests in the 1870s by German, British, and American
physicists indicated the certiﬁed standards were off by ten or even twenty times
that amount.96 In 1880, the British Association Committee was reconstituted
and Lord Rayleigh, Maxwell’s successor at the Cavendish Laboratory in Cam-
bridge, set out to repeat the determination of the ohm using the original
spinning coil apparatus. He also carefully reviewed Maxwell and Jenkin’s
procedures and calculations, and though he was unable to pinpoint the precise
source of the discrepancy, he found they had made several signiﬁcant errors,
including transposing numbers when measuring their spinning coil and mis-
calculating its self-induction. Rayleigh concluded that the 1865 B. A. unit was
1.3% too small—about 9,870 kilometers per second instead of the intended
10,000.97 As scientists in Britain and around the world developed improved
methods of absolute electrical measurement, they gradually hammered out
a corrected set of standards in their laboratories and in a series of international
congresses.98
By the time measurements of the ratio of units and the speed of light
deﬁnitively began to converge around 1890, Maxwell’s theory had already
largely won out on other grounds, notably those provided by Heinrich Hertz’s
dramatic discovery of electromagnetic waves in 1888. Had the gap between
measurements of v and the speed of light persisted, it would have raised serious
problems for Maxwell’s theory, but in the event the eventual convergence in
the values, though welcome, played a relatively small role in drawing adherents
to the theory.99
96. For the claim that the resistance of the British Association coils ‘‘does not probably differ
from true absolute measurement by 0.08 per cent,’’ see ‘‘Report, 1864’’ (ref. 42), 346, repr. in
Smith, ed., Reports, 161; for later evidence that the discrepancy was in fact much larger, see
Schaffer, ‘‘English Science’’ (ref. 24), 161–62, and Olesko, ‘‘Precision’’ (ref. 15), 137–43.
97. Lord Rayleigh and Arthur Schuster, ‘‘On the Determination of the Ohm in Absolute
Measure,’’ Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 32 (1881), 104–41.
98. Larry Lagerstrom, ‘‘Constructing Uniformity: The Standardization of International
Electromagnetic Measures, 1860–1912’’ (PhD dissertation, University of California, Berkeley,
1992).
99. On improvements in the measurement of v between the 1870s and 1907 and their con-
vergence with measurements of the speed of light, see Schaffer, ‘‘English Science’’ (ref. 24), 163,
3 3 4
|
H U N T
Maxwell’s strategy in the mid-1860s of trying to clinch the case for his
electromagnetic theory of light by showing that the ratio of units equalled the
speed of light met with only equivocal success. Discrepancies in measurements
and uncertainties over the precise value of the ohm proved too great to over-
come the skepticism of Thomson and others, and when he addressed the issue
in his Treatise in 1873, Maxwell felt he could say no more than that his theory
was ‘‘not contradicted’’ by the available measurements.100 But what he had
seen as a preliminary step in that strategy, of showing on general dynamical
grounds that the electromagnetic medium would carry waves at a speed given
by the ratio of units, proved remarkably fruitful, for it played a large part in
leading him to formulate his general equations of the electromagnetic ﬁeld.
CONCLUSION: ‘‘A TREATISE ON ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENT’’
George Chrystal was a Scottish-born Cambridge wrangler who worked closely
with Maxwell at the Cavendish Laboratory from 1874 until 1878 and later
became professor of mathematics at the University of Edinburgh. He knew
Maxwell and his work well, and when the second edition of Maxwell’s Treatise
appeared in 1881, two years after Maxwell’s death, Chrystal was asked to review
it for Nature. The resulting review is valuable and interesting in many ways,
not least for a striking remark bearing on Maxwell’s work for the British
Association Committee. Maxwell’s Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism,
Chrystal declared, is ‘‘in the strictest sense a Treatise on Electrical Measure-
ment,’’ for it ‘‘looks at electrical actions almost exclusively as measurable.’’
Indeed, he said, much of the Treatise represented ‘‘a continuation of the
labours of its author in conjunction with the rest of the distinguished band
of electricians who formed the Committee of the British Association on Elec-
trical Measurements.’’101
Chrystal’s remark reinforces the point, argued above, that Maxwell’s work
for the British Association Committee was not a mere side project for him, but
-
and Rosa and Dorsey, ‘‘Comparison’’ (ref. 50), 606–07. On the growing acceptance of Maxwell’s
theory in the 1880s and 1890s, see Jed Z. Buchwald, From Maxwell to Microphysics: Aspects of
Electromagnetic Theory in the Last Quarter of the Nineteenth Century (Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 1985), and Bruce J. Hunt, The Maxwellians (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
1991).
100. Maxwell, Treatise § 787.
101. Chrystal, review of Treatise (ref. 61), 238.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 3 5
lay ﬁrmly in the main line of his scientiﬁc development, and had a lasting effect
on the way he approached electrical questions—including in his Treatise. The
Treatise has customarily been seen as a work of electromagnetic theory, indeed,
as the prime expression of Maxwell’s own ﬁeld theory and the foundation of its
later development.102 It was certainly that. But anyone who sits down and
actually reads through its two thick volumes is likely to be struck by how little
of the Treatise focuses on ﬁeld theory, much less on Maxwell’s own distinctive
contributions to the subject. Instead one ﬁnds its pages ﬁlled with long
accounts of one- and two-ﬂuid electrical theories, extended discussions of the
mathematical intricacies of such things as spherical harmonics and confocal
surfaces, and detailed descriptions of the workings of guard ring electrometers
and other electrical and magnetic instruments. As Andrew Warwick has
shown, different groups read the Treatise in very different ways and for very
different purposes, even just within Cambridge. Those attending W. D.
Niven’s intercollegiate lectures might delve into the physics of Maxwell’s
theory (as did George Francis FitzGerald, Oliver Heaviside, and a scattered
band of others outside Cambridge), but most Tripos coaches turned to the
Treatise solely for its treatment of mathematical techniques and told their
students to skip almost everything we would now regard as ‘‘Maxwell’s the-
ory,’’ whereas experimenters at the Cavendish generally focused instead on
Maxwell’s accounts of instruments and how to use them.103
Besides the college lecture hall, the Tripos coaching room, and the nascent
Cavendish Laboratory, Maxwell’s Treatise should also be seen in relation to
a fourth context: the testing rooms of the great cable telegraph companies. The
British Association Committee had been set up in 1861 largely to meet the
needs of the growing British cable industry, and in his review of the Treatise,
Chrystal emphasized how profoundly the development of electrical units and
standards, and the ideas associated with them, had affected technological
practice. ‘‘Instead of the old vague, unscientiﬁc, and still more, unbusinesslike
102. This is reﬂected, for instance, in Thomas K. Simpson, Figures of Thought: A Literary
Appreciation of Maxwell’s ‘‘Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism’’ (Santa Fe: Green Lion Press,
2005), which focuses entirely on ten chapters in Part IV of Maxwell’s Treatise and thus leaves
aside 85% of the book.
103. On the mathematical Tripos examination at Cambridge and the culture of ‘‘coaching’’ for
it, as well as on the reception of Maxwell’s theory elsewhere at Cambridge, see Andrew Warwick,
Masters of Theory: Cambridge and the Rise of Mathematical Physics (Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 2003), 286–356; on the reception and development of Maxwell’s theory outside
Cambridge, see Hunt, Maxwellians (ref. 99).
3 3 6
|
H U N T
statements of quantity and intensity,’’ he noted, ‘‘we have the precise ideas of
electromotive force, resistance, current, and so on, measured in their respective
units, the volt, the ohm, the ampe`re.’’ Now, he declared with evident satis-
faction, ‘‘electrical commodities can be bought and sold by rule and measure,
as heretofore cloth, coals, or horse-power.’’104 Here Chrystal was echoing
remarks Maxwell had made in his 1873 review of Jenkin’s Electricity and
Magnetism and that William Thomson had often made about the commercial
measurement of physical quantities.105 Crosbie Smith, Norton Wise, and
Simon Schaffer have all drawn attention to the ways commercial values and
concerns informed the work of the British Association Committee on Elec-
trical Standards.106 Chrystal’s point (and mine) is that these values and con-
cerns shaped Maxwell’s wider work as well, and are reﬂected both in his
Treatise and in the crucial shifts his thinking underwent in the 1860s and 1870s.
The most striking of these shifts came, of course, in 1863–64, when Maxwell
was fresh off his work on ‘‘Physical Lines’’ and had just joined the British
Association Committee. At this crucial juncture, as he sought to capitalize on
his discovery that light was evidently a disturbance in the electromagnetic
medium and that its speed was given by the ratio of electrostatic to electro-
magnetic units, he considered how he could present his results in a way that
would win them the widest possible support. He never gave up his belief that
magnetic ﬁelds are ﬁlled with molecular vortices; indeed, when he returned to
the Faraday effect toward the end of his Treatise, he said he still thought ‘‘we
have good evidence for the opinion that some phenomenon of rotation is going
on in the magnetic ﬁeld’’ and that ‘‘this rotation is performed by a great
number of very small portions of matter, each rotating on its own axis.’’107
But Maxwell’s collaboration with Jenkin on ‘‘Elementary Relations’’ and on
the determination of the ohm, and his exposure to engineers’ characteristic
ways of thinking, had brought home to him the value of framing his results not
in terms of unseen microstructures, but as far as possible in terms of relations
among measurable quantities. He was thus led to step back from the vortex
104. Chrystal, review of Treatise (ref. 61), 238.
105. [Maxwell], review of Jenkin (ref. 45). Thomson argued that the farad should be deﬁned in
terms of a ‘‘real purchaseable tangible object’’ (i.e., a condenser of speciﬁed capacity) rather than
a quantity of charge; see William Thomson to Maxwell, 24 Aug 1872, in SLP 2: 749 n.8.
106. Smith and Wise, Energy and Empire (ref. 23), 687–98; Smith, Science of Energy (ref. 4) 277–
87; Schaffer, ‘‘Manufactory’’ (ref. 13), 24–26; and Schaffer, ‘‘English Science’’ (ref. 24), 135–36.
107. Maxwell, Treatise, § 831.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 3 7
model of ‘‘Physical Lines’’ and instead formulate the general equations of his
‘‘Dynamical Theory.’’
Maxwell was a man of many sides. As the titles of at least two books about
him attest, he is often—and rightly—viewed as a ‘‘natural philosopher,’’ per-
haps one of the last in a long British line.108 But he had another side, too, as
FIG. 1. Portrait of James Clerk Maxwell, depicting him with the spinning
coil apparatus he and Fleeming Jenkin used in 1863–64 to determine
the value of the ohm. Painted by R. H. Campbell and presented to the
Institution of Electrical Engineers by L. B. Atkinson in 1929, it hung
for many years in the Maxwell Room at the London headquarters
of the IEE (now the Institution of Engineering and Technology).
Source: IET Archives (www.theiet.org/resources/library/archives),
UK0108 IMAGE 1/1/0319.01.
108. Everitt, Maxwell (ref. 4); Harman, Natural Philosophy (ref. 4).
3 3 8
|
H U N T
seen in his work for the British Association Committee on Electrical Standards,
and while he was no William Thomson, knee-deep in Glasgow commerce and
industry, Maxwell developed closer links to the practicalities of electrical engi-
neering than have often been recognized. He was, for instance, an early mem-
ber of the Society of Telegraph Engineers and took an active part in its work
promoting accurate electrical measurement. It is ﬁtting that the portrait of
Maxwell that was presented in 1929 to the Institution of Electrical Engineers, as
the STE had by then been renamed, and that for many years adorned the
‘‘Maxwell Room’’ at the Institution’s London headquarters, depicts him sitting
with the spinning coil apparatus that he and Jenkin had used to determine the
ohm, and that had done so much to shape his thinking on electrical questions
(ﬁg. 1).109
109. On Maxwell’s early membership in the Society of Telegraph Engineers, see Rollo
Appleyard, The History of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, 1871–1931 (London: Institution of
Electrical Engineers, 1939), 43, and SLP 3: 201 n.8. The portrait of Maxwell by R. H. Campbell
was presented to the IEE in 1929 by L. B. Atkinson; as of 2014, it is in storage while the head-
quarters of the Institution of Engineering and Technology (successor to the IEE) is being ren-
ovated. I thank Jonathan Cable of the IET Archives for this information.
M A X W E L L
A N D
M E A S U R E M E N T
|
3 3 9
