COGNITIVE 
SCIENCE 19, 
265-288 (1995) 
How a Cockpit Remembers Its Speeds 
EDWIN HUTCHINS 
University of California, San Diego 
Cognitive 
science normally 
takes the individual 
agent as its unit of analysis. 
In 
many human endeavors, 
however, 
the outcomes of interest 
are not determined 
entirely 
by the information 
processing 
properties 
of individuals. 
Nor can they be 
inferred 
from 
the properties 
of the individual 
agents, 
alone, 
no matter 
how 
detailed 
the knowledge 
of the properties 
of those individuals 
may be. In com- 
mercial aviation, 
for example, 
the successful 
completion 
of a flight 
is produced 
by a system that typically includes two or more pilots interacting 
with each other 
and with 
a suite 
of technological 
devices. 
This 
article 
presents 
a theoretical 
framework 
that tokes a distributed, 
socio-technical 
system 
rather 
than an indi- 
vidual mind as its primary 
unit of analysis. 
This framework 
is explicitly 
cognitive 
in that it is concerned with how information 
is represented 
and how representa- 
tions are transformed 
and propagated in the performance 
of tasks. An analysis 
of 
a memory task in the cockpit of a commercial 
airliner 
shows how the cognitive 
properties 
of such distributed 
systems 
can differ 
radically 
from 
the cognitive 
properties 
of the individuals 
who inhabit them. 
Thirty years of research in cognitive psychology and other areas of cognitive 
science have given us powerful models of the information 
processing prop- 
erties of individual human agents. The cognitive science approach provides 
a very useful frame for thinking about thinking. When this frame is applied 
to the individual human agent, one asks a set of questions about the mental 
An initial analysis 
of speed bugs as cognitive 
artifacts 
was completed 
in November 
of 1988. 
Since then, my knowledge 
of the actual 
uses of speed bugs and my understanding 
of their role 
in cockpit 
cognition 
has changed 
dramatically. 
Some of the ideas in this paper were presented 
in a paper titled, “Information 
Flow in the Cockpit” 
at the American 
Institute 
for Aeronautics 
and Astronautics 
symposium, 
“Challenges 
in Aviation 
Human 
Factors: 
The National 
Plan,” 
in Vienna, 
Virginia. 
The current 
draft 
also benefited 
from the comments 
of members 
of the 
Flight Deck Research 
Group 
of the Boeing Commercial 
Airplane 
Company 
and from the par- 
ticipants 
in the second 
NASA 
Aviation 
Safety/Automation 
program 
researchers 
meeting. 
Thanks 
to Hank 
Strub, 
Christine 
Halverson, 
and Everett 
Palmer 
for discussions 
and written 
comments 
on earlier versions 
of this paper. 
This research 
was supported 
by grant 
NCC 2-591 from the Ames Research 
center of the 
National 
Aeronautics 
and Space Administration 
in the Aviation 
Safety/Automation 
Program. 
Everett 
Palmer 
served as Technical 
Monitor. 
Correspondence 
and requests 
for reprints 
should 
be sent to Edwin Hutchins, 
Department 
of Cognitive 
Science, University 
of California, 
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-05 15; or e-mail 
to: hutchins@cogsci.ucsd.edu. 
265 
266 
HUTCHINS 
processes that organize the behavior of the individual.’ In particular, one 
asks how information 
is represented in the cognitive system and how repre- 
sentations are transformed, 
combined, and propagated through the system 
(Simon, 1981). Cognitive science thus concerns itself with the nature of 
knowledge structures and the processes that operate on them. The properties 
of these representations 
inside the system and the processes that operate on 
representations 
are assumed to cause or explain the observed performance 
of the cognitive system as a whole. 
In this paper, I will attempt to show that the classical cognitive science 
approach can be applied with little modification 
to a unit of analysis that is 
larger than a person, One can still ask the same questions of a larger, socio- 
technical system that one would ask of an individual. That is, we wish to 
characterize the behavioral properties of the unit of analysis in terms of the 
structure and the processing of representations that are internal to the system. 
With the new unit of analysis, many of the representations 
can be observed 
directly, so in some respects, this may be a much easier task than trying to 
determine the processes internal to the individual that account for the indi- 
vidual’s behavior. Posing questions in this way reveals how systems that are 
larger than an individual may have cognitive properties in their own right 
that cannot be reduced to the cognitive properties of individual persons 
(Hutchins, 1995). Many outcomes that concern us on a daily basis are pro- 
duced by cognitive systems of this sort. 
Thinking of organizations 
as cognitive systems is not new, of course.’ 
What is new is the examination of the role of the material media in which 
representations 
are embodied, and in the physical processes that propagate 
representations 
across media. Applying the cognitive science approach to a 
larger unit of analysis requires attention to the details of these processes as 
they are enacted in the activities of real persons interacting with real material 
media. The analysis presented here shows that structure in the environment 
can provide much more than external memory (Norman, 
1993). 
I will take the cockpit of a commercial airliner as my unit of analysis and 
will show how the cockpit system performs the cognitive tasks of computing 
and remembering a set of correspondences 
between airspeed and wing con- 
figuration. 
I will not present extended examples from actual observations 
because I don’t know how to render such observations 
meaningful for a 
non-flying audience without swamping the reader in technical detail. Instead, 
I will present a somewhat stylized account of the use of the small set of tools 
in the performance 
of this simple task, which is accomplished every time an 
airliner makes an approach to landing. 
’ This notion 
is widespread 
in cognitive 
science. 
See Simon & Kaplan, 
1989. The canonical 
statement 
of what is currently 
accepted 
as the standard 
position 
appears 
in Newell & Simon, 
1972. See also Wickens 
& Flach, 
1988 for a direct application 
of this perspective 
to aviation. 
* March 
and Simon 
staked 
out this territory 
with their seminal 
book, 
Organizations, 
in 
1958. For a review of conceptions 
of organizations 
see Morgan, 
1986. 
COCKPIT 
SPEEDS 
267 
The procedures described below come straight from the pages of a major 
airline’s operations 
manual for a midsized jet, the McDonnell 
Douglas 
MD-80. Similar procedures exist for every make and model airliner. The ex- 
planations of the procedures are informed by my experience as a pilot and 
as an ethnographer 
of cockpits. In conducting research on aviation safety 
during the past 6 years,’ I have made more than 100 flights as an observer 
member of crews in the cockpits of commerical airliners. These observations 
spanned a wide range of planes, including old and new technology cockpits, 
domestic and international (tram-oceanic) 
operations, and both foreign and 
US-flag carriers. 
APPLYING THE COGNITIVE FRAME 
TO THE COCKPIT SYSTEM 
If we want to explain the information 
processing properties of individuals, 
we have no choice but to attempt to infer what is inside the individual’s 
mind. Cognitive scientists do this by constructing carefully selected contexts 
for eliciting behavior from which they can attribute internal states to actors. 
However, if we take the cockpit system as the unit of analysis, we can look 
inside it and directly observe many of the phenomena of interest. In par- 
ticular, we can directly observe the many representations 
that are inside the 
cockpit system, yet outside the heads of the pilots. We can do a lot of research 
on the cognitive properties of such a system (i.e., we can give accounts of 
the system’s behavioral properties in terms of its internal representations), 
without saying anything about the processes that operate inside individual 
actors (Hutchins, 1990, 1991, 1995). This suggests that rather than trying to 
map the findings of cognitive psychological studies of individuals directly 
onto the individual pilots in the cockpit, we should map the conceptualization 
of the cognitive system onto a new unit of analysis: the cockpit as a whole. 
REMEMBERING SPEEDS 
Why Speeds Must he Remembered 
For an illustration of the application of the cognitiver science frame to the 
cockpit system, consider the events having to do with remembering speeds 
in the cockpit of a midsize civil transport jet (a McDonnell Douglas MD-80) 
on a typical descent from a cruise altitude above 30,000 feet, followed by an 
’ This research 
was performed 
under a contract 
from the flight human 
factors 
branch 
of 
the NASA Ames research 
center. 
In addition 
to my activities 
as an observer, 
I hold a commer- 
cial pilot certificate 
with multiengine 
and instrument 
airplane 
ratings. 
I have completed 
the 
transition 
training 
course (both ground 
school and full-flight) 
for the Boeing 747400 
and the 
ground 
schools 
for the McDonnell 
Douglas 
MD-S, 
and the Airbus 
A320. I am grateful 
to the 
Boeing Commercial 
Airplane 
group, 
McDonnell 
Douglas, 
and America 
West Airlines 
for these 
training 
opportunities. 
268 
HUTCHINS 
instrument landing system (ILS) approach and landing. Virtually all of the 
practices described in this paper are mandated by federal regulations and 
airline policy or both. A reader may wonder how many crews do these things. 
The answer is that nearly all of them do these things on every flight. Excep- 
tions are extremely rare. In all of my observations, never have I seen a crew 
fail to compute and set the approach speeds. This is known in the aviation 
world as a “killer” item. It is something that can cause a fatal accident, if 
missed. Of course, sometimes crews do miss these procedures, and some- 
times they make headlines as a result. To understand what the task is and 
how it is accomplished, one needs to know something about the flight char- 
acteristics of commercial jet transports as well as something about the man- 
dated division of labor among members of the crew. 
Flaps and Slats 
The wings of airliners are designed to enable fast flight, yet performance 
and safety considerations 
require airliners to fly relatively slowly just after 
takeoff and before landing. The wings generate ample lift at high speeds, 
but the shapes designed for high speed cannot generate enough lift to keep 
the airplane flying at low speeds. To solve this problem, airplanes are equipped 
with devices, called slats and flaps,4 that change the shape and area of the 
wing. Slats and flaps are normally retracted in flight, giving the wing a very 
clean aerodynamic 
shape. For slow flight, slats and flaps are extended, 
enlarging the wing and increasing its coefficient of lift. The positions of the 
slats and flaps define configurations of the wing. In a “clean” wing config- 
uration, the slats and flaps are entirely retracted. There is a lower limit on 
the speed at which the airplane can be flown in this configuration. 
Below 
this limit, the wing can no longer produce lift. This condition is called a 
wing stall.5 The stall has an abrupt onset and invariably leads to loss of 
altitude. Stalls at low altitude are very dangerous. The minimum maneuver- 
ing speed for a given configuration 
and aircraft weight is a speed that guar- 
antees a reasonable margin of safety above the stall speed. Flying slower 
than this speed is dangerous because the airplane is nearer to a stall. Changing 
the configuration 
of the wing by extending the slats and flaps lowers the 
stall speed of the wing, thus permitting the airplane to fly safely at slower 
speeds. As the airplane nears the airport, it must slow down to maneuver 
for landing. To maintain safe flight at slower speeds, the crew must extend 
the slats and flaps to produce the appropriate 
wing configurations 
at the 
right speeds. The coordination of changing wing configuration with changing 
speed as the airplane slows down is the first part of the speed memory task. 
4 Slats are normally 
on the leading 
edge of a wing. Flaps normally 
on the trailing 
edge. 
’ This “stall” 
has nothing 
to do with the functioning 
of the engines. 
Under the right condi- 
tions, any airplane 
can stall with all engines generating 
maximum 
thrust. 
COCKPIT 
SPEEDS 
269 
The second part concerns remembering the speed at which the landing is to 
be made. 
V ref 
Within the range of speeds at which the airplane can be flown in its final 
flap and slat configuration, 
which speed is right for landing? There are 
tradeoffs in the determination 
of landing speed. High speeds are safe in the 
air because they provide good control response and large stall margins, 
but they are dangerous on the ground. Limitations on runway length, energy 
to be dissipated by braking, and the energy to be dissipated if there is an 
accident on landing, all suggest that landing speed should be as slow as is 
feasible. The airplane should be traveling slowly enough that it is ready to 
quit flying when the wheels touch down, but fast enough that control can be 
maintained in the approach and that if a landing cannot be made, the air- 
plane has enough kinetic energy to climb away from the ground. This speed 
is called the reference speed, or Vrer. Precise control of speed at the correct 
value is essential to a safe landing. 
The minimum maneuvering speeds for the various wing configurations 
and the speed for landing (called the reference speed) are tabulated in the 
FLAP/SLAT 
CONFIGURATION 
MIN MAN AND REFERENCE SPEED 
table (Table 1). If weight were not a factor, there would be only one set of 
speeds to remember, and the task would be much simpler. 
Crew Division of Labor 
All modern jet transports 
have two pilot stations, each equipped with a 
complete set of flight instrumentation. 
While the airplane is in the air, one 
pilot is designated the pilot flying (PF) and other, the pilot not flying (PNF). 
These roles carry with them particular responsibilities with respect to the 
conduct of the flight. The pilot flying is concerned primarily with control of 
the airplane. The PNF communicates with air traffic control (ATC), operates 
the aircraft systems, accomplishes the checklists required in each plase of 
flight, and attends to other duties in the cockpit. 
THREE DESCRIPTIONS OF MEMORY FOR SPEEDS 
With an understanding of the problem and the basics of crew organization, 
we can now examine the activities in the cockpit that are involved with the 
generation and maintenance of representations 
of the maneuvering and ref- 
erence speeds. I will provide three descriptions of the same activities. The 
first description is procedural. It is the sort of description that a pilot might 
provide. The second and third descriptions are cognitive in that they concern 
representations 
and processes that transform 
those representations. 
The 
second description treats the representations 
and processes that are external 
270 
COCKPIT SPEEDS 
271 
to the pilots. It provides the constraints for the final description of the rep- 
resentations and processes that are presummed to be internal to the pilots. 
A Procedural 
Description of Memory for Speeds 
Prepare the Landing Data 
After initiation of the descent from cruise altitude and before reaching 
18,000 feet, the PNF should prepare the landing data. This means com- 
puting the correspondences 
between wing configurations 
and speeds for the 
projected landing weight. The actual procedure 
followed depends on the 
materials available, company policy, and crew preferences.6 For example, 
many older cockpits use the table in the operations manual (Table 1) and a 
hard plastic landing data card on which the arrival weather conditions, go- 
around thrust settings, landing gross weight, and landing speeds are indicated 
with a grease pencil. Still others use the table in the operations manual and 
write the speeds on a piece of paper (flight paperwork, printout of destina- 
tion weather, and so forth). Crews of airplanes equipped with flight manage- 
ment computer systems can look up the approach speeds on a page display 
of the computer. 
The MD-80 uses a booklet of speed cards. The booklet 
contains a page for each weight interval (usually in 2,000 pound increments) 
with the appropriate 
speeds permanently 
printed on the card (Figure 1). 
The preparation 
of landing data consists of the following steps: 
1. Determine the gross weight of the airplane and select the appropriate 
card in the speed card booklet. Airplane gross weight on the MD-80 is 
continuously computed and displayed on the fuel quantity indicator on 
the center flight instrument panel (Figure 2). 
2. 
Post the selected speed card in a prominent position in the cockpit. 
3. 
Set the speed bugs on both airspeed indicator (ASI) instruments (Figure 
3) to match the speeds shown on the speed card. 
On the instrument depicted in Figure 3, the airspeed is shown both in 
knots (the black-tipped dial pointer indicating 245) and Mach (the digital 
indicator showing 0.735). The striped indicator at 348 knots indicates 
the m~imum 
permissible indicated air speed (IAS). The four black 
speed bug pointers on the edge of the dial are external to the instrument 
6 The procedural 
account 
given here has been constructed 
from in-flight 
observations, 
and 
from analyses 
of video and audio recordings 
of crews operating 
in high fidelity simulators 
of 
this and other aircraft. 
The activities described 
here are documented 
further in airIine operations 
manuais 
and training 
manuals, 
and in the manufacturer’s 
operational 
descriptions. 
Because 
these manuals 
and the documentation 
provided 
by the Douglas 
Aircraft 
company 
are con- 
sidered 
proprietary, 
the actual 
sources 
will not be identified. 
Additional 
information 
came 
from other 
published 
sources, 
for example, 
Webb, 
1971; Tenney, 
1988 and from interviews 
with pilots. There are minor variations 
among 
the operating 
procedures 
of various 
airline com- 
panies, 
but the procedure 
described 
here can be taken as representative 
of this activity. 
272 
HUTCHINS 
MANEUVERING 
FLAPS/SLATS 
SPEED 
O/RET - 227 
O/EXT - 177 
11 
- 155 
15 
- 152 
28 
- 142 
40 
- 137 
VREF 
28/EXT - 132 
40/EXT - 128 
122,000 LBS 
Figure 1. A speed 
card 
from 
on MD-80 
speed 
card 
booklet 
and are manually set by sliding them to the desired positions. The other 
speed bug (called the “salmon bug” for its orange color) is internal to 
the instrument and indicates the speed commanded to the flight director 
and the autothrottle system (which is shown differing from the indicated 
airspeed by about 2 knots) or both. 
Starting with the bug at 227 knots and moving counterclockwise, 
the 
bugs indicate: 227-the 
minimum maneuvering speed with no flaps or 
slats extended; 
177-minimum 
maneuvering 
speed with slats, but no 
flaps, extended; 152-minimum 
maneuvering speed with flaps at 15” 
and slats extended; 128-landing 
speed with flaps at 40” and slats ex- 
tended (also called Vrer). 
The preparation of the landing data is usually performed about 25 to 30 
minutes prior to landing. The speed bugs are set at this time because at this 
point crew workload is relatively light and the aircraft is near enough to the 
destination to make accurate projections of landing gross weight. Later in 
the approach, the crew workload increases dramatically. 
The Descent 
During the descent and the approach, the airplane will be slowed in stages, 
from cruise speed to final approach speed. Before descending through 10,000 
COCKPIT SPEEDS 
273 
L MAIN 
R MAIN 
2600 
I 
Figure 2. The fuel quantity 
indicator. 
feet MSL (mean sea level), the airplane must slow to a speed at or below 250 
KIAS (knots indicated air speed). This speed restriction exists primarily to 
give pilots more time to see and avoid other traffic as the big jets descend 
into the congested airspace of the terminal area, and into the realm of small, 
slow, light aircraft which mostly stay below 10,000 feet. 
At about 7,000 feet AFL (above field level), the crew must begin slowing 
the airplane to speeds that require slat and flap extension. At this point, 
they use the previously set external speed bugs on the ASI as indicators of 
where flap extension configuration changes should be made. Some companies 
specify crew coordination cross-checking procedures for the initial slat selec- 
tion. For example, “After initial slat selection (O”/EXT), 
both pilots will 
visually verify that the slats have extended to the correct position (slat TAKE- 
OFF light on) before reducing speed below O/RET Min Maneuver speed. . . ” 
Because it is dangerous to fly below the minimum maneuvering speed for 
any configuration, 
extending the flaps and slats well before slowing to the 
minimum maneuvering speed might seem to be a good idea. Doing so both 
would increase the safety margin on the speeds and would give the pilots a 
274 
HUTCHINS 
Figure 3. Speed 
bugs. 
This 
illustration 
is modeled 
on the 
airspeed 
indicator 
instrument 
in 
the 
McDonnell 
Douglas 
MD-80, 
OS described 
by Tenney, 
1988. 
wider window of speed (and therefore, of time) for selecting the next flap/slat 
configuration. 
Unfortunately, 
other operational 
considerations 
rule this 
out. As one operations manual puts it, “To minimize the air loads on the 
flaps/salts, avoid extension and operation near the maximum airspeeds. Ex- 
tend flaps/slats near the Min Maneuver Speed for the flap/slat configura- 
tion.” The extension of the flaps and slats must be coordinated 
precisely 
with the changes in airspeed. This makes the accurate memory of the speeds 
even more important than it would be otherwise. 
The crew must continue configuration 
changes as the airplane is slowed 
further. 
The Final Approach 
After intercepting the glide slope and beginning the final approach segment, 
the crew will perform the final approach checklist. One of the elements on 
this checklist is the challenge/response 
pair, “Flight instruments and bugs/ 
Set and cross-checked.” 
The PNF reads the challenge. Both pilots check the approach and landing 
bug positions on their own AS1 against the bug position on the other pilot’s 
ASI and against the speeds shown on the speed card. Both crew members 
will confirm verbally that the bug speeds have been set and cross checked. 
For example, the captain (who sits in the left seat) might say, “Set on the 
COCKPIT 
SPEEDS 
275 
left and cross-checked”, 
whereas the first officer would respond, “Set on 
the right and cross-checked.” 
A more complete cross-check would include a 
specification 
of the actual value, (e.g., “One thirty two and one twenty 
seven set on the left and cross-checked”). 
At about 1,000 feet AFL, the crew selects the final flap setting of 28 ’ or 
40”, and maintain the approach speed. 
At 500 feet AFL, the PNF calls out the altitude, the airspeed relative to 
the approach airspeed, and the descent rate. For example, “Five hundred 
feet, plus four, seven down,” meaning 500 feet above the field elevation, 4 
knots faster than desired approach speed, descending at 700 feet per minute. 
The PNF also may specify relation to the glide slope, indicating whether the 
airplane is below, on, or above the glide slope. 
Once final flaps are set during the final approach segment, the PNF 
calls out airspeed whenever it varies more than plus or minus 5 knots from 
approach speed. 
A Cognitive Description of Memory 
for Speeds-Representations 
and Processes Outside the Pilots 
Let us now apply the cognitive science frame to the cockpit as a cognitive 
system. How are the speeds represented in the cockpit? How are these repre- 
sentations transformed, 
processed, and coordinated 
with other representa- 
tions in the descent, approach, and landing? How does the cockpit system 
remember the speeds at which it is necessary to change the configuration 
of 
the wing in order to maintain safe flight? 
The observable representations 
directly involved in the cockpit processes 
that coordinate airspeed with flap and slat settings are: the gross weight dis- 
play (Figure 2), the speed card booklet (Figure l), the two airspeed indicator 
instruments 
with internal and external bugs (Figure 3), the speed select 
window of the flight guidance control panel, and the speed-related verbal 
exchanges among the members of the crew. The speed-related verbalizations 
may appear in the communication 
of the values from PNF to PF while 
setting the speed bugs, in the initial slat extenion cross-check, in the sub- 
sequent configuration changes, in the cross-check phase of the before-landing 
checklist performance, 
in the PNF’s approach progress report at 500 feet 
AFL, and in any required speed deviation call outs on the final approach 
segment after the selection of the landing flap setting. 
In addition to the directly observable media listed earlier, we may also 
assume that some sort of representation 
of the speeds has been created in 
two media that are not directly observable: the memories of the two pilots, 
themselves. Later, we will consider in detail the task environment in which 
these memories may form. For now, let us simply note that these mental 
memories are additional media in the cockpit system, which may support 
and retain internal representations 
of any of the available external represen- 
tations of the speeds. 
276 
HUTCHINS 
Accessing the Speeds and Setting the Bugs 
The speed card booklet is a long-term memory in the cockpit system. It 
stores a set of correspondences between weights and speeds that are function- 
ally durable, in that they are applicable over the entire operating life of the 
airplane. 
The weight/speed 
correspondences 
represented 
in the printed 
booklet are also physically durable, in that short of destroying the physical 
medium of the cards, the memory is nonvolatile and cannot be corrupted. 
This memory is not changed by any crew actions. (It could be misplaced, 
but there is a backup in the form of the performance tables in the operating 
manual). The appropriate speeds for the airplane are determined by bringing 
the representation 
of the airplane gross weight into coordination 
with the 
structure of the speed card booklet. The gross weight is used as a filter on 
this written memory, making one set of speeds much more accessible than 
any other. The outcome of the filtering operation is imposed on the physical 
configuration 
of the speed card booklet by arranging the booklet such that 
the currently appropriate speed card is the only one visible. Once performed, 
the filtering need not be done again during the flight. 
The physical configuration 
of the booklet produced by opening it to the 
correct page becomes a representation 
of the cockpit system’s memory for 
both the projected gross weight and the appropriate 
speeds. That is, the 
questions, “Which gross weight did we select?” and “What are the speeds 
for the selected weight?“, can both be answered by reading the visible speed 
card. The correspondence 
of a particular gross weight to a particular set of 
speeds is built into the physical structure of each card by printing the corre- 
sponding weight and speed values on the same card. This is a simple but 
effective way to produce the computation 
of the speeds, because selecting 
the correct weight can’t help but select the correct speeds. 
Posting the appropriate 
speed card where it can be seen easily, by both 
pilots creates a distribution (across social space) of access to information 
in 
the system that may have important consequences for several kinds of sub- 
sequent processing. Combined with a distribution of knowledge that results 
from standardized 
training and experience, this distribution 
of access to 
information 
supports the development of redundant storage of the informa- 
tion and redundant processing. Also, it creates a new trajectory by which 
speed-relevant 
information 
may reach the PF. Furthermore, 
posting the 
speed card provides a temporally enduring resource for checking and cross 
checking speeds, so that these tasks can be done (or redone) any time. And 
because the card shows both a set of speeds and the weight for which the 
speeds are appropriate, 
it also provides a grounds for checking the posted 
gross weight against the displayed gross weight on the fuel quantity panel 
(Figure 2), which is just a few inches above the normal posting position of 
the speed card. This is very useful in deciding whether the wrong weight, 
and therefore, 
the wrong speeds, may have been selected. 
COCKPIT 
SPEEDS 
277 
In addition to creating a representation 
of the appropriate 
speeds in the 
configuration 
of the speed card booklet, the PNF creates two other repre- 
sentations of the same information: 
the values are represented as spoken 
words when the PNF tells the PF what the speeds are, and the speeds are 
represented on the airspeed indicator in the positions of the speed bugs. 
By announcing aloud the values to be marked, the PNF both creates yet 
another representation 
of the speeds, and notifies the PF that the activity of 
setting the speed bugs should commence at this time. Unlike the printed 
speed card, the verbal representation 
is ephemeral, that is, it won’t endure 
over time. If it is to be processed, it must be attended to at the time it is 
created. The required attending to can be handled by auditory rather than 
visual resources. The latter often are overtaxed, whereas the former often 
are underutilized in the cockpit.’ By reading back the values heard, the PF 
creates yet another representation that allows the PNF to check on the values 
being used by the PF to set the PF’s bugs. 
The PF may make use of any of the representations the PNF has prepared 
in order to create a representation 
of the bug speeds on the PF’s airspeed in- 
dicator. The spoken representation 
and the speed card provide the PF’s 
easiest access to the values, although it is also possible for the PF to read the 
PNF’s airspeed indicator. Because all of these representations 
are available 
simultaneously, 
there are multiple opportunities 
for consistency checks in 
the system of distributed representation. 
When the pilots set the speed bugs, the values that were listed in written 
form on the speed card, and were represented in spoken form by the PNF, 
are re-represented as marked positions adjacent to values on the scale of the 
airspeed indicator (ASI). Because there are two ASI’s, this is a redundant 
representation 
in the cockpit system. In addition, it provides a distribution 
of access to information 
that will be taken advantage of in later processes. 
The external speed bug settings capture a regularity in the environment 
that is of a shorter time scale than the weight/speed 
correspondences 
that 
are represented in the speed card booklet. The speed bug settings are a memory 
that is malleable, and that fits a particular period of time (this approach). 
Because of the location of the AS1 and the nature of the bugs, this represen- 
tation is quite resistant to disruption by other activities. 
Using the Configuration 
Change Bugs 
The problem to be solved is the coordination 
of the wing configuration 
changes with the changes in airspeed as the airplane slows to maneuver for 
the approach. 
The location of the airplane in the approach and or the in- 
structions received from ATC determine the speed to be flown at any point 
’ See Gras et al., 
1991 (p. 49ff) for a discussion 
of the balance 
among 
the senses in the 
modern 
cockpit. 
Of course, 
aural 
attending 
may 
produce 
an internal 
representation 
that 
endures 
longer than the spoken 
words. 
278 
HUTCHINS 
in the approach. The cockpit system must somehow construct and maintain 
an appropriate 
relationship between airspeed and slat/flap 
configuration. 
The information 
path that leads from indicated airspeed to flap/slat con- 
figuration 
includes several observable representations 
in addition to the 
speed bugs. 
The airspeed is displayed on the AS1 by the position of the airspeed indi- 
cator needle. Thus, as the AS1 needle nears the speed bug that represents the 
clean-configuration 
minimum maneuvering speed, the pilot flying can call 
for “Flaps 0.” The spoken flap/slat setting name is coordinated 
with the 
labels on the flap handle quadrant. That is, the PNF positions the flap handle 
adjacent to the label that matches (or is equivalent to) the flap/slat setting 
name called by the PF. Movement of the flap handle then actuates the flaps 
and slats themselves which produce the appropriate wing configurations 
for 
the present speed. The speed bugs contribute to this process by providing 
the bridge between the indicated airspeed and the name of the appropriate 
flap/slat configuration 
for the aircraft at its present gross weight. 
The cockpit procedures of some airlines require that the configuration 
that is produced by the initial extension of slats be verified by both crew 
members (by reference to an indicator on the flight instrument panel) before 
slowing below the clean MinMan speed. This verification activity provides a 
context in which disagreements between the settings of the first speed bug 
on the two ASIs can be discovered. Also, it may involve a consultation with 
the speed card by either pilot to check the MinMan speed, or even a com- 
parison of the weight indicated by the selected speed card and the airplane 
gross weight as displayed on the fuel quantity panel. The fact that these 
other checks are so easy to perform with the available resources, highlights 
the fact that the physical configuration 
of the speed card is both a memory 
for speed, and a memory for a decision that was made earlier in the flight 
about the appropriate 
approach 
speed. Any of these activities may also 
refresh either pilot’s internal memory for the speeds or the gross weight. 
The depth of the processing engaged in here, that is, how many of these 
other checks are performed, 
may depend on the time available and the 
pilots’ sense about whether or not things are going well. Probably, it is not 
possible to predict how many other checks may be precipitated by this man- 
dated cross check, but it is important to note that several are possible and 
may occur at this point. 
When the pilot flying calls for a configuration 
change, the PNF can, and 
should, verify that the speed is appropriate for the commanded configuration 
change. The mandated division of labor in which the PF calls for the flap 
setting, and the PNF actually selects it by moving the flap handle, permits 
the PF to keep hands on the yoke and throttles during the flap extension. 
This facilitates airplane control because changes in pitch attitude normally 
occur during flap extension. 
It is likely that facilitating control was the 
original justification 
for this procedure. 
However, this division of labor 
COCKPIT SPEEDS 
279 
also has a very attractive system-level cognitive side effect in that it provides 
for additional redundancies in checking the bug settings and for the corre- 
spondences between speeds and configuration 
changes. 
Using the Salmon Bug 
On the final approach, 
the salmon bug provides the speed reference for 
both pilots, as both have speed-related tasks to perform. The spatial relation 
between the AS1 needle and the salmon bug provides the pilots with an indica- 
tion of how well the airplane is tracking the speed target, and may give indi- 
cations of the effects on airspeed of pitch changes input by the crew (or other 
autoflight systems in tracking the glide slope during a coupled approach) or 
of local weather conditions, such as windshear. 
The salmon bug is also the reference which the PNF computes the devia- 
tion from target speed. The PNF must make the mandatory call out at 500 
feet AFL, as well as any other call outs required if the airspeed deviates by 
more than five knots from the target approach speed. In these call outs, the 
trajectory 
of task-relevant 
representational 
state is from the relationship 
between the AS1 needle and the salmon bug, to a verbalization by the PNF 
directed to the PF. Because the final approach segment is visually intensive 
for the PF, the conversion of the airspeed information 
from the visual into 
the auditory modality by the PNF permits the PF access to this important 
information, 
without requiring the allocation of precious visual resources to 
the ASI. 
Summary of Representations and Processes Outside the Pilot 
Setting the speed bugs is a matter of producing a representation in the cockpit 
environment 
that will serve as a resource that organizes performances 
that 
are to come later. This structure is produced by bringing representations 
into coordination 
with one another (the gross weight readout, the speed 
card, the verbalizations, 
and so forth) and will provide the representational 
state (relations between speed bug locations and AS1 needle positions) that 
will be coordinated 
with other representations 
(names for flap positions, 
flap handle quadrant labels, flap handle positions, and so forth) ten to fifteen 
minutes later, when the airplane begins slowing down. I call this entire pro- 
cess a cockpit system’s “memory” 
because it consists of the creation, inside 
the system, of a representational state that is then saved and used to organize 
subsequent activities. 
A Cognitive Description of Memory 
for Speeds-Representations 
and Processes Inside the Pilots 
Having described the directly observable representationa 
states involved in 
the memory for speeds in the cockpit system during the approach, we ask of 
that same cycle of activity, “What are the cognitive tasks facing the pilots?” 
280 
HUTCHINS 
The description of transformations 
of the representational 
state in the 
previous section is both a description of how the system processes informa- 
tion and a specification of cognitive tasks facing individual pilots. It is, in 
fact, a better cognitive task specification than can be had by simply thinking 
in terms of procedural descriptions. The task specification is detailed enough, 
in some cases, to put constraints on the kinds of representations 
and pro- 
cesses that the individuals must use. 
In much of the cockpit’s remembering, significant functions are achieved 
by a person interpreting material symbols, rather than by a person recalling 
those symbols from his or her memory. So we must go beyond looking for 
things that resemble our expectations about human memory to understand 
the phenomena of memory in the cockpit as a cognitive system. 
Computing the Speeds and Setting the Bugs 
The speeds are computed by pattern matching on the airplane gross weight 
and the weights provided on the cards. The pilots don’t have to remember 
what the weights are that appear on the cards. It is necessary only to find the 
place of the indicated gross weight value in the cards that are provided. 
However, repeated exposure to the cards may lead to implicit learning of 
the weight intervals, 
and whatever such knowledge 
that does develop 
may be a resource in selecting the appropriate speed card for any given gross 
weight. With experience, pilots may develop internal structures to coordinate 
with predictable structure in the task environment. 
Once the appropriate 
card has been selected, the values must be read 
from the card. Several design measures have been taken to facilitate this 
process. Frequently 
used speeds appear in larger font size than do infre- 
quently used speeds, and there is a box around the Vref speeds to help pilots 
find these values (Wickens & Flach, 1988). Reading is, probably, an over- 
learned skill for most pilots. Still, there is a need for working memory: 
transposition errors are probably the most frequent sort of error committed 
in this process (Norman, 
1991; Wickens & Flach, 1988). 
Setting any single speed bug to a particular 
value requires 
the pilot to 
hold the target speed in memory, 
read speed scale, locate the target speed on 
the speed scale (a search similar to that for weight in the speed card booklet), 
and then, manually, 
move the speed bug to the scale position. 
Because not 
all tick marks on the speed scale have printed values adjacent to them, some 
interpolation, 
or counting of ticks, also is required. 
Coordinating 
reading the speeds with setting the bugs is more complicated. 
The actions 
of reading 
and setting 
may be interleaved 
in many possible 
orders. 
One could read each speed before 
setting it or read several speeds, 
retain them in memory, 
then set them one by one. Other sequences are also 
possible. The demands 
on working 
memory 
will depend on the strategy 
chosen. 
If several speeds are to be remembered and then set, they may be 
COCKPIT 
SPEEDS 
281 
rehearsed to maintain the memory. Such a memory is vulnerable to interfer- 
ence from other tasks in the same modality (Wickens & Flach, 1988), and 
the breakdown of such a memory may lead to a shift to a strategy that has 
less demanding memory requirements. 
The activities involved in computing the bug speeds and rerepresenting 
them in several other media may permit them to be represented in a more 
enduring way in the memory of the PNF. Similarly, hearing the spoken 
values, possibly reading them from the landing data card, and setting them 
on the airspeed indicator, may permit a more enduring representation of the 
values to form in the memory of the PF. Lacking additional evidence, we 
cannot know the duration or quality of these memories. But we know from 
observation that there are ample opportunities 
for rehearsals and associa- 
tions of the rehearsed values with representations 
in the environment. 
Using the Configuration 
Change Bugs 
The airspeed indicator needle moves counter-clockwise as the airplane slows. 
Because the airspeed scale represents speed as spatial position and numerical 
relations as spatial relations, the airspeed bugs segment the face of the AS1 
into regions that can be occupied by the AS1 needle. The relation of the AS1 
needle to the bug positions is thus constructed 
as the location of the air- 
plane’s present airspeed in a space of speeds. The bugs are also associated 
with particular 
flap/slat 
setting names (e.g., O”/RET, lS”/EXT, 
and so 
forth), so the regions on the face of the ASI have meaning both as speed 
regimes and as locations for flap/slat 
setting names. Once the bugs have 
been set, the pilots do not simply take in sensory data from the ASI; rather, 
the pilots impose additional meaningful structure on the image of the ASI. 
They use the bugs to define regions of the face of the ASI, and they associate 
particular meanings with those regions (Figure 4). The coordination of speed 
with wing configuration 
is achieved by superimposing 
representations 
of 
wing configuration 
and representation 
of speed on the same instrument. 
Once the bugs are set, it is not necessary actually to read the scale values 
where they are placed. It is necessary, however, to remember the meanings 
of each of the bugs with respect to names for flap/slat configurations. 
Since 
the regions of speed scale that are associated with each configuration 
are 
not permanently marked on the jet ASI, the pilot must construct the mean- 
ings of the regions in the act of “seeing” the AS1 with bugs as a set of mean- 
ingful regions. 
Speed bugs are part of what Luria called a functional 
system (Luria, 
1979). It is a constellation of structures, some of them internal to the human 
actors, some external, involved in the performance 
of some invariant task. 
It is commonplace to refer to the speed bug as a memory aid (Norman, 1991; 
Tenney, 1988). Speed bugs are said to help the pilot remember the critical 
speeds. But now that we have looked at how speed bugs are set up and how 
282 
HUTCHINS 
O/EXT 
Figure 4. Meaningful 
regions of the airspeed indicator face. The pilots “see” regions of the 
airspeed 
indicator 
scale as having meanings 
in terms of the configurations 
required 
to fly 
the airplane 
at the speeds in each region. 
they are used, it is not clear that they contribute to the pilot’s memory at all. 
The functional system of interest here is the one that controls the coordina- 
tion of airspeeds with wing configurations. 
It is possible to imagine a func- 
tional system without speed bugs, in which pilots are required to read the 
speeds, remember the speeds, remember which configuration 
change goes 
with each speed, read the scale, and so forth. Adding speed bugs to the sys- 
tem does nothing to alter the memory of the pilots, but it does permit a dif- 
ferent set of processes to be assembled into a functional system that achieves 
the same results as the system without speed bugs. In the functional system 
with speed bugs, some of the memory requirements for the pilot are reduced. 
What was accomplished without speed bugs by remembering speed values, 
reading the AS1 needle values, and comparing the two values is accomplished 
with the use of speed bugs by judgments of spatial proximity. 
Individual 
pilot memory has not been enhanced; rather, the memory function has now 
become a property of a larger system in which the individual engages in a dif- 
ferent sort of cognitive behavior. The beauty of devices like speed bugs is 
that they permit these reconfigurations 
of functional systems in ways that 
COCKPIT 
SPEEDS 
283 
reduce the requirements for scarce cognitive resources. To call speed bugs a 
“memory aide” for the pilots is to mistake the cognitive properties of the 
reorganized 
functional 
system for the cognitive properties 
of one of its 
human components. Speed bugs do not help pilots remember speeds; rather, 
they are part of the process by which the cockpit system remembers speeds. 
Using the Salmon Bug 
Without a speed bug, on final approach the PF must remember the approach 
speed, read the airspeed indicator scale to find the remembered value of the 
approach speed on the airspeed indicator scale, and compare the position of 
the ASI needle on the scale with the position of the approach speed on the 
scale. With the salmon bug set, the pilot no longer needs to read the airspeed 
indicator scale. He or she simply looks to see whether or not the indicator 
needle is lined up with the salmon bug. Thus, a memory and scale reading 
task is transformed 
into a judgment of spatial adjacency. It is important to 
make these tasks as simple as possible because there are many other things 
the pilot must do on the final approach. The pilot must continue monitoring 
the airspeed while also monitoring the glide path and runway alignment of 
the aircraft. Deviations in any of these may require corrective actions. 
In making the required speed call outs, the PNF uses the salmon bug in a 
way similar to the way the PF does. To determine the numerical relation 
between the indicated speed and the setting of the salmon bug, the PNF 
could use mental arithmetic and subtract the current speed from the value 
of Vref. This is the sort of cognitive task we imagine might face the crew if 
we simply examined the procedural description. A less obvious, but equally 
effective method, is to use the scale of the AS1 as a computational 
medium. 
The base of the salmon bug is about ten knots wide in the portion of the 
speed scale relevant to maneuvering 
for approach and landing. To deter- 
mine if the current speed is within 5 knots of the target, one only need see if 
the airspeed pointer is pointing at any part of the body of the salmon bug. 
This strategy permits a conceptual task to be implemented by perceptual 
processes. 
Having determined the deviation from target speed, the PNF calls it out 
to the PF. Notice the role of the representation 
of information. 
Twice in 
this example, a change in the nature of the representation 
of information 
results in a change in the nature of the cognitive task facing the pilot. In the 
first case, the speed bug itself permits a simple judgment of spatial proximity 
to be substituted for a scale reading task operation. 
In the second case, the 
PNF further transforms the task facing the PF from a judgment of spatial 
proximity 
(requiring scarce visual resources) into a task of monitoring 
a 
particular aural cue (a phrase like, “five knots fast”). Notice also that the 
change in the task for the pilot flying changes the kinds of internal knowl- 
edge structures that must be brought into play in order to decide on an 
appropriate 
action. 
284 
HUTCHINS 
The Pilot’s Memory for Speeds 
Memory is normally thought of as a psychological function internal to the 
individual. However, memory tasks in the cockpit may be accomplished by 
functional systems which transcend the boundaries of the individual actor. 
Memory processses may be distributed among human agents, or between 
human agents and external representational 
devices. 
In some sense, the speeds are being remembered 
by the crew, partly, I 
suspect, in the usual sense of individual internal memory. But the speeds are 
also being read, written, and compared to other speeds in many representa- 
tions. They are being compared to long-term memories for the typical or ex- 
pected speeds for a plane of this specific weight. The comparison might be 
in terms of numbers; that is, “Is 225 KIAS a fast or a slow speed for initial 
flap extension?” 
The comparison 
could also take place in terms of the 
number in the pilot’s head, or on the landing data card, or on the position 
of the first bug on the airspeed indicator, or all of these together. 
In this setting, the pilot’s memory of these speeds may be a richly inter- 
woven fabric of interaction with many representations 
that seem superficial 
or incomplete compared to the compact localized internal memory for which 
cognitive scientists usually look. The memory observed in the cockpit is a 
continual interaction with a world of meaningful structure. The pilots contin- 
ually are reading and writing, reconstituting and reconstructing the meaning 
and the organization of both the internal and the external representations 
of 
the speeds. It is not just the retrieval of something from an internal store- 
house, and not just a recognition or a match of an external form to an inter- 
nally stored template. It is, rather, a combination 
of recognition, 
recall, 
pattern matching, cross modality consistency checking, construction, 
and 
reconstruction 
that is conducted in interaction with a rich set of representa- 
tional structures, many of which permit, but do not demand, the recon- 
struction of some internal representation 
that we would normally call the 
“memory” 
for the speed. 
In the cockpit’s memory for speeds, we see many examples of opportun- 
istic use of structure in the environment. Some of these were never anticipated 
by designers. Using the width of the salmon bug as a yardstick in local speed 
space is a wonderful example. The engineer who wrote the specifications for 
the airspeed indicator in the Boeing 7571767 reported to me that the width 
of the base of the command airspeed pointer (salmon bug) is not actually 
spelled out in the specifications. The width of the tip of the pointer is explic- 
itly specified, but the width of the base is not. On engineering drawings, the 
base is shown fitting just between the large ticks at ten-knot intervals on the 
scale. The engineers say it has this width so that it will be easy to find, but 
will never obscure more than one large tick mark at a time. If it covered 
more than one large tick mark, it might make it difficult to interpolate and 
read speeds. That constraint solves a design problem for the engineers that 
the pilots never notice (because the difficulty in reading the scale that would 
COCKPIT 
SPEEDS 
285 
be caused by a wider bug never arises), and provides a bit of structure in the 
world for the pilots that can be opportunistically 
exploited to solve an oper- 
ational problem that the designers never anticipated. 
COGNITIVE 
PROPERTIES 
OF THE COCKPIT SYSTEM 
The task is to control the configuration 
of the airplane to match the changes 
in speed required for maneuvering in the approach and landing. The flaps 
are controlled by positioning the flap handle. The flap handle is controlled 
by aligning it with written labels for flap positions that correspond to spoken 
labels produced by the PF. The spoken labels are produced at the appropriate 
times by speaking the name of the region on the AS1 face that the needle is 
approaching. 
The regions of the AS1 are delimited by the settings of the 
speed bugs. The names of the regions are produced by the PF through the 
application of a schema for seeing the dial face. The speed bugs are posi- 
tioned by placing them in accordance with the speeds listed on the selected 
speed card. And the speed card is selected by matching the weight printed 
on the bottom with the weight displayed on the fuel quantity panel. 
This system makes use of representations 
in many different media. The 
media themselves have very different properties. The speed card booklet is a 
relatively permanent representation. 
The spoken representation is ephemeral 
and endures only in its production. 
The memory is stored ultimately for use 
in the physical state of the speed bugs. It is represented temporarily in the 
spoken interchanges, 
and represented 
with unknown 
persistence in the 
memories of the individual pilots. The pilot’s memories clearly are involved, 
but they operate in an environment where there is a great deal of support for 
recreating the memory. 
Speed bugs are involved in a distribution of cognitive labor across social 
space. The speed bug helps the solo pilot by simplifying the task of deter- 
mining the relation of present airspeed to Vrer, thereby reducing the amount 
of time required for the pilot’s eyes to be on the airspeed indicator during 
the approach. With multi-pilot crews, the cognitive work of reading the air- 
speed indicator and monitoring the other instruments on the final approach 
can be divided among the pilots. The PF can dedicate visual resources to 
monitoring the progress of the aircraft, whereas the pilot not flying can use 
visual resources to monitor airspeed and transform the representation 
of the 
relation between current airspeed and Vrer from a visual to an auditory form. 
Speed bugs permit a shift in the distribution 
of cognitive effort across 
time. They enable the crew to calculate correspondences 
between speeds and 
configurations 
during a low workload phase of flight, and save the results 
of that computation 
for later use. Internal memory also supports this redis- 
tribution of effort across time, but notice the different properties of the two 
kinds of representation; 
a properly set speed bug is much less likely than a 
pilot’s memory to “forget” 
its value. The robustness of the physical device 
286 
HUTCHINS 
as a representation 
permits the computation 
of speeds to be moved arbi- 
trarily far in time from the moment of their use and is relatively insensitive 
to the interruptions, 
the distractions, 
and the delays that may disrupt in- 
ternal memories. 
This is a surprisingly redundant system. Not only is there redundant rep. 
resentation 
in memory; there is also redundant processing and redundani 
checking. The interaction of the representations 
in the different media give: 
the overall system the properties it has. This is not to say that knowing about 
the people is not important, 
but rather to say that much of what we care 
about is in the interaction of the people with each other and with physical 
structure in the environment. 
The analog ASI display maps an abstract conceptual quantity, speed, 
onto an expanse of physical space. This mapping of conceptual structure 
onto physical space allows important conceptual operations to be defined 
in terms of simple perceptual procedures. 
Simple internal structures (the 
meanings of the regions on the dial face defined by the positions of the speed 
bugs) in interaction 
with simple and specialized external representations 
perform powerful computations. 
DISCUSSION 
The cockpit system remembers its speeds, and the memory process emerges 
from the activity of the pilots. The memory of the cockpit, however, is not 
made primarily of pilot memory. A complete theory of individual human 
memory would not be sufficient to understand that which we wish to under- 
stand because so much of the memory function takes place outside the indi- 
vidual. In some sense, what the theory of individual human memory explains 
is not how this system works, but why this system must contain so many 
components that are functionally implicated in cockpit memory, yet are ex- 
ternal to the pilots themselves. 
The speed bug is one of many devices in the cockpit that participate in 
functional systems which accomplish memory tasks. The altitude alerting 
system and the many pieces of paper that appear in even the most modern 
glass cockpit are other examples. The properties of functional systems that 
are mediated by external representations 
differ from those that rely exclus- 
ively on internal representations, 
and may depend on the physical properties 
of the external representational 
media. Such factors as the endurance of a 
representation, the sensory modality via which it is accessed, its vulnerability 
to disruption, 
and the competition 
for modality specific resources may all 
influence the cognitive properties of such a system. 
This article presents a theoretical framework that takes a socio-technical 
system, rather than an individual mind, as its primary unit of analysis. This 
theory is explicitly cognitive in the sense that it is concerned with how infor- 
COCKPIT 
SPEEDS 
287 
mation is represented and how representations 
are transformed 
and propa- 
gated through the system. Such a theory can provide a bridge between the 
information 
processing properties of individuals and the information 
pro- 
cessing properties of a larger system, such as an airplane cockpit. 
One of the primary jobs of a theory is to help us look in the right places 
for answers to questions. This system-level cognitive view directs our atten- 
tion beyond the cognitive properties of individuals to the properties of ex- 
ternal representations 
and to the interactions between internal and external 
representations. 
Technological devices introduced into the cockpit invariably 
affect the flow of information 
in the cockpit. They may determine the pos- 
sible trajectories 
of information 
or the kinds of transformations 
of infor- 
mation structure that are required for propagation. 
Given the current rapid 
pace of introduction of computational equipment, these issues are becoming 
increasingly important. 
REFERENCES 
Gras, A., Moricot, 
C., Poirot-Delpech, 
S., & Scardigli, 
V. (1991). Le Pitote, Ie confr3teur, e/ 
/‘automate (Reedition 
du rapport 
prkdefinition 
PIRTTEM-CNRS 
et du rapport 
final 
SERT-Minis&e 
des transports. 
ed.). Paris: Editions 
de L’Iris. 
Hutchins, 
E. (1990). The technology 
of team navigation. 
In J. Galegher, 
R. Kraut, 
& C. Egido 
(Eds.), Intellectual teamwork: Social and technical bases of collaborative work. Hillsdale, 
NJ: Erlbaum. 
Hutchins, 
E. (1991). Organizing 
work by adaptation. 
Organization Science, 2, 14-38. 
Hutchins, 
E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Luria, 
A.R. (1979). The making of mind: A personal account of Soviet psychology. (M. Cole 
& S. Cole, Trans.). 
Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard 
University 
Press. 
March, 
J., & Simon, 
H. (1958). Organizations. New York: Wiley. 
Morgan, 
G. (1986). Images of organization. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 
Newell, A., & Simon, H.A. (1972). Human problem solving. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Norman, 
D.A. (1991). Cognitive 
science in the cockpit. 
CESERlAC Gateway, 2, l-6. 
Norman, 
D.A. (1993). Things that make us smart. Reading, 
MA: Addison 
Wesley. 
Simon, 
H.A. 
(1981). The sciences of the arttficial(2nd 
ed.). Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Simon, 
H.A., 
&Kaplan, 
C.A. (1989). Foundations 
of Cognitive 
Science. 
In M. Posner (Eds.), 
Foundations of cognitive science. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Tenney, 
D.C. (1988, December). 
Bug speeds pinpointed 
by autothrottles 
mean less jockeying 
but more thinking. 
Professional pilot, pp. 96-99. 
Webb, J. (1971). F/y the wing. Ames, 
IA: Iowa State University 
Press. 
Wickens, 
C., & Flach, 
J. (1988). 
Information 
processing. 
In E. Wiener 
& D. Nagel (Eds.), 
Human factors in aviation. New York: Academic. 
GLOSSARY 
AS1 
ATC 
Flap 
Air speed indicator. 
Air traffic control. 
A panel mounted on the trailing edge of the wing that 
can be extended to change the shape of the wing and 
increase its area. 
HUTCHINS 
288 
IAS 
MinMan speed The minimum maneuvering speed. A speed at which an 
airplane has a reasonable margin over a stall given the 
current configuration. 
This is usually 1.3 times the stall 
speed for the configuration. 
PF 
Pilot flying. The crewmember who is responsible for 
flying and navigating the airplane. 
PNF 
Pilot not flying. The crewmember who is responsible for 
communicating 
with ATC and operating the airplane 
non-flying systems, airconditioning 
and pressurization, 
for example. 
Slat 
A panel mounted on the leading edge of the wing that 
can be extended to change the shape of the wing and 
increase its area. Slats are normally extended before flaps. 
V ref 
The approach reference speed or velocity. This is the 
target speed for the final approach segment. 
Indicated air speed. The airspeed determined by the 
dynamic pressure of the airstream over the airplane. This 
may be different from true airspeed. It is the speed that 
is indicated on the ASI. 
