85
The Evolution of Smalltalk
From Smalltalk-72 through Squeak
DANIEL INGALLS, Independent Consultant, USA
Shepherd: Andrew Black, Portland State University, USA
This paper presents a personal view of the evolution of six generations of Smalltalk in which the author played
a part, starting with Smalltalk-72 and progressing through Smalltalk-80 to Squeak and Etoys. It describes the
forces that brought each generation into existence, the technical innovations that characterized it, and the
growth in understanding of object-orientation and personal computing that emerged. It summarizes what
that generation achieved and how it affected the future, both within the evolving group of developers and
users, and in the outside world.
The early Smalltalks were not widely accessible because they ran only on proprietary Xerox hardware;
because of this, few people have experience with these important historical artifacts. To make them accessible,
the paper provides links to live simulations that can be run in present-day web browsers. These simulations
offer the ability to run predefined scripts, but also allow the user to go off-script, browse the details of the
implementation, and try anything that could be done in the original system. An appendix includes anecdotal
and technical aspects of how examples of each generation of Smalltalk were recovered, and how order was
teased out of chaos to the point that these old systems could be brought back to life.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering →General programming languages; • Social and pro-
fessional topics →History of programming languages.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Smalltalk, Squeak, Alto, NoteTaker, OOZE, BitBlt, Morphic, Etoys, Objects,
Blocks, Bytecode, Interpreter, Virtual Machine, Bootstrap
ACM Reference Format:
Daniel Ingalls. 2020. The Evolution of Smalltalk: From Smalltalk-72 through Squeak. Proc. ACM Program. Lang.
4, HOPL, Article 85 (June 2020), 102 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3386335
1
PRELUDE
I am the luckiest person I know in computer science. Over a period of more than thirty years I have
had the opportunity to design and implement six generations of Smalltalk systems, and the joy
of working with wonderful like-minded people who shared my excitement and commitment to
making every one of these systems remarkable in one way or another. In each case it was Alan Kay
who carried the standard of realizing the potential of computers to make us better thinkers, and
Author’s address: Daniel Ingalls, Independent Consultant, Manhattan Beach, CA, 90265, USA, DanHHIngalls@gmail.com.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses,
contact the owner/author(s).
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
2475-1421/2020/6-ART85
https://doi.org/10.1145/3386335
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:2
Daniel Ingalls
committed his time and energy to secure the resources to do what it took, year by year, to realize
that dream. This paper can be read as a companion to Alan Kay’s earlier HOPL paper [Kay 1993]; it
presents my personal recollections of the work and the forces that shaped it.
Contents
1
Prelude
1
2
Smalltalk-72
4
3
What is a Smalltalk?
20
4
Smalltalk-74
21
5
Smalltalk-76
31
6
Smalltalk-78
50
7
Smalltalk-80
56
8
Squeak
66
9
Conclusion
80
A
Archaeology
82
B
Bootstrapping
88
C
Primitive Access
92
D
Parse-Tree Compiler
93
E
Speed and Space
94
F
The Alto Computer
98
References
100
Many people have been involved in the work
on Smalltalk, and many interesting Smalltalks
have been created over the years. This paper fo-
cuses on the work that began with Smalltalk-72
at Xerox Parc, and traces its evolution through
six generations, culminating in Squeak and the
Etoys tile-programming environment that it
hosted. The core team of half a dozen people or
fewer remained remarkably stable over more
than two decades, and this has helped me to
tell the story in a coherent manner. All the
Smalltalks except Squeak are named by the year
in which they were designed, and in each case
they were running and in use the following year.
Squeak was designed and released in 1996.
My involvement with Smalltalk began in
1971. I was selling a system that I wrote as a
spin-off from a project I had worked on with
Don Knuth at Stanford University. This was
the day when Fortran programs were still writ-
ten on punched cards and read into room-sized
computers to carry out the early automation of business and research. My system would read in
those programs, insert monitoring statements at branch points, and then run the program as it was
intended, while accumulating data about the execution. When the program terminated, my system
would correlate the monitoring results with the original program and print out a source listing
annotated by exact execution counts and estimates of time spent on each statement. Because it
presented its results on the programmer’s original listing, it was simple to understand, and therefore
easy to use. It was possibly the first source-level execution profiling tool.
To develop this profiler on different platforms of the day, I would rent time at the various service
bureaus around Palo Alto to make sure that it worked well on IBM, CDC, GE, Univac, and other
mainframe computers. Time was cheaper at night, and the turnaround time was better, so that is
when I carried out this testing. One night I ran into a fellow named George White who had just
been hired to work on speech recognition at a new lab called Xerox Parc. He was working on a
program to segment an utterance and identify phonemes based on the frequency spectrum at each
instant. He wasn’t sure where it was spending its time, so I offered to make him my test case for
the evening. The results were enlightening to him and, though he didn’t offer to buy my program,
we parted as good friends.
A few days later I got a call from this George White, explaining that he had just taken delivery
of a pile of computer equipment including a Xerox Sigma 3 minicomputer, and he thought I might
be able to help him turn it into a speech lab at Xerox Parc. This sounded like fun, so I took the job.
With my Fortran knowledge I was right at home on the Sigma 3. George had also hired a Stanford
intern named Ted Kaehler, and we worked on the project together. I wrote a text editor and job
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:3
entry system so that in a couple of months we could do rapid prototyping of George’s speech
recognition schemes, and display the results on a Tektronix graphics terminal.
In our spare time, Ted introduced me to APL [Iverson 1962]; he had access to an APL system
at IBM [Pakin 1968] from an earlier internship. In turn, I introduced Ted to Meta II, Val Schorre’s
amazing tiny compiler compiler [Schorre 1964]. Schorre’s paper shows how to write a simplified
Algol compiler in about a page, and finishes by exhibiting a Meta compiler that will compile itself
in less than half a page. The day I read that paper, I wrote a version of Meta in Fortran for our
Sigma 3.
At the time, my experience with computer science was limited. I was familiar with Fortran and
APL, and had written assembly code for the PDP-8 and HP 2116. I had never really used a Lisp
system [McCarthy 1978; McCarthy et al. 1965], except to write a reverse function as an exercise,
and neither had I read about nor used Simula [Nygaard 1970; Nygaard and Dahl 1981]. I think,
though, that both these deficiencies may have worked as strengths. Knowing less, I generally
added something only if we actually needed it. Compared to Lisp, Smalltalk made classes special,
whereas they could have been just another level of scope. Ironically I think this made things easier
to understand. Just as serifs make some fonts easier to read by offering recognizable islands in text,
so I think it helps to think about classes and instances, even if there is a way in which “everything
is the same.” Compared to Simula, Smalltalk may have been a “weaker” language in terms of types,
concurrency, and other behavior, but from the beginning Smalltalk was “alive” in a way that Simula
was not.1
In spite of my relative innocence, I will note that Alan knew just about every computer language
and system; if I were doing something wrong or leaving something out, he would give me a nudge
to rethink things.
There was an air of excitement everywhere around Xerox Parc. Major resources were available
for an open agenda to invent “the office of the future,” and remarkable people were being collected
to discover what it was and to make it real. We would frequently bump into Butler Lampson and
his crew from Berkeley Computer Corp (developers of the Scientific Data Systems SDS 940 com-
puter [Lampson et al. 1966]), Bill English and his crew from SRI (prime movers behind the “greatest
demo ever” [Doug Englebart Institute 2008; Engelbart and English 1968]) and Gary Starkweather,
the genius of quality laser printing [Starkweather 1997]. Alan Kay had also been hired, with ideas
about personal computing that resonated well with the Butler Lampson contingent.
While working for George White, Ted Kaehler and I used an office across the hall from Alan
Kay’s office, and we frequently found ourselves more interested in what we overheard from
Alan than in our work on speech recognition. We fell into a hallway conversation that I think
was started by talking about the beautiful compactness of APL and Meta; the spirit of Small is
Beautiful [Schumacher 1973] was in the air.
We knew that Alan wanted to make a computer for children—“children of all ages,” to use his
phrase [Kay 1972]—based on sending messages. Alan had just come from the Stanford AI Lab, where
various computing systems had been cobbled together, and he had seen that sending messages was
the key to reducing complexity by not allowing one part of a system to depend on the internals of
other parts. This kept the level of complexity proportional to the number of components rather
than to the square of the number of components. And so our hallway discussion came around to
1In the 1970s, we spoke of Smalltalk as being “reactive,” but I will also use the current term, “live,” to denote the property of
being immediately responsive to changes.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:4
Daniel Ingalls
the question of how small a language one could write, based on messages, that would be capable
of creating the entire worlds that we foresaw in the future of computing. Alan, who knew about
McCarthy’s Lisp interpreter in a half page [McCarthy 1960, §3f], declared “No more than a page of
code.” Ted and I said “show us,” and Alan went home for the day.
For the next two weeks, Alan would come in around 4am, work on the design, and then chat
with several of us about his progress. Around day 8 he had something that seemed workable. It
was more symmetric with regard to send-receive, but for various reasons this was abandoned in
favor of a more expression-oriented functional return style. The essence of Alan’s original design
appears in Appendix II of his paper at HOPL II [Kay 1993, Figure 11A.3]. It was not much more
than a page, and we all agreed he had won his bet.
2
SMALLTALK-72
The possibility of such a simple and novel language being within reach was incredibly exciting.
I immediately went home myself and wrote a simulation of Alan’s interpreter in Basic (the only
language to which I had easy access at home), as a proof of concept. I coded up a token scanner, list
maker, and a couple of class tables. After a few days it evaluated 6 factorial,2 and we could see
that it was going to work. In Alan’s words, “all of a sudden there was something new to program.”
This was the birth of the language Smalltalk-72.
The rules of Smalltalk-72 are few, and well-summarized in Alan’s HOPL paper [Kay 1993, p.534].
• Everything is an object.
• Objects have their own memory (in terms of objects).
• Every object is an instance of a class (which is an object).
• The class holds the shared behavior for its instances.
• Objects communicate by sending and receiving messages (streams of tokens).
• To evaluate a token stream representing an expression, control is passed to the object repre-
sented by the first token, and the remainder of the stream is passed to it as a message.
2.1
Implementation
I managed to wrangle access to a Data General Nova computer from the Polos group.3 It had a hard
disk, and I got one of the techs to hook up a modem so that I could call in to it from home. This
was all I needed to write a serious version of the interpreter in Nova assembly language. The main
components of that interpreter were
• a routine to read and tokenize text,
• a managed object memory,
• an architecture for classes and instances,
• a structure for code (we used vectors and sub-vectors), and
• the evaluator that Alan had designed.
2This test sent the message factorial to the object 6, which would in turn send factorial to the object 5, and so on,
testing recursive calling and returning in the context of a message-sending system.
3Polos (for Parc Online Office System) was a project at Parc led by Bill English. Bill had come from Doug Englebart’s group
at SRI, and the project was exploring Englebart-like systems for office use.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:5
Fig. 1. The basic architecture of the Smalltalk-72 system. Shown are the Virtual Machine, containing the
object memory and activation stack, the USER class pointing to global classes and other objects, the screen,
with a dispframe for type-in and print-out, and the disk, mouse, keyboard, and a speaker.
The fledgling universe created by this interpreter consisted simply of objects that could send
messages as sequences of tokens, and which could receive and recognize messages, somewhat in
the spirit of Meta II. This created a language extensible in both its syntax and semantics.
The makeup of the Smalltalk-72 system is shown in Figure 1. It consisted of an object memory, or
image, organized with direct 16-bit pointers to each object. Each object began with a class pointer
followed by instance state. Strings (within string quotes) and vectors (within parentheses) had a
length word following their class pointer. Classes were hash tables that described their instances,
and a function was simply a class with no instances. Each name in the table was associated with
one of three values:
• an offset for temporary variables stored in the activation
• an offset for variables stored in an instance
• a direct pointer for variables stored in the class
Each class included several class variables not shown to users:
• DO: the code for this function or class
• TITLE: the name of the function or class
• ARSIZE: the size needed for the activation record, with temps
• SIZE: the size of instances of the class; all instances of a particular class were of the same size,
except for arrays and strings
One class, USER, held all the global objects as its class variables. Thus it served as an “index” of
all the classes and other objects in the image. The state of each message send was specified by
a stack frame that we referred to as an activation record, or simply an activation. The activation
records formed a stack that grew down from the top of the object memory, while all other objects
were allocated upward from the bottom. The interpreter itself followed the rule for interpretation
with objects sending messages to each other to change their state, create new objects, or invoke
primitive behavior. Primitive behavior was invoked by the token CODE followed by an integer; this
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:6
Daniel Ingalls
induced the abstract interpreter to perform concrete behavior such as arithmetic, logic, input from
the keyboard, and output to the display and disk devices.
I worked on the object memory, the read routine, and the basic evaluator. The read routine read
characters from the keyboard or elsewhere into a vector of atoms (names and non-alphanumeric
characters), numbers, strings, and subvectors. The name “vector” was a holdover from APL. In
source code the contents of a vector were delimited by parentheses, and stored as simple arrays
with a length field. Diana Merry, who had been with Alan since before I joined Parc, worked with
Alan on text display and some rectangle operations necessary for scrolling and clearing areas on the
screen. Ted Kaehler came back from graduate school over Christmas 1972 then wrote line-drawing
routines for the bitmap display.
Meanwhile, Altos (described in Appendix F) were being built, and would soon become available
to us. The Alto had a 606×808 pixel black and white bitmap display and the possibility of writing
microcode for important kernel routines. Butler Lampson and other folks in CSL had put together a
development system for the Alto that ran on our Data General Nova minicomputers. It provided an
operating system, text editor, assembler and loader, and SWAT, a debugger that we used mainly for
its ability to dump all of memory to the disk in only a second, and to load it all back with similar
speed. This development system enabled us to write and debug code while the Altos were still
being built, since the Alto microcode included an emulator that would run the same Nova code
that we had written and tested. Finally, in April of 1973, the first few Altos became available to us.
Within a few days we had Smalltalk-72 up and running on the beautiful Alto bitmap display.
2.2
Hop into the Tardis4
Let’s go back to 1973, put our disk-pack into an Alto, and start up Smalltalk-72. To run the live
Smalltalk-72 simulation, visit https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/HOPL-St72.html?snippets.
2.3
Simple Examples
Figure 2 shows an Alto Smalltalk-72 screen. At the bottom is a scrolling text area where a miniature
icon of the Alto beckons users to type a Smalltalk expression. Several such expressions can be
seen along with their printed or graphical results. We discuss them here for the benefit of readers
without access to the simulation.
3+4!
7
We always typed this as our first evaluation after a new build. It tests a lot of the system; reading
from keyboard, building and eval’ing vectors (more later), and printing to the display. This is a
chance to explain to a first-timer that this sequence of symbols means: start with the number 3,
and pass it the message +4, which is something that 3 understands. After the do-it character (the
bold “!”), it prints the result and waits for more input.
355.0/113!
3.14159292
This second test runs floating-point arithmetic and the complex floating point print routine. At this
point we could be more confident that things were working right.
go 100!
4The “Tardis” is a time-travelling telephone box central to the television series Dr. Who.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:7
Fig. 2. A screen-shot from a (simulated) Smalltalk-72 system. The text area at the bottom shows several
Smalltalk commands; the line drawing is the result of
go 100 and spiral 300 89. To run this system live,
click the image or visit https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/HOPL-St72.html?snippets
Yay, a line appears—the vertical line at the center of Figure 2. For new learners, this was often the
first thing typed. We greatly respected the work of Seymour Papert, and made sure that Smalltalk-72
included a class named “turtle,” of which
(we called her “Smiley”) was an instance. Already the
learner is thinking about where
is located, and what go 100 looks like as a line.
Next in Figure 2 is a function designed to give Smiley some real exercise.
to spiral n angle i (:n. :angle. for i to n do (
go i turn angle))!
We followed the Logo usage of “to” as the command for defining a function, as we do with ordinary
verb definitions in English (“to speed is to drive fast”). The name of the function being defined is
followed by declarations for temporary variables—n, angle, and i—and then by a vector containing
the actual code for the function. The defining function “to” returns the name of the function.
The code begins with the pattern :n.. The function : here fetches the next value from the incoming
message stream, and binds it to the following name, n. The same thing happens with :angle, after
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:8
Daniel Ingalls
which we have n iterations of the for-loop body (
go i turn angle) with the distance i increasing
by one on each iteration.
spiral 300 89!
This expression looks up the name spiral, activates the function so named, and passes the remaining
tokens (300 89) as a message stream to that function. With these values bound to n and angle, the
for-loop produces the gratifying image in the upper portion of the screen shown in Figure 2.
2.4
Message Parsing
We can learn more about the message parsing mechanism of Smalltalk-72 by taking a look at the
definition of for. We can do this by asking the Smalltalk system to show for:
show for!
to for token step stop var start exp (:  var.
(∢←⇒(:start.)  start←1).
(∢to⇒(:stop.)  stop←start).
(∢by⇒(:step.)  step←1).
∢do. :#exp. CODE 24)
This function declares six temporary variables; they are all accessible to the primitive CODE 24, as
in dynamically bound Lisp or Logo.
Functions and other objects in Smalltalk-72 need to be able to recognize (i.e., parse) their input
message streams. To accomplish this, several primitive functions are available.
The primitive function : fetches values from the message stream; it is seen here in three variants.
The variant that appears first is :  (pronounced “fetch-quote”); it fetches the very token that
is next in the message (the atom i in our spiral example) and binds it to the following named
variable var.
The most common variant is simply : (pronounced “fetch”); it will begin a new evaluation in
the message stream, and bind the resulting value to the variable following :. We see this in the
definition of for as :start, and :stop, just as with :n and :angle in definition of spiral.
The final variant shown is :# (pronounced “fetch-bind”); it fetches the next token in the message
stream, (an embedded literal code vector in this example) without evaluating it. The :# variant
differs from :  in that, if the next item in the message stream is an atom , then :# will look up its
value, whereas :  will not.
It’s worth noting that all these forms of fetch may be used with no target variable, in which case
they simply return their value, presumably to be consumed in some other expression. Thus :stop
could have been written as  stop ←:. With hindsight the latter pattern is better style. This
“autobind” feature is particular to the fetch primitive, and not a general pattern; thus 10 start will
not bind start to 10. We often discussed doing without the autobind feature of fetch, as it would
have made the language a bit simpler to implement and to teach, but we had a bit of an APL-ish
taste for the brevity of this idiom. For example, a factorial function might be defined as:
to fact n (:n = 0 ? (⇑1) ⇑n * fact n--1)!
Here, :n fetches the value from the incoming message stream, binds it to the variable n, and proceeds
with the message = 0 as the beginning of the code body. Our young programmers were quick to
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:9
learn the autobind pattern and they, like us, were happy with its brevity. I am not an educator, and I
care mainly that syntax be simple. My sense is that people learn more by copying patterns than by
learning rules, and in this case the pattern :stop was easier to learn than  stop ←:. In addition
to APL’s brevity, we were also influenced by its infix operator syntax. It was natural to use infix for
arithmetic, and we liked how infix operators worked together with the rest of the syntax.
2.5
Atoms and Their Values
An atom in Smalltalk-72 is any alphanumeric identifier. It may have an associated value or not.
Assignment is accomplished by sending the message ←to an atom, as in  alpha ←value. This
statement looks up alpha in the current context (it might be a temporary variable, an instance
variable, or a class variable), and assigns the value to alpha. If not found, it will create a new global
variable for alpha and assign the value to it.
And now a word about quote (  ). Note that if alpha does not have a value, then alpha ←13
would cause an error, because it would send the message ←6 to alpha, which has no value. More
precisely, its value would be nil, and nil does not understand ←. On the other hand, if alpha were
bound to a text frame on the display, then alpha ←13 would add a newline character to that text.
Quote picks up the next token in the message stream (the hand is pointing at it) without evaluating
it. In this case it finds the atom alpha, which can understand ←6, and the assignment works.
Finally a word about left arrow and assignment. I always felt that there was something beautiful
about assignment not being built into Smalltalk-72. Assignment is simply a result of how atoms
interpret the message left-arrow. We decided to have the atom find its definition in a context and
change it.5 The kernel definition of Smalltalk-72 is remarkably open ended.
2.6
More on Message Parsing
Consider the middle three lines of for from Page 8; they say the following.
• If you see “←”, then fetch a value for start, otherwise set it to 1.
• If you see “to”, then fetch a value for stop, otherwise set it to start.
• If you see “by”, then fetch a value for step, otherwise set it to 1.
From this it should be apparent that ∢(read as “peek for”), followed by some symbol, tests for a
matching symbol as the next token in incoming message stream. If the symbol following ∢is found,
then the message stream is advanced and true is returned; if not, then the message stream remains
undisturbed, and false is returned.
Note also the expression ∢do on the last line of for. This does what it appears to do—it simply
consumes the token do if it is found, affording the user of for the option of putting the “buzzword”
do before the loop body.
The object false is a singleton instance of falseclass6 known to the interpreter. A conditional
test in Smalltalk-72 consists of an “implies-arrow” (⇒, read as “then”) in the message stream
followed by a parenthesized subvector containing the consequent code. If any value other than
false (including nil!) precedes a “then”, evaluation proceeds in the consequent subvector instead
5I talked with Alan about this while writing this paper, and he said “We could have done more with the first version of this;
it’s an interesting way to guard meaning with something between dynamic and static types.”
6“CamelCase” was not widely used in the early ’70s, and it made typing more difficult for young learners.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:10
Daniel Ingalls
of continuing in the outer vector. When execution hits the end of the consequent subvector, it
concludes evaluation of the outer vector as well. While the vector structure is not symmetric, the
subvector, and the continuation of the outer vector, behave as two equal forks chosen by the implies
arrow.
Finally we come to CODE 24, which invokes primitive code in the Smalltalk interpreter. This and
other such “code escapes” in the interpreter exist partly to get things going from scratch, partly to
maintain reasonable performance, and partly to effect primitive behavior that cannot be described
in the source language. In this case, CODE 24 looks up the value of var, adjusts it by step, compares
it to stop and then, while in range, it stores the new value and evaluates the code vector, exp. Note
that the activation of the code vector for the body of for must have a “caller” pointer back to the
activation of for, but a “message” pointer to the code vector (which will be parsed afresh each
time through), and a “global” pointer to the caller of for, where the binding of var, in our spiral
example i, exists. In that way expressions in the body of the loop will see the value of i, but not
the values of the other variables internal to the implementation of for.
Before leaving Smiley behind, let’s look at one more definition that is evocative of the fun we
had with Smallltalk-72 on the Alto.
It was possible to read the Alto’s mouse position from mx and my, and mouse 4 returned the state
of the top mouse button (the three mouse buttons were accessed by bits 4, 2, and 1). Here is a
rudimentary paint program of which many embellishments were built:
to paint (
home erase.
repeat (
penup goto mx my pendn.
repeat (4=mouse 4⇒(done)
goto mx my)))!
Fig. 3. A screenshot showing the turtle class rendered in the original Alto Smalltalk-72 fonts. The same
code is shown more readably in Figure 4. Note that the quoted string following CODE 21 is a comment
descriptive of the code escape.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:11
to turtle var : pen ink width dir xor x y frame : f (
CODE 21 'This code escape is equivalent to...
∢go⇒(draw a line of length :. ⇑SELF)
∢turn⇒(turn right :. ⇑SELF)
∢goto⇒(draw a line to :x :y. ⇑SELF)'
∢pendn⇒(  pen ←1. ⇑SELF)
∢penup⇒(  pen ←0. ⇑SELF)
∢ink⇒(∢←. :ink. ⇑SELF)
∢width⇒(∢←. :width. ⇑SELF)
∢xor⇒(  xor ←(∢off⇒(0) 1). ⇑SELF)
∢is⇒(ISIT eval)
∢home⇒(  x ←frame
frmwd/2.
 y ←frame
frmht/2.
 xf ← yf ←0.  dir←270. ⇑SELF)
∢erase⇒(frame fclear. ⇑SELF)
∢up⇒(  dir ←270. ⇑SELF)
isnew⇒(  ink ← black.  pen ← width ←1.  xor ←0.
(∢frame⇒(  frame ←:)  frame ←f)
∢at⇒(:x. :y.  dir←270) SELF home) )
Fig. 4. The turtle class of Figure 3, but typeset in the style of this paper.
2.7
Classes
So far we have seen the evaluation of simple expressions, messages sent to a turtle object Smiley,
and some locally parsed syntax defining a for-loop. Because we have been sending messages to
Smiley, let’s take a look at the turtle class to see how it is defined, and thus how Smiley gets its
behavior. The code is shown in Figures 3 and 4 (the same code is shown in both figures).
While turtle is a function, just like any other, it includes an isnew phrase that works as a factory
to make instances. An evaluation of
(or any other turtle) runs the code as shown, with the
distinguished variable SELF bound to that instance. A call on turtle as a function runs its code
with SELF set to nil. The isnew function detects a nil value of SELF, creates a new blank instance
for SELF, and returns true, thus running the consequent code to initialize that instance. In this way,
Smalltalk-72 functions play the rôle of functions, factories, and classes.
This definition declares a function named “turtle” with one temporary variable var, eight instance
variables, and one class variable (preceding the code vector and delimited by colons). Following
that is the code for evaluating instances of turtle. As in modern Smalltalks, temporary variables
are local to each call (here one code block that includes many “method” sections), instance variables
are stored and persist separately in each instance, and class variables are stored in the class and are
shared by all instances.
Notice that most turtle methods end with ⇑SELF. This means that, not only is SELF the value
returned, but that it is returned “actively,” so that if any code remains in the message stream,
this instance will again try to parse and execute it (as with
go 10 turn 90). This cascading of
messages is frequently convenient.
Take a look at the phrase ∢is⇒(ISIT eval). We can’t know what this is doing without knowing
what ISIT does.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:12
Daniel Ingalls
ISIT! ( ∢? ⇒( ⇑TITLE ) ⇑TITLE = :  )
Thus, this method provides answers regarding the type of a turtle:
is ?!
turtle
is number!
false
This same phrase is copied into each class so that all objects can answer their class (informally
represented by the title of their class). In some sense it would have been simpler just to copy the
same code in every class, but copying code is bothersome, and a bad habit as well. Because of
examples like this, we already felt the need for a superclass object with behavior that could be
inherited by all classes. This sharing of the global method ISIT was a weak second best.
In fact, each instance did have a pointer to its class object, but there was no access to it in the
language. Even if there had been, the class objects did not point to a class themselves, and thus
had no DO property with code that might have been useful. This explains why, earlier, we used the
expression show for to print the definition of for instead of for show which would have been more
object-oriented: there was no code to run for as a proper class-object. Smalltalk-72 was in that
regard a proto-oop world, but it gave immediately the oop experience, which in turn inspired the
real thing.
Let’s define a class of our own—one that should be familiar to users of the language Lisp.
to cons : car cdr (
isnew⇒(  car ←:.  cdr ←:)
∢car ⇒(∢←⇒(  car ←:) !car)
∢cdr ⇒(∢←⇒(  cdr ←:) !cdr)
∢print ⇒(  [ print.
car print.  . print. cdr print.
 ] print))!
 a ←cons 2 5!
[2.5]
 b ←(a cdr ←cons 3 7)!
[2.[3.7]]
b cdr car!
3
2.8
disp, Evaluation and the REPL
We have explored examples of Smalltalk-72 syntax and graphical functions that can be typed and
executed in the text frame in the lower part of Figure 2.
We turn now to the Alto environment and look at how the world was organized to provide
for reading and displaying function definitions, creating and accessing global variables, and some
details of how the language interpreter actually works.
We begin with the object disp, an instance of dispframe. dispframe provides a rectangular area
in which text can be read in from the user, evaluated, displayed, and scrolled. The starting frame is
only a small part of the display, leaving a large space available above for turtle geometry examples
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:13
and other graphic explorations. If we wish to display more text, we can create a larger dispframe
with
 disp ←dispframe 16 480 8 670 string 2000!
These parameters define the x-position, width, y-position, and height of the frame; string 2000
provides a buffer to hold the text being displayed. In Smalltalk-72, and throughout the Smalltalks of
this paper, rectangles are characterized by the x,y position of the upper-left corner on the screen,
where x increases to the right and y increases downward on the screen. This is consistent with
both the layout of text and with the scanning of the Alto display electronics, and therefore also
with the layout of the display bits in Alto memory.
While we’re talking about conventions, for children and most end-users, I preferred, and I think
everyone in Alan’s group pretty much agreed, that strings, vectors, and other collections should be
indexed with 1 as the first element. That’s our story, and we’re sticking to it!
Next, we need to know about all the objects in this world, how our code interacts and adds to
them, and how the code actually works. At the center of Smalltalk-72’s “object architecture” is
the class USER; USER has no temporary variables or instance variables, but many class variables. It
thus serves as a dictionary of global variables in a manner that I will describe shortly. Whenever
Smalltalk is started or restarted, the interpreter is wired to look up the code in USER and run it. As a
default, this code is
(cr. read eval print)
This can be understood as follows:
• cr: start a new line (print a “carriage return”). The function cr is followed by a period to
prevent any resulting value from parsing the remaining three tokens.
• read: prompt with an Alto character, read from the keyboard into disp’s text buffer (handling
backspaces, etc.), and finally call an internal read routine that converts a character string to a
sequence of tokens stored in a vector.
• eval: sent as a message to the code vector result of read.
• print: sent as a message to the result of evaluating the code. Most classes define a method
for print; invoking it will normally print the result at the place where the user typed.
Because this code runs in USER, global variables are accessible to any code that is typed in. Thus,
USER is effectively the global symbol table for this Smalltalk. Modern Smalltalk users can think of
this as the origin of the Smalltalk SystemDictionary.
It is interesting that modern parlance condenses (read eval print) to repl, but at the dawn of
Object-Oriented programming, most existing systems used a print(eval(read)) loop. The difference
is not a minor one. A conventional print routine was full of logic to test for many possible types of
objects. This made it complex for new learners to modify, and if they made a mistake the whole
system could die because the print routine was broken. In Smalltalk, adding a new class causes no
global perturbation other than defining that class. If you mess up in its print method, it affects only
your new objects.
Let’s return to vector ∢eval. This is the heart of Smalltalk evaluation but, like everything else
here, it is surprisingly simple. Each activation record points to the current code vector and contains
a program counter (pc) The vector and the pc together provide the function of a message stream.
Here is the pseudocode for vector eval:
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:14
Daniel Ingalls
As long as there is content remaining in the stream:
• fetch the next token (ignoring periods)
• evaluate it
– atoms evaluate by looking themselves up in the current context
– vectors make a new activation and evaluate themselves as a subexpression
– everything else just returns itself
• apply the result to the remaining stream. This means creating an activation to run this object’s
code on the unconsumed part of the message stream.
Variable lookup is simple in Smalltalk-72. Whenever a message is sent, the interpreter builds
and uses an activation, which is similar to a “context” in later Smalltalks. The global links in each
activation form a chain that ends at the activation of USER’s repl. At every level of this global chain,
a name is looked up in that class table. If it is one of
• a direct value link (a class variable),
• an activation offset (a temp variable), or
• an instance offset (an instance variable),
then the corresponding value is returned. If the name is not found, then the global link is followed
to the next level, and so on up the chain. Ultimately this chain ends with the activation of USER,
and this explains why USER is the home of all global variables.
An important special case (not an exception) of Smalltalk’s variable lookup is , the “quote”
function. Quote picks up the next item in its message and returns it unevaluated. This means that
an atom representing a variable has a chance to peek for a following ←(just another token). In
the case of  x
←expr , x fetches the following value, looks itself up in the global chain, and
stores the value wherever the atom x is found. If x is not found anywhere, it would make a new
entry for itself in the USER dictionary, and store the value there.
Before leaving this section, we should talk about how this all comes together to make a running
system. Smalltalk came in two parts: a pile of Nova assembly code that was assembled and loaded
into memory by the Alto OS, and a bootstrap file of Smalltalk definitions known as ALLDEFS (see
Appendix B). The assembly code would start running, and immediately read in ALLDEFS using a
simplified form of (read eval print) that could not read strings or floats and that could print only
the name of the most recent function defined. During the process, many functions and objects were
defined (and stored in the USER dictionary), and along the way Smalltalk became more intelligent
and able to parse strings and floats. At the end, the disp object was created, and its read-eval-print
loop launched after a “Welcome to SMALLTALK” message appeared. If you read ALLDEFS, you will
note places where a simple definition in the early part is then extended or supplanted later on. For
instance the final version of to includes a feature that collects the names of any classes that have
been defined or redefined, so that the fileout command would know to write those definitions out
to save one’s work in a text file.
After reading in the bootstrap file, we would hit the Alto’s swat key. This invoked the Alto OS’s
code-swapping debugger to write a copy of the entire memory onto a file such as small.sv. That file
could later be restarted by typing resume small.sv to the Alto OS. The simulation that is available
on the CHM website loads one of these files as an exact replica of the Alto memory (65k 16-bit
words) and simulates the Alto Nova emulator to run the Smalltalk image file that was saved over
40 years ago.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:15
2.9
Under the Hood
Once Smalltalk was working, we found ways to use it for introspective system programming tasks.
This informed the later evolution of Smalltalk systems.
2.9.1
Object Layout and Linking of Activations. In Smalltalk-72, there is a function leech that can
attach to any object and return its contents either as Smalltalk pointers or as the actual bits in
memory. This made it possible to access classes and activations even though they had no proper
access methods.
As a simple example of such investigations, we could define a function seebits as follows:
to seebits x lx n i xbits (:n. :#x. 'Fasten seat belts'.
 lx ←leech x.  xbits ←vector n+1.
for i ←0 to n do (xbits[i+1] ←base8 lx[i]◦).
⇑xbits)!
seebits
seebits 4 (3+4)!
('0005352' '0000004' '0004215' '0003654' '0004216' '0177777')
The special “bits” symbol ◦, seen in lx[i]◦, returned the actual bits in memory. The numbers are
octal, as was common usage in Alto software. From this we can learn that the address of class
vector is 05350, and that the reference count of this vector at the time was 2. The 4 is the instance
size, which includes a nil at the end (to facilitate end-of-stream checks).
2.9.2
Reference Counts. Classes were given blocks of storage on 8-word boundaries so that the
low three bits of an object’s class pointer were always zero. In this way, we were able to fit an
abbreviated reference count in the low three bits of any object’s first word (its class pointer).
Reference counts that overflowed that field were entered into a separate table until they returned
to a lower value.
2.9.3
Numbers and Strings. We set aside a range of addresses below the object memory to represent
small integers as immediate pointers (the actual range varied from one version to another). Integers
outside that range were represented as real objects with a full 16-bit integer value. We can infer
from this example that 04212 was the pointer value associated with the integer 0. The reader can
probably imagine a small program to figure out the range of immediate integers in this version.
seebits 2 8192!
('0005262' '0020000')
Here we can tell that class number has an address of 05260,
seebits 4 'ABC'!
('0005472' '0000003' '0040502' '0041777')
showing us that 05470 is class string, the second word gives the character count, and an odd last
character is padded with 0377. These are the kind of investigations that enable us to use the power
of a general computing system to look inside itself and, in the case of this one, bring it back to life.
2.9.4
Activations. In Smalltalk-72, four pseudovariables point to activations, which can be “leeched”.
The pseudovariables are
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:16
Daniel Ingalls
Fig. 5. Stack trace of an intentional error in Smalltalk-72 showing how the sender, message, and global
pointers provide the structure for message passing when eval’ing a code vector.
• AREC—the current activation,
• RETN—the caller,
• MESS—the activation that serves as message stream for, eg, peek, fetch, etc., and
• GLOB—the next activation up in the global lookup chain.
Each activation also includes pointers to the following:
• the class (or function),
• its instance if any,
• the caller of this method (another activation),
• the message being received (another activation),
• a link in the global lookup chain (another activation),
• the code being run (a code vector), and
• a pc into the code.
The left side of Figure 5 shows the definition of the error routine that was called by the interpreter
when it could not make sense of the next token in a message stream. It began by creating a leech
on the current activation (AREC), copying an error message from inside the interpreter code,7 and
then calling c (for “caller”), a function that advances the activation leech up to its activation of its
7We made the special “bits” circle-symbol have a width of one, so that it would display on top of the next character to
represent logical operations. Thus the two lines near the end of this function can be read as
disp gets ptr bit-shift -8.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:17
caller. Also shown is a printStack function that I have written in the present day to provide a stack
trace. It calls c repeatedly and shows how the message, global, and caller pointers work together in
Smalltalk-72. The numbers are memory addresses in octal, as was common in the Nova assembly
code tools.
On the right of Figure 5, I have executed an intentional error in our familiar spiral for-loop, and
invoked stackTrace to show the various activation links work during interpretation. Each caller
pointer threads back to the original read-eval-print loop in USER, and each message pointer points
to the activation with the code vector being parsed. If we had been running the function spiral,
the activations called from there would have had global links to the activation of spiral, but in
this example, all the global links go straight to the activation of USER (for is written specifically to
prevent called code from “seeing” its local variables).
2.10
Speed and Space—Not
With a 5MHz processor clock, the Alto was an exciting machine for its time [Wadlow 1981]. This
however was the speed of the microcode; the memory cycle time was one fifth of that, and not
all available to our fledgling programming system. The Alto devoted roughly 50 percent of the
memory bandwidth to refresh the display from main memory. Application programs on the Alto
were mostly written in Nova assembly code, which took on the average of two memory cycles per
instruction, so the Alto Nova emulator was effectively a 0.5 MHz machine when not competing
with display refresh, and more like 0.3MHz when running Smalltalk. 0.3MHz; not 0.3GHz.
The Alto seemed well-endowed with 128k of main memory, but half of that was allocated to the
bitmap display, and roughly 32k more for the lean OS and our interpreter. So our Smalltalk system
really had only 32k bytes for working storage—all strings, code vectors, and actual user structures.
32k bytes; not 32M bytes. When running these old Smalltalks, you will at times see the display
shorten or go black altogether. This was to give the processor more cycles and make the program
run faster. We used to joke that the Alto ran faster with its lights off.
Managed storage was a value inherited from our inspiration systems. APL and Lisp both provided
garbage-collected workspaces. However, at this level of performance, we did not want to risk hiccups
caused by mark-sweep garbage-collection. Moreover, with scarcely 10k words of free storage, mark-
sweep reclamation would have been triggered almost constantly. Instead, we chose reference
counting, which gave us smooth real-time behavior at the cost of occasional memory “leaks” due
to circular structures not being reclaimed. The modest text editing code for “dispframes” was all
written in Smalltalk-72. While we had to work hard to keep up with typing, storage management
hiccups due to a scavenging garbage-collector were never a problem.8
Smalltalk-72 objects were compact, and have remained so in each subsequent generation. The
Smalltalk code was also nicely compact. Notice that the code for the spiral example
for i to 400 ( go i turn 89)
is only two vectors: one of five tokens, including a pointer to the second one, which is also of five
tokens. With class pointers, vector lengths, and nil pointer at the end, this example took up a total
disp gets ptr bit-and 255,
where they extract a character string from 16-bit words in memory.
8Diana and Alan experimented with simple yet performant text editing schemes. A clever one that I recall was to populate
the string buffer with long sequences of non-printing nulls which could be simply replaced during type-in rather than ever
having to copy the string buffer when inserting or deleting characters.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:18
Daniel Ingalls
of sixteen 16-bit words, or 32 bytes. The null pointer at the end enabled faster checks for end-of-list
in the evaluation loop. We soon learned that this overhead was insignificant, and so eliminated the
terminal nil in code vectors in Smalltalk-74.
Although slow by modern standards, our experience was anything but boring. Smalltalk provided
nearly immediate turnaround time for changes. We would frequently make several changes in a
minute, never having to reload the system or any of our applications. Our figures of merit were
malleability, and turnaround time for simple changes.
From the beginning, we made sure that when you left the world of Smalltalk, it saved all your
state so that when you started up again (in 5 minutes, or in 5 days) things were exactly as you left
them. This was especially valuable for students who might be away from the computer for several
days. From the time your session ended, everything, including the bits on the screen, was saved
onto a removable disk pack. When you returned and reloaded your disk into an Alto, everything
was restored, allowing students to resume their plans with minimal cognitive disruption.
2.11
Impact
Smalltalk-72 supported several courses hosted at the Xerox Parc facility that taught this early
form of object-oriented programming to middle school and high school students. The courses were
designed and taught by Adele Goldberg in our group. Adele had a wonderful talent for recognizing
what was difficult for learners and how to make it easier, and the experience from those courses
was valuable to us as teachers and to students as well. Several of the students went on to careers
that began with their Smalltalk experience (Bruce Horn who worked on the Macintosh finder, Steve
Putz who taught computer science, and Marian Goldeen who went on to work at Apple). It also
supported an animation system consisting of KAOS microcode (written by Steve Purcell) and the
SHAZAM composition system (created by Ron Baeker and Tom Horseley [Baecker 1976]), and the
TWANG music system (with microcode by Bob Shur) and a composition system (created by Ted
Kaehler and Bob Shur [Kay 1993, p.539; Saunders 1977]). The primitive computations of animation
and music were remarkable for the period, and had to be performed in microcode, Smalltalk-72
provided an easily understood language interface for these capabilities. Alan Kay was a constant
coach and consultant on these early precursors to later media work in Squeak, and he was always
the first to try out any new capability.
I will never forget when we first got synthesis to work. We had not yet hooked a real organ
keyboard up to the Alto, but we mapped the QWERTY keyboard in to the synthesis code. It was
not a crazy thing to do, since the Alto keyboard was unencoded and could register any number
of simultaneous keys down. Chris Jeffers who worked in our group managing at the time, was
an amazing musical talent, and we invited him over to try out the QWERTY organ as soon as we
got a sound out. At first he played a few notes with various mistakes as we expected, finding out
where the octaves were. But then after a few more notes and a couple of chords, he was playing a
reasonable polyphonic rendition of a popular broadway tune...I think from The Music Man.
2.12
Reflections
For those of us working on the system itself, Smalltalk-72 gave us a taste of the subtle power of
simplicity. In a system that ran probably 50 times slower than other languages at Parc, we would
routinely try out and succeed with experiments in less time than serious programmers using more
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:19
Fig. 6. Screen shots of the TWANG music system that ran in Smalltalk-72, using Alto microcode to perform
12-voice ASDR and 4-voice FM multitimbral synthesis. On the left is a real-time piano roll display, and on the
right a rudimentary timbre editor for the FM synthesis parameters.
Fig. 7. Screen shots of the SHAZAM animation system. On the left, one of the images of a water droplet is
being altered to show a splash—while the sequence is playing on the right. Such aliveness was a key value
from the very beginning of Smalltalk.
complex systems. Much of this productivity resulted from the combination of a simple language,
direct connection to bitmap graphics, and immediate response to program changes and user events.
Malleability was also important. Alan’s language that fit on a page was a lot like clay—it came
with little defined, but it was easy to shape into the forms we needed and wanted. From simple
functions emerged object factories, and from message pattern recognizers grew the methods of
OOP as we know it today.
The Alto also shaped our work. Alan and the other Alto designers had thought ahead, and knew
the resources and processes that would be needed to create the future of personal computing. The
bitmap display for graphics, the mouse for graphical manipulation, microcode for unanticipated
primitive capabilities; all these enabled us to explore what we wanted this Smalltalk to be, as a
language, and as a personal computing world.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:20
Daniel Ingalls
3
WHAT IS A SMALLTALK?
When we talk about Smalltalk, we mean not just a language, but the entire gestalt conjured up
by Alan’s phrase “A personal computer for children of all ages” [Kay 1972]. Smalltalk is a vision
that includes hardware and software and how they behave. I use the phrase “A Smalltalk” here
to connote that larger gestalt. According to this view, “A Smalltalk” should have the following
features.
SIX GENERATIONS OF SMALLTALK
This paper focuses on work that began
with Smalltalk-72 at Xerox Parc, and traces
Smalltalk’s evolution through six generations
culminating in Squeak.
Smalltalk-72 The first practical Smalltalk in-
terpreter. Based on classes and messages and
coupled to Alto graphics and sound.
Smalltalk-74 Virtual memory, bitmap graph-
ics, and a multi-window development environ-
ment prepared for the next generation.
Smalltalk-76 Established the language, archi-
tecture, and virtual machine (VM) of all mod-
ern Smalltalks.
Smalltalk-78
A
reengineering
of
the
Smalltalk-76 VM to run on an Intel 8086 in the
Xerox NoteTaker computer.
Smalltalk-80 A refinement of Smalltalk-76
and -78 aimed at commercial release. Standard-
ization and documentation led to significant
adoption in industry and academia.
Squeak VM entirely in Smalltalk. Flexible me-
dia support and extremely portable. Introduced
Morphic graphics framework, project worlds,
and Etoy language extensions.
The system is immediately responsive.
This may seem obvious, but in the early days
(and even today), many systems required one
to leave the state of a project to edit and re-
compile code and then reload the state of the
world before observing the effect of a change. In
Smalltalk, everything is “live” so that changes
to user code, or even to the system itself, take
place immediately. This is important because it
removes the cognitive interference of changing
context from working on a project to jumping
out to recompile it. Immediate response rein-
forces the experience of “being in a world,” and
this immersive aspect adds to focus and motiva-
tion. Both APL and Lisp systems of the time had
this property; we never considered building a
system that was not live in this way.
Everything is an object. It is important to
understand how this uniformity extends into
the whole experience of using Smalltalk. It
means that anything in your world can be con-
nected to anything else with relative ease, even
when that connection has not been anticipated.
This facilitates fanciful construction, whether
it be pure art or a breakthrough in technol-
ogy. The property of inviting unanticipated con-
structions is key to the power of Smalltalk and similar exploratory environments. To support this
freedom obviously requires that the system be pointer safe, but it also requires that it be resilient
in the face of absurd connections.
Objects communicate by sending and receiving messages. A system of objects commu-
nicating by messages is not invalidated when code or objects are added or removed. Smalltalk
programs, including the later “compiled” ones, are nothing but sequences of message sends. About
the only error that can be caused by changing or adding code is that a message is not understood,
and this can be handled easily. Thus, robustness is a direct result of the message sending paradigm.
The necessity to recompile and relink to avoid invalid pointers never arises in Smalltalk. Even in a
large system with thousands of methods, the turnaround time to change and install a new method
is typically just a second or two. Performance, especially performance of the development cycle, is
thus another positive result of the message sending paradigm.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:21
Every object contains its state. This organizing principle tends to pull together a lot of what
would otherwise be rather random unconnected “data”—the screen extent, the height of a menu, the
width of a line-drawing pen, etc. Not only does this tend to reduce the number of such apparently
unconnected values, it also provides a natural place to look when trying to make sense of some
aspect of the system.
Every object is an instance of a class, which specifies the behavior of the object. Orga-
nizing a world in terms of classes of objects is such a basic intuition as to be easily overlooked. Our
natural language itself names things by their classes—a table, a person, a tree, etc. This tends to be
even more so in a synthetic environment where it is natural to build things from a small number of
parts—points, rectangles, windows, menus and the like. The early Smalltalk bootstrap definitions
describe meaningful worlds made up from very few classes of objects.
Everything is preserved from one session to the next. We had experienced this comfort in
the notion of a “workspace” that preserved not only function definitions but also variable bindings.
We extended this to include even the bits on the graphics screen and partial results in any windows.
It is not easy to articulate the benefit of this characteristic, but it relieves a stressful cognitive load
to know that everything will be there when you come back; think about leaving notes to yourself
on a desk and then having to worry about someone coming by and cleaning up before you have
a chance to finish what you are working on. Any Smalltalk should preserve the state of work in
progress across sessions. Smalltalk-72 accomplished this by capturing the entire state of the Alto
memory. As later Smalltalks realized the ideal of “everything is an object,” including the display
bitmap, process scheduler and contexts, we were able to save everything by preserving the state of
the object memory in a file, conventionally referred to as a “Smalltalk image file.”
Automatic storage management. In the spirit of unanticipated creations, it must be possible
to connect and disconnect objects without causing memory to fill up, and the programs must be
free of “deallocation” code if they are to be simple and maintainable. We never considered a world
without managed storage.
Simplicity and generality. Simplicity and generality are the apple pie and motherhood of
science, and thus of computer science; they are seemingly obvious positive values. If a language is
simple then it must also be general if it is to be of any use. This implies, for instance, that there
should not be many distinctions other than that between one object and another, and it means
that a user can build objects that participate in the world as first-class citizens. Even in the first
Smalltalk it was possible to write your own class of character sequence objects, and these new
objects would work in existing code that expected system-provided string objects.
4
SMALLTALK-74
Smalltalk-72 had sprung to life quickly, and gave us, as Alan said, “something to program.” On
the one hand, the experience was enormously positive: from Alan’s sketch of proto-OOP, we had
assembled a whole system adequate for teaching the elements of object-oriented programming
in a simple world with engaging bitmap graphics; a world that could be shaped by the user and
then saved and restored with complete fidelity. It had the feel of a personal computer. On the other
hand, much of our gratification was tinged with a feeling that things were missing or not quite
right. In the backs of our minds these various issues percolated.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:22
Daniel Ingalls
4.1
Unfinished Business
There was no inheritance in Smalltalk-72. It was for this reason that we had copied into many
classes the code ∢is⇒(ISIT eval) mentioned in Section 2.7. It didn’t feel right to copy code for
behavior common to all objects. Copying code leads to fragility due to the difficulty of maintaining
consistency across all copies. The sharing of ISIT solved the consistency problem, but left the need
to write this code stub in every class, which seemed burdensome and inelegant. This was behavior
that every class could have inherited from a superclass ‘object’ if it were possible. Other examples
arose, such as default printing behavior. Elsewhere in the fledgling class library we had to do a
similar workaround for the extended form of subscripting (subscripting ranges in substr) desired
for both strings and vectors, and number (integer) and float had no way to share common methods,
such as max.
Classes in Smalltalk-72 were not real objects. They were essentially dictionaries assembled
by the primitive code in to. That code parsed the arguments, and identified the set of temporary
variables, instance variable and class variables declared for the class. With each name, the dictionary
associated a pointer in the case of class variables, or a descriptor with offset in the case of temporary
or instance variables. Because classes had no associated code, there was no way in the language
to access these properties. The few places that required such access (such as the ability to print a
class for editing or fileout) used the unprotected access afforded by leech; naturally that code was
difficult to read and maintain.
Activation records were not real objects. Like classes, activation records had no class pointer
and hence no code offering user-accessible means to be inspected. Here again, I relied on leech to
enable the c function (short for caller) to climb the stack in error situations.
The various message-parsing primitives (peek, fetch, etc.) were useful and did the job, but it
seemed that we should be able to write more of that code in Smalltalk itself, because they were
simple manipulations of the streaming capability of activations.
Increasingly, we felt the need for more speed. We have discussed above the modest speed of
the Alto, further burdened by maintaining the display. The flexibility of being able to simulate
messages by on-the-fly parsing was a remarkable feat, but the cost of constantly parsing the code
stream could not be ignored. As we increasingly evolved to the idiom of named methods, it seemed
that we should somehow be able to use a dictionary of methods to speed things up.
We were also strapped for space. Once Smalltalk was loaded there was little more than 10k
words of working storage. For teaching Smalltalk this was barely adequate,9 but not for serious
text editing, graphics editing, and system programming. While the lack of speed was an occasional
frustration, the lack of space was a real barrier to progress.
We were also starting to experiment more with bitmap graphics, using the few primitives
available in Smalltalk-72. On the one hand we wanted more control over the combination rules
(or-ing, and-ing, complementing, etc.) for any operation, and on the other hand it seemed that it
required a discouragingly complex mass of code for character display, line drawing, and scrolling.
They all dealt separately with the problems of bit-wise alignment on a display that was organized
as 16-bit words.
9The space available was iffy even for teaching, but Adele designed her “Box class” curriculum to be successful with minimal
resources.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:23
4.2
Progress
I’ve been asked how Smalltalk-74 came about. On the one hand we were living with these various
linguistic frustrations, and on the other we were just fun-loving computer crazies working on
the next thing, whatever that might be. For Dave Robson, who had just joined us, it was to do a
new interpreter. For me it was to simplify and generalize all the bitmap manipulation code. For
Ted Kaehler, who had just returned from grad school in August, it was the thought of grafting
a virtual memory onto Dave’s interpreter. Meanwhile, Alan was working with Diana Merry on
a galley editor that handled both textual and graphical content, and with me on how to make a
simple multi-window scheduler. I generally guided the detailed technical work, and Alan was in
the wheelhouse. This was a time when he could tell that we were all “cooking,” so he let the reins
loose. Meanwhile he was busy writing an article for Scientific American [Kay 1977] that looked
forward to the day of the “notebook-size computer.”
Dave got to work on a new bootstrap that made it possible for classes and activations to be
instances of real classes with useful descriptive code. Class was an instance of itself. Classes
contained dictionary objects for class variables and for methods, and they also supported protocol
for defining and redefining individual methods. While the expression syntax remained the same,
the class-defining function to was supplanted by an assignment of the form
 className ←class((temps)(instvars)(classvars)(globals))
((initCode)(list of selector--method pairs))
Moreover, since we had identified classes as a significant semantic structure, we made a separate
entity for the simpler (non-factory) functions:
 functionName ←function (temps) (code)
While isnew had performed satisfactorily in allowing functions to act as factories and classes in
Smalltalk-72, it had always been confusing where to put it. Should it be placed early in the code
to avoid running methods before any instance had been created, or should it be placed at the end
where the test would not slow any of the most common methods? In Smalltalk-74, initCode took
the place of the former isnew test, and it was dispatched primitively with no effect on the time to
run instance methods.
The list of selector-method pairs canonized the dominant style of class description in which
incoming messages were dispatched based on their leading token. It also gave us the structure we
needed to redefine methods and classes on the fly, without invalidating existing instances. This
was not yet reshaping instances, but only editing the class—methods, temps, instvar names, etc.
But it was a taste of things to come.
While we made classes and activations proper objects, the expression syntax of Smalltalk-74 was
unchanged from Smalltalk-72, so most of our old code ran in the new system. This allowed us to
migrate most important projects forward with relatively little effort.
Dave’s new bootstrap10 for Smalltalk-74 included the first process scheduler for Smalltalk. It was
modeled along the same lines as the priority scheduler of the Alto hardware, and it made it possible
for us to interrupt, inspect, and resume running Smalltalk programs. While a fledgeling capability
in Smalltalk-74, it became the core of the process scheduling mechanism in the Smalltalk-76 virtual
machine and all its successors.
10A copy of the file “MDefs St-74.pdf” is available as auxiliary material for this paper.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:24
Daniel Ingalls
4.3
Windows and Events
While Alan and Diana had endowed the Smalltalk-72 system with the capability to display multiple
windows with independent text content, this capability was not used in the daily programming
environment other than in a rudimentary sub-window feature used for trying code snippets and
for displaying error notifications.
By this time, though, our text windows had evolved to offer mouse-driven selection and WYSI-
WYG text editing. We coupled the windows to the file system so that entire files could be read in,
edited, and saved; and individual methods of a class stored in a file could be edited and redefined in
just a few seconds. It was suddenly much easier to work on serious code with substantial logic.
Our process was accelerating with its progress.
Smalltalk operated as its own world, without any real operating system support for mouse and
keyboard events. This meant that much of the user interface code was complicated by polling loops
that tested for mouse or keyboard activity. There was no consistent coding style for this kind of
user interaction. With this in mind, Alan and I in one afternoon came up with a paradigm we called
“loopless programming.” The idea was to establish a protocol of three methods for client objects
being scheduled:
• firstTime—Respond true if the client wants control, else false
• eachTime—Do this whenever the client has control; return true as long as the client wishes
to keep control
• lastTime—This will be called once before the client loses control
This established a partition between the scheduling code and the “client” code for the objects being
scheduled. It also set up a natural partition between initialization, live activity, and finalization for
the client code. We referred to it as “loopless” because the polling loops were removed from the
client code.
In a world in which event-driven programming did not really exist, this gave us an event-based
paradigm for client code, and an almost trivial way to drive it from above:
For every client object in a list being scheduled...
obj firstTime ⇒
(repeat (obj eachTime ⇒(again) done).
obj lastTime)
This immediately suggested variants relevant to window scheduling, such as enter and leave, with
the scheduler promoting active windows to the head of the list and thus appearing on top of other
windows as we expect of most systems today.
4.4
OOZE
One of the most important contributions of Smalltalk-74 is nearly invisible: the OOZE virtual
memory. Ted and I developed this scheme to enable Smalltalk to address over a megabyte of data
within the limited confines of our Alto memory (roughly 30k bytes). We did this by using the 16 bits
of an object pointer to index a hash table of resident objects, along with elaborate schemes for how
to retrieve non-resident objects from the disk and how to make space when the local cache was
full. In a simple memory system, an indexed object table requires only one or two instructions
to dereference an object pointer (i.e., resolve the object pointer to the memory address of the
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:25
Fig. 8. Mapping object pointers in OOZE. Resident objects were found by hashing the OOZE Object Pointer
(OOP) into the object table (OT). Non-resident objects were found via a pointer to one of 512 zones (the “Z”
of “OOZE”) on the disk allotted to 128 instances of their particular class. The low 7 bits of the OOP provided
an index into that zone. Figure taken from Byte [Kaehler 1981].
referenced object). To dereference an OOZE object pointer would have tripled this overhead or
worse, except...we had the option to put this vital piece of logic into microcode. With the help
of a bit of microcode to access the hashed object table, Smalltalk was barely slowed at all, yet we
suddenly had roughly 50 times more free space in which to explore object-oriented programming
and bitmap graphics. While Smalltalk-72 had only 20k free bytes at startup, now OOZE could
address over a megabyte.11 That this scheme worked for us was partially due to the relatively small
size of most Smalltalk projects. While the Alto’s moving-head disk drive occasionally thrashed like
a washing machine at major context changes, the system hummed along quietly most of the time
we were at work.
The most ingenious feature of OOZE—a typical Ted invention—was “safing.” A background
process was always writing dirty objects to the disk and marking them clean, although many would
immediately be made dirty again as the system continued its normal operation. Periodically, the
“safing” operation would stop the system and write every last dirty object out to the disk, and then
write a checkpoint image of the entire Smalltalk to the disk. The beauty of this scheme was that,
regardless of the complicated structures in memory and on disk, Smalltalk could be restarted from
11Typical Smalltalk objects were about 20 bytes, and OOZE could address up to 60k objects. (We reserved 4k of the full
16-bit pointer space for immediate integers.)
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:26
Daniel Ingalls
this “safe” state until the next time an object needed to be written to the disk. Because all objects in
memory were clean at this time, new space was available in memory simply by discarding clean
objects, so it was a long time before the need to write to disk. During all this time, Smalltalk was
“safe” in that it could crash and be rebooted, suffering only the effect of going back to the most
recent checkpoint. Occasionally when someone said “Oh, no!” because of having caused a fatal
error, you would hear a nearby experienced user say “Quick, boot and resume!” While this was a
wonderful parachute, it had to be deployed promptly, because the safing process, on its next cycle,
would dutifully enshrine the damaged state in a permanent checkpoint.
Throughout our time at Parc, we of the Learning Research Group (Alan’s crew, LRG) enjoyed a
friendly competitive relationship with Bob Taylor’s Computer Science Lab (CSL). We were invited
to their weekly “Dealer” brainstorming meetings, and frequently joined in the discussion. While
they were working on serious system programming languages such as BCPL and Mesa, and on
the Alto and Dorado operating systems, our Smalltalk work was viewed superficially as a toy. We
gradually earned their respect by actually building things that were only talked about as “interesting
ideas.” In spite of the stately pace of Smalltalk, it was often much quicker to try something out in
our world than in the tools of CSL. While Alan and Adele Goldberg were the only members of LRG
with PhD’s, we were fearless about writing microcode and other nitty-gritty projects like OOZE
and BitBlt.
When we were designing OOZE, Alan suggested that Ted and I run the design for OOZE by
Butler Lampson (a lead technical powerhouse in CSL), which we did one day when he was passing
through our area. He heard us out, asking various questions, and at the end he said “You’ll never
get it to work.” Coming from Butler, that one comment was so motivating for Ted and me, that I
give Butler partial credit for making OOZE a success. More details on OOZE can be found in Ted’s
article in Byte magazine [Kaehler 1981].
4.5
BitBlt
In my periodic code reviews, I was bothered by the large and complex body of code devoted to
various manipulations of the Alto’s bitmap display. Drawing a line for a turtle graphic design,
copying a character of text to the screen, or scrolling a block of text; in every case detailed
manipulation was required at the left and right ends of the image to deal with the bit alignments
within words, and similarly all along the horizontal extent of any block transfer, as necessary for
scrolling.
Figure 9 shows a common situation where Smalltalk must copy a rectangle from one source
point to a different destination location, and where source and destination are in different objects
with different raster widths as well. Looking at the figure, one can see the need for a special mask
for the bits at the left of the source, and another for storing it into the destination, and the same
machination at the right side, with even more special cases when the area is narrow and the edge
regions overlap. Of course the offsets within the two bitmaps may be different, and the raster
widths may also be different in many cases except when moving or copying a rectangle from one
location to another in the same bitmap.
Things got complicated when the source and destination overlapped, and of course the loops
had to run in different directions when scrolling up or down. In dealing with these problems, the
existing scrolling code in Smalltalk required an extra buffer the size of a scan line, and a computer
scientist does not sleep well when extra buffers are required.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:27
Fig. 9. Copying a character from a font (bottom) to the screen (top) requires complex manipulation of the
stored bits to account for different alignment of source and destination in the 16-bit memory words, and
different widths of the scan lines in the source and destination. Figure taken from Byte [Ingalls 1981, p. 171].
I had been wrestling with a solution to this problem, and especially the problem of how to
avoid the need for temporary storage when moving large blocks, when my son brought home an
intriguing rolling rubber stamp wheel, like the one on the left of Figure 10.
I realized immediately that one could think of the source and destination of the block transfer as
two sheets passing over one another with the wheel in between, as shown on the right of Figure 10.
The wheel picks up images from the top and lays them down on the bottom—not unlike the insides
of a Xerox machine! The only temporary storage required is one complete circumference of the
wheel (two full words that can be in registers) and, except at the beginning and end, full words can
be loaded into, and stored out of, the two registers.
This point of view enabled me to greatly simplify and merge code for all these manipulations,
including text display (offering a more compact font format), line drawing, scrolling, menu display,
and movement of sprites (including dragged windows) on the display. The resulting operation, now
known as BitBlt, was a major contribution to the evolution of Smalltalk as a computing tool, not
just as a language. BitBlt was embellished over time to provide clipping and support for halftone
fills as well as all possible ways of composing source and destination pixels.
The Byte article on “The Smalltalk Graphics Kernel” [Ingalls 1981] details Smalltalk methods that,
with BitBlt at their core, can lay out and display text, draw lines, and magnify and rotate images—
each in little more than a dozen lines of code. The article concludes with a frivolous method for
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:28
Daniel Ingalls
Fig. 10. On the left, a rubber stamp in the shape of a wheel, which can be rolled to make a long strip image
on paper. On the right, a sketch of the rolling image transfer model of BitBlt. The “wheel” is a register two
full words long. It picks up one full word unshifted, rotates by the pixel offset, and then stores a full word
unshifted.
computing the next generation of Conway’s “Game of Life” on any size bitmap in just 60 calls on
BitBlt.
Fig. 11. 90-degree rotations accomplished by masking, shifting, and storing operations, all of which can be
implemented with BitBlt. Figure taken from Byte [Ingalls 1981, p.188].
A notable instance of technology transfer took place when I gave a demo at one of the CSL
“Dealer” meetings at Parc that featured overlapping windows with BitBlt in Smalltalk-74. In the
process, I showed a pop-up menu, made with BitBlt, that restored the underlying image when done.
Peter Deutsch,12who was in the audience at the time, called out, “Wait a minute...did you just do
what I think you did?” I had just finished putting BitBlt into the Alto’s microcode, and the menu
response was instant. At the time, it seemed like magic. The very next day I was visited by Smoky
Wallace from the Xerox’s product division, and BitBlt was subsequently integrated into graphics
projects there, and throughout Parc.
4.6
Microcode
The Alto was an ingeniously simple machine [see Appendix F] that used microcode to emulate the
instruction set of the Data General Nova minicomputer. Most of the software that ran on the Alto
was written in Nova assembler, or BCPL that compiled into Nova code. The Alto’s microcycle was
200 ns and the memory cycle time was 1 µs, so well-written code could execute up to 5 simple logic
12Peter was a member of CSL at the time, although he later joined our group for a while before leaving Parc.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:29
instructions for every cycle of the main memory. This could produce enormous gains: a block move
loop might take three nova instructions totaling at least seven memory cycles per word, whereas
the same move could be done in two memory cycles per word in microcode. To a programmer, this
was a magic wand.
The tools for writing and debugging microcode were crude, but a number of us in Alan’s group
tackled the problem early on, achieving 4-voice real-time FM music synthesis for the TWANG
music system, and real-time image compression and decompression for the SHAZAM animation
system in Smalltalk-72.
It was Alto microcode that allowed us to consider using a hashed object table in OOZE, so that
with 16-bit pointers we could address up to 60k objects, as well as 4k immediate integers, and still
manage the resident objects compactly in memory (as opposed to the breakage associated with a
straight paging architecture).
The microcoded architecture of the Alto was also perfect for implementing BitBlt. With the
ability to execute up to five logical instructions between each memory cycle, it greatly reduced
the overhead of shifting and masking data at the left and right ends of the source and destination
rectangles. In large scrolling operations, the “wheel” copying loop could read and write at the full
speed of the memory, in spite of dealing with differing alignments and raster widths of the source
and destination.
The writeable microstore of our Altos had a capacity of only 1k instructions; this meant that music
and animation could not be run together, and neither could be run with other special microcode,
such as that for OOZE. Microcode was a magic wand at the time, but our higher goals of combining
live music, animation and programming had to wait for Squeak.
4.7
Major Smalltalk-74 Projects
A number of interesting projects were implemented in Smalltalk-74. Most of these were research
projects internal to our group, but they all fed into the future work that was to carry us ever closer
to the world outside Parc.
Fig. 12. Segmentation of characters in
Sanskrit text. The “profiles” shown along
the edges are used to separate the lines
and characters.
4.7.1
Optical Character Recognition. Smalltalk-74 was our
slowest Smalltalk, yet BitBlt ran in Alto microcode, which
meant that there were huge rewards for “thinking BitBlt” in
image manipulation. For a while, I had dreamed of scanning
Devanagari text as part of a project with my father, who
was a Sanskrit scholar. With the ability to count bits (black
pixels) in any rectangle it was possible to decompose images
as well as to assemble them. Using BitBlt in this way, I was
able to perform OCR on Devanagari text [Ingalls and Ingalls
1985], a task that would not otherwise have been possible in
Smalltalk. A scan of one-pixel-wide rectangles produced a
“profile” of black pixels; this made it possible to break a page
into lines, the lines into “words,” and the words into characters, as shown in Figure 12. BitBlt also
served to align the characters, and to score their similarity, to achieve the final identification of
each character glyph. A video of the project can be found at https://vimeo.com/4714623.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:30
Daniel Ingalls
Fig. 13. The figure from page 234 of the September 1977 Scientific American, showing windows on an Alto
screen.
4.7.2
Scientific American Paper. Alan Kay led a number of projects that fed into an article he wrote
for Scientific American in September of 1977 [Kay 1977].
• Steve Weyer’s Findit: Part of Steve’s work on his PhD, Findit was an information retrieval
system in which you filled out a card with any information you had; the system then returned
all the cards that matched. This was an especially nice interface for a library, and in fact the
Xerox Parc library used Findit for a number of years.
• Ted Kaehler’s graphics editor: An early bitmap paint program that used BitBlt for its brushes
and “stamps.” It was cleverly designed to stripe large images across several smaller objects so
that OOZE could handle them gracefully.
• Diana Merry’s galley editor: This was our first foray into a real document editor. It built on
the loopless scheduling model to provide a scrolling view of editable text, graphics, and other
content, a rarity at the time.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:31
4.7.3
Development Environment. Our event-driven scheduler and independent text windows were
now at the heart of every serious Smalltalk project. Smalltalk-74’s ability to redefine classes and
methods on the fly made possible a new way to develop code. We put the code for each class in a
separate file, and opened windows on each of the files being developed. Menu commands made
it possible to read in the entire file contents, or to select a single method and read it as a new
definition. In both situations, changes took place immediately with no need to reload the work in
progress. This meant that we were seeing the entire code in context while editing—a refreshing
change from the structured code editor of Smalltalk-72. If ever a fatal error caused a crash, the files
were there for recovery. When this environment became functional, I remember saying to Ted, “if
we just had this kind of coding environment at 10 times the speed, we would be unstoppable.”
4.7.4
Simulation of Smalltalk-76. The other major project in Smalltalk-74 was, interestingly, the
simulation and bootstrapping of Smalltalk-76. “Interestingly” because this project essentially killed
Smalltalk-74. It both diverted the programming team away from Smalltalk-74, and became the host
for most of the improvements we were contemplating. That Smalltalk-74 was so quickly abandoned
explains why, out of 120 salvaged disk packs, we found only one with Smalltalk-74 on it. That
disk contains pieces of the Smalltalk-76 simulation, and its screen is still full of content from the
Scientific American article (see Appendix A).
4.7.5
Reflections. I sometimes see the period of Smalltalk-74 as one of displacement activity. We
knew that we wanted to clean up the language, but instead we mainly worked on graphics and
virtual memory. In the end, though, I feel this was for the best. Suppose we had implemented the
message parsing functions in Smalltalk; it would have made things slower still. Suppose we had
implemented inheritance; it would still have been in the context of slow message dispatch. As it
was, we all did important work, and when the time came to clean up the language, we were ready.
5
SMALLTALK-76
In August of 1976, I spent a weekend at the beach with my family. In those three days all of the
brewing forces and frustrations came together to suggest an entirely new language and architecture
that promised true commercial speed while preserving an object-oriented style very similar to that
of our familiar interpreted language. I began by sketching a syntax similar in style to Smalltalk-
72/74, but that could be compiled. This quickly evolved into the now familiar keyword syntax of
modern Smalltalks, along with a way to compile that syntax into bytecodes amenable to efficient
execution in microcode.
I have been asked, “Why and when did the development of Smalltalk-76 start—was there any
corporate or research team strategy?” When I got back to work after that weekend, I essentially
declared, “I’ve got it.” I felt I could answer any question on the way to an efficient Smalltalk. I was
working closely with Ted, Diana, Dave, and Glenn Krasner, and we all basically dropped what we
were dong that day. Alan knew when someone was on fire, and at that point he did what he does
best: he made it our “corporate” strategy.13
13This was a period of feverish activity for me, and Alan allowed a “skunkworks” deviation from normal Xerox procedure
so that I could burn midnight oil on Altos that were required to remain in the building. One night, we rolled an Alto onto
the loading dock of Parc’s building; we hoisted it into my station wagon, and I drove it home, where I kept it for several
months. I would run my own diagnostics and replace memory boards as needed. To stay in sync with the group (before the
Internet), I would carry a Diablo 33 disk in my backpack when I bicycled in to work. We figured it at 2.4 Mb/20 minutes =
2k bytes/second bandwidth each way.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:32
Daniel Ingalls
5.1
Syntax
In order to compile Smalltalk, there needed to be a syntax. In the earlier Smaltalks, we had enjoyed
using a word before before each argument, and this suggested a keyword-based form of expressions.
Keywords provide the opportunity to name both the what (the keyword part) and how (the parameter
name) of each parameter. By putting colons on each keyword, it seemed almost like natural language,
as in “name: Philip”; it also happened to be reminiscent of Smalltalk-72’s “fetch” function associated
with most arguments.
This keyword syntax has remained essentially unchanged in Smalltalk ever since.14 It seemed
simple; the syntax rules are as follows:
• There are three kinds of messages, greatly reducing the need for parentheses:
– a unary message with no arguments is a simple atom.
– an infix message is an arithmetic token followed by an expression.
– a keyword message is one or more colon keyword, each followed by an expression.
A series of keyword phrases represents a message with multiple arguments, with each
keyword descriptive of its accompanying parameter, as in Point new x: 0 y: 5. In such
cases, the method name is the concatenation of the keywords: in this case, x:y:.
• Precedence is in the order above: unary > infix > keyword > assignment.
• A semicolon indicates a cascaded message to the prior receiver. I added this wrinkle because
I liked the streaming style of Smalltalk-72.
• Assignment is of the form <variable> ←<expression>.
• Statements are expressions terminated by a period or close bracket.
• Square brackets delimit blocks of code (a series of statements).
• Expressions can be grouped by parentheses where needed for precedence.
• A method could be followed by a phrase such as primitive: 24 to invoke primitive behavior.
I retained the old Smalltalk-72 pattern of representing conditionals by an arrow to the consequent
block, as well as the convention of treating all objects (other than false) as true.
We adopted the use of camelCase in most places, and also the convention that local variables
began with lowercase, while class variables and other global variables were capitalized. Both
conventions aided readability and have endured for that reason.
Keyword syntax for messages gave us the ability to handle multiple arguments without the need
for parentheses, and with readability close to that of natural language. It was a real breakthrough.
5.2
About Left Arrow
Smalltalk-76, as with Smalltalk-72 and Smalltalk-74, used the left arrow for assignment. For sim-
plicity and speed, I made the decision that this would be compiled as a straight-out destructive
store operation. However, I came up with a special “trailing left-arrow keyword” rule that harked
back to the message-sending model of assignment in the earlier interpreted Smalltalks. This rule
allowed the inclusion of a final left arrow with argument as a message part added to the end any
of the Smalltalk-76 message forms: unary, infix, and keyword. This offered a pleasing read–write
symmetry in patterns such as these:
14Small changes include the format of literal arrays, literal uniqueStrings, and extended infix (operators composed from a
sequence of non-alphanumerics).
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:33
next
next←
"unary extended, as in stream next←item"
•
•←
"infix extended, as in array • i ←item
(• was the array subscripting operator)"
name: name:←
"keyword extended, as in name: 'Jones' ←'CEO',
or row: a column: b ←item"
Beyond being merely a pleasant pairing, the trailing left-arrow bound the final argument more
tightly. This meant that a number of expressions did not require parentheses, as with
greek wordFor: 'B' ←'alpha beta gamma' word: 2
as opposed to
greek wordFor: 'B' put: ('alpha beta gamma' word: 2)
5.3
Classes and Contexts
Classes were first-class objects, as in Smalltalk-74, but now with a rich protocol that handled all
the class-oriented aspects of the system kernel. These classes supported inheritance, so all objects
were automatically endowed with a useful base protocol inherited from an Object class, and related
entities like strings and vectors could share a common protocol for collections. Other natural
inheritance groups were magnitudes and numbers, and streams and files. It had been frustrating to
work without inheritance in the earlier Smalltalks, so inheritance was a central feature of Smalltalk-
76 from the start. We had not encountered any real need for multiple inheritance, and it seemed to
add a lot of complexity to a simple design, so we left it out. Simplicity was key.
Once I had a clear vision for the Smalltalk-76 architecture, I used the tools at my disposal, and
proceeded to build an entire Smalltalk-76 image inside a running Smalltalk-74 system. As part of the
new architecture, I changed from calling our stack frames “activations” to calling them “Contexts,”
since they captured the entire context of the state of the VM at each step of its operation. With
Contexts being first-class objects, the entire operation of the virtual machine could be emulated by
repeatedly “stepping” the current context:
repeat°° (currentContext ←currentContext step)
This pattern is conveniently able to follow a growing and shrinking evaluation stack because the
step method is written to return a different context in the case of a send (which creates a new
context) or a return (which reverts to the calling context).
The trickiest part of getting this all going was writing the compiler, since it had to be written in
the Smalltalk-76 language which did not yet have a compiler. However the simulation approach
made it quite tractable: I wrote the whole compiler in Smalltalk-74, and could test that various
code snippets were producing the right code. Then I just had to transliterate that compiler from
Smalltalk-74 to Smalltalk-76 syntax, a relatively simple task, and thus one I could complete without
introducing many bugs.
A paper at POPL in 1978 [Ingalls 1978] describes the Smalltalk-76 language, user interface,
architecture and implementation of this system. Here, let’s examine a few code snippets.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:34
Daniel Ingalls
5.4
Example Code
Class new title: 'Rectangle';
fields: 'origin corner'.
Access to fields
origin
[⇑origin]
``top left''
corner
[⇑corner]
``bottom right''
origin: origin corner: corner
["no code; just store into the instance"]
Testing
contains: pt
"return true if pt is inside me"
[⇑origin <= pt and: pt <= corner]
empty [⇑
corner <= origin]
Combination
inset: delta
[⇑origin + delta rect: corner -- delta]
intersect: r
[⇑(origin max: r origin) rect: (corner min: r corner)]
Image
clear: color [primitive]
"display operation"
outline: width
[self clear: black.
(self inset: width) clear: white]
moveto: pt
[corner ←
corner -- origin + pt.
origin ←
pt]
Rectangles have two fields: origin is the upper left corner, and corner is the lower right corner.
Rectangle builds on the fact that origin and corner are Points.
Class new title: 'Point';
fields: 'x y'.
"Cartesian coordinates"
Access to fields
x
[⇑x]
y
[⇑y]
x: x y: y
Testing
<= pt
"return true if I am below/left of pt"
[⇑x <= pt x and: y <= pt y]
Combination
rect: c
"make up a new rectangle"
[⇑Rectangle new origin: self corner: c]
Point arithmetic
+
pt
[⇑Point new x: x + pt x y: y + pt y]
--
pt
[⇑Point new x: x -- pt x y: y -- pt y]
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:35
Fig. 14. A typical Smalltalk-76 screen showing two classes—DocWindow and Window—being edited.
Figure replicates an illustration from Ingalls [1978, Fig. 3], but created on a Smalltalk-76 emulation.
The scheduling of windows shown in Figure 14 is implemented in Window’s response to the
message startup (visible in the figure). Central to that method is this expression:
frame contains: stylus loc
which checks whether the stylus location (a Point) is within the frame (a Rectangle) of the current
Window. The code for Rectangle’s contains: method builds on the meaning of <= for Points. The first
test determines that origin is above and to the left of the Point pt, and the second test determines
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:36
Daniel Ingalls
that pt is above and to the left of corner. Following the precedence rule, arithmetic messages (+, <,
etc.) are sent before keyword messages (the identifiers ending in colon). Therefore, after the two
<= tests have been made, the conjunction of the two results (and:) defines whether the rectangle
contains the Point pt. The arrow ⇑returns this result.
5.5
Compilation
This vision of how to compile Smalltalk-76 included a byte-coded stack machine for evaluation of
the code. Compilation of a message expression proceeded roughly as follows:
• evaluate any parameters, and leave them on the stack
• evaluate the receiver (a variable, or an expression in parenthesis), and leave it on the stack
• perform a send to the receiver with the selector name
• at the end of a statement, pop the stack
• at the end of a method or at a return arrow ⇑, pop the stack and return that value
The Rectangle method involved in the Window example above,
contains: pt
"return true if pt is inside me"
[⇑origin <= pt and: pt <= corner]
is compiled as
(1) corner—push (onto the stack) the rectangle’s corner
(2) pt—push pt, the argument to contains:
(3) <=—send the message <= to the top of stack (origin) with argument pt
(4) pt—push pt, the argument to contains:
(5) origin—push the rectangle’s corner
(6) <=—send the message <= to the top of stack (pt) with argument origin
(7) and:—send the message and: to the top of stack (a boolean result)
(8) ⇑—return the result returned from and:
The compiler has done some juggling so that the receiver of and: will be on the top of the stack
when the message is sent. The compiled method for contains: appears at the center of Figure 15.
The static structures through which the method is accessed appear in the upper half of the figure:
class Rectangle points to a method dictionary which includes an entry for the selector contains:,
and that entry points to both the source code and the compiled method.
5.6
Evaluation
I had heard of, but never seen, Peter Deutsch’s bytecoded Lisp interpreter [Deutsch 1973]. The
idea of a bytecoded interpreter appealed for several reasons. I liked compactness, and if we were
going to compile this language I wanted it to be at least as compact as our earlier Smalltalks. Also,
having written microcode for the kernel of OOZE and BitBlt, I had a visceral sense of the power of
microcode. Stepping through byte-sized code syllables, and looking up offsets in an instance or
method dictionary could be accomplished in microcode without wasting extra memory cycles to
emulate the details in Nova instructions.
The operation of the virtual machine can be understood by examining the lower half of Figure 15.
The message contains: has been looked up in the message dictionary of frame’s class, Rectangle.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:37
Fig. 15. The evaluation of frame contains: stylus loc. Figure from Ingalls [1978].
The Method object, shown in the middle, provides setup information from which a Context (think
stack frame) has been set up as follows:
• sender—the “calling” context in which this expression was encountered
• method—the method found for contains:
• pc—the program counter that steps through the bytecodes compiled for this method
• tempframe—a vector allocated for arguments and temporary variables and the evaluation
stack
• stack ptr—tracks the top of the evaluation stack
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:38
Daniel Ingalls
• mclass—the class in which this method was found. Note that mclass can be different from
the receiver’s class if the method is found in a superclass of the receiving instance15
• self—the receiver of the message; in this case the point value of ‘stylus loc’
The instant depicted in the figure is when the first bytecode of the <= method is about to be
executed. Returning to the operation of the virtual machine, we can see that ‘currentContext step’
will pick up the next bytecode (the one for <=) and dispatch on it. In this case, <= is compiled as a
special message, so it will run
self send: (SpecialMessages * lobits).
Here we encounter the world of trade-offs in speed and space that beckons to the virtual machine
designer. The message <= is assigned a special bytecode because it is used frequently, and as such
can be stored in a single VM table rather than requiring a literal in every method that sends that
message. This confers a space benefit, and is also benefit in speed. The VM will have special code
associated with this bytecode to first check if the receiver is an integer and, if so, to attempt a direct
arithmetic operation without ever sending a message. In this case, it will fail because the receiver
is a point, so it will retrieve the name <= from the SpecialMessages table, and send it as a normal
message to that point, which will finally return a true or false to be pushed on the stack.
5.7
Contexts and Simulation
As mentioned earlier, Smalltalk-76 began its life as a simulation in Smalltalk-74 that repeatedly
sent the message step to an instance of class Context.
repeat°° (currentContext ←currentContext step)
When Smalltalk-76 came fully to life, this same pattern worked, and ran much faster! Figure 16
shows the code for Context-step in Smalltalk-76. This simple kernel capability enabled such system-
level functions as tracing, profiling, and single-stepping to be written entirely as Smalltalk methods
in class Context. The crucial step of making Contexts be first-class objects built a bridge between
the language and its implementation.
5.8
Unevaluated Arguments and the Origin of Smalltalk Blocks
The syntax described so far covered almost all our examples of earlier Smalltalks in a manner that
was readable and—for the same reason—compilable. The one important case not covered was that
of unevaluated arguments, along with a mechanism for controlling their evaluation. For this I
added the notion of a “non-evaluating keyword,” signified by its ending with an “open colon,” such
as do°° This was intended to be reminiscent of Smalltalk-72’s “fetch-quote” function.
The argument following a non-evaluating keyword would not be evaluated before the message
was sent, but would instead create a handle to the argument expression that could be evaluated
one or more times by “remote control.” The natural handle to use would be the current context,
but we needed a different structure with its own pc so that it could be evaluated at a later time,
or even repeatedly. Therefore I generated code to create a “remote context,” a copy of the current
context, with its own pc. To evaluate the argument expression, a client would send eval to the
remote context, causing it to run the bytecodes of the argument expression exactly as it would have
15The pseudovariable super can be used to send messages intended to be looked up in a superclass of a given method. For
that reason it is necessary to know the class in which that method was found.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:39
Fig. 16. An excerpt of the Smalltalk-76 virtual machine (written in Smalltalk-76) summarizing the operation
of Context-step. Figure from Ingalls [1978].
Fig. 17. An argument is compiled as a remote context if its associated keyword ends with an open colon,
causing c isuneval to be true.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:40
Daniel Ingalls
in its original context, except that when execution reached the end of the block, it would return to
the sender of eval, not to the sender of the home context.
The compiler knew to generate this special form of “remote return” for unevaluated arguments.
Figure 17 shows the code that compiled a keyword selector c and its argument (the result of
self compileterm: input), appending the resulting bytecodes to the instruction stream a. For a
normal (evaluating) message selector, <rcvr> <selector> <expr> ... compiled to
(1) push expr
(2) push rcvr
(3) send selector
(4) ...
In Figure 17, the expression c isuneval checks whether or not the keyword bound to c ends in
an open colon. If it does, the method remote°° is used to wrap the bytecodes for <rcvr> <selector>
<expr> ... with the added mechanism to create a remote context for evaluation.
(1) push currentContext
(2) send remoteCopy
(3) jmp: (9)
(4) push expr
(5) push rcvr
(6) send selector
(7) remote retn
(8) jmp: (4)
(9) ...
Here is the code that generated this sequence:
When this code ran, it created a remote context, and then jumped around the expr so that it did not
get eval’ed at the time of the method call. The receiver of the unevaluating keyword would thus
receive a remote context rather than the evaluated expression. The remote context could later be
sent the message eval to evaluate the expression whenever desired. In fact, the expression could be
evalled repeatedly, because the backward jump at the end of the setup sequence (item 8) would
start a new evaluation.
Note, though, that if the code contained an explicit return statement, that would cause a return
from the home method, effectively exiting from the remote control structure.
The other requirement of remote code was the ability to store into variables in the home context,
as with the induction variable of a for-loop. This was handled by a primitive method next←in
RemoteContext that looked for a variable reference at the starting pc, and stored into that variable.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:41
The beauty of these unevaluated arguments, or “blocks,” was that they provided a way for users
to write their own control structures on a par with those in the base language. This little two-line
method gives us a non-evaluating OR method:
Object understands: 'or°° alternative | priorCursor value
["Non--evaluating OR evaluates alternative only when receiver is false"
self ⇒[⇑true]
⇑alternative eval]'
Here is an example that proved to be quite useful in the user interface:
Cursor understands: 'showWhile°° activity | priorCursor value
["Display this cursor during the execution of activity, and then
restore the prior one"
priorCursor ←user currentcursor.
self show.
value ←activity eval.
priorCursor show.
⇑value]'
This showWhile°° method appears in several places, such as:
readCursor showWhile°° [file load]
upCursor showWhile°° [self scrollUpWhile°° [self clickInRegion]]
cornerCursor showWhile°° [window moveTo: cursor location]
5.9
The Origin of Smalltalk SymbolTables16
One of the clever tricks in Smalltalk-76 that fell into my lap was what I called “Symbol Tables.” A
SymbolTable was a dictionary that had an indirect ObjectReference cell holding each value. One of
these ObjectReference cells can be moved (e.g., to another dictionary), and have its value updated
independent of the dictionary in which it resides.
The bytecodes for loading and storing local variables had direct access to the temporary variable
frame, or the receiver (self) frame, that provided storage for those variables. However, non-local
variables needed to refer to a dictionary entry, either in some class variable dictionary, or in the
global Smalltalk dictionary. It seemed as though this reference would require both a pointer to the
dictionary, and the name of the variable to use as the key, and a lot of access machinery to chase
the reference at run time. However, putting an ObjectReference in the dictionary meant that the
non-local variable reference could point directly to the ObjectReference, and the read and write
bytecodes could access the variable’s value in the ObjectReference directly, while still enabling
the variable to be accessed by name using the appropriate dictionary. It took only 5 methods to
implement a SymbolTable, using ObjectReference and Dictionary; the code is shown in Figure 18.
This SymbolTable could be used for class variables and globals alike, enabling the simple “indirect
literal” bytecodes to read and write in those dictionaries. But wait, there is more! When such
references could not be resolved as globals or class variables, they were placed in a special Undeclared
dictionary. The Undeclared dictionary provided for forward references while compiling from a file.
The beauty of the indirection through SymbolTables was that a forward reference or undeclared
16The use of the term “SymbolTable” here refers specifically to a Smalltalk dictionary with names as keys, and a level of
indirection to the values.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:42
Daniel Ingalls
Fig. 18. Definition of SymbolTable from the Smalltalk-76 Annotated Bootstrap
variable could be declared as a global or class variable later on, regardless of pre-existing references,
and nothing needed to be recompiled. The ObjectReference in question could simply be removed
from Undeclared, and be placed in another dictionary, all with no effect on the code that had already
been compiled, nor even on the values that might have been stored there.
Later, in Smalltalk-80, when Dictionaries were restructured to be Sets of Associations, this
indirect access mechanism was moved to work through Associations, with the added convenience
of providing access to the variable names required for decompilation.
5.10
Debugging Capability
A virtual machine design amounts to a specification of how each step of a computation shall
be carried out. In Smalltalk-72, Alan’s original design laid out the steps required to evaluate an
expression. In Smalltalk-76, my design centered around a set of bytecodes that would carry out
the data movement and communication functions that would achieve the same global goal of
computation by sending messages. The Smalltalk-72 evaluation mechanism was simple enough that
I could fairly reliably write assembly code from Alan’s specification, even where it required some
further clarification. By contrast, the Smalltalk-76 interpreter was a complex virtual machine. While
it was as simple as I could make it, it nonetheless involved picking variable-length instructions
from a byte stream, loading and storing data from numerous sources, looking up methods in an
inheritance hierarchy of hash tables, etc. I don’t recall ever considering writing a native code
interpreter straight from such an architecture. Instead, I used Smalltalk-74, the only tool I had, to
simulate the operation of Smalltalk-76. I have already alluded to this history, but it had an impact
that I don’t think any of us anticipated.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:43
Almost from the day we got Smalltalk-76 running we realized that “something had happened.”
Not only was it more than 10 times faster17 and more powerful (inheritance shrank the kernel while
actually providing more functionality), but having Contexts as real objects suddenly put detailed
control over the system into the domain of the user language. Thus, when an error occurred, we
created a new Smalltalk process, with a handle to the context in trouble, and provided a simple
browser-like interface to it. A simple two-line method could print out the stack, and with a bit
more code, the variables at each level of that stack. Soon we had written an entire debugger in
Smalltalk, and not long after, fleshed out the vestigial Smalltalk-74 logic to enable Smalltalk-76
to completely simulate itself. This in turn enabled tracing capabilities and source-level execution
profiles with time spent and exact execution counts.
5.11
Message Not Understood
When the virtual machine failed to find a message, it would package up that message and send it to
the intended receiver as an argument of the message doesNotUnderstand:. This began simply as a
way for us to invoke the debugger with full information about the suspended context. However, it
soon became clear that it could be used for other purposes, such as enabling a proxy object to be
inserted between sender and receiver to notice exceptional events, or even to transmit the entire
message stream to a remote receiver.
5.12
Inheritance
The Smalltalk-76 bootstrap18 began with the definition of a class Object, from which all the
other classes in the system inherited common behavior. After two generations of Smalltalk, this
establishment of a superclass Object was finally a declaration in the language of the underlying
principle that everything is an object. Figure 19 shows the protocol for class Object. I described
Object and several other classes as “abstract” because their purpose was to establish an inheritable
method protocol although there was no intention that instances would be made of exactly that
class. Other abstract classes included Array and Number. In later systems, parts of Object’s protocol
were pushed down into more specific subclasses such as Collection and Boolean.
There were no enforced properties of abstract classes, and a number of concrete classes served
this same purpose of establishing a meaningful inheritance hierarchy. Stream was one such concrete
class, whose subclasses benefited greatly from inheritance; the common protocol is shown in
Figure 20. The messages for reading and writing, called next and next←, are written to send the
messages pastend and pastend←if the stream is at its end. These return false in the read case,
and grow the underlying array as required in the write case. While not shown here, a subclass
Filestream inherits the same code, but of course responds differently, with pastend and pastend←
advancing to the next page of a file on disk. The synergy goes even farther: the frequently used
next and next←messages have primitive implementations allowing them to perform in native
code, or even microcode, and this optimization works to the benefit of files, as well as any new
kind of stream that may be added.
17The benchmarks in Appendix E.2 show about 28× improvement in simple operations and 2.5× in speed of full sends. Much
of the code was written to minimize full sends and maximize the leverage of simple and especially primitive operations, so
the change we experienced was dramatic.
18We use the noun “bootstrap” here, as we did in those days, to refer to a file of initial definitions that could be read into a
raw interpreter, after which it became a usable programming system.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:44
Daniel Ingalls
Fig. 19. The inherited protocol for class Object in the original Smalltalk-76 system including comparisons,
printing, boolean operations and even the loopless programming kernel. The “@” sign here is a stand-in for
“≡,” absent in the listing font of the day.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:45
Fig. 20. The inherited protocol for abstract class Stream in Smalltalk-76.
In the first days of these inheritance groups we were sometimes careless in referring (in an
abstract superclass) to methods that were not present, but which would be required in subclasses.
Adele Goldberg, who was always aware of the learner’s dilemma, instituted the practice of ensuring
that such methods be added to the superclass as a stub self subclassResponsibility method. This
made it clear, both to a reader of the class and to a programmer encountering an error, when a
method was required in a subclass of an abstract superclass.
5.13
The Remarkable Synergy of Messages and Inheritance
Compilation is a lighter process in a message sending language. The reason is that messages are
independent of the type of the receiver, and therefore the code is free of type information—the code
itself is abstract in that sense. Let’s take a look at the code for max: in class Number as an example.
<Number> max: other
[self < other ⇒[⇑other]]
This means the following: if the receiver self is less than the argument other, return the argument,
otherwise return self.19 We can use Smalltalk to look at itself by evaluating Number method: #max:
to reveal the bytecodes of the compiled method, as shown in Figure 21. The method is nicely
compact, but it may not seem extraordinary at first. However, notice that the comparison is not an
Integer less-than, nor is it a Float less-than; rather it is the message less-than, which is understood
by both Floats and Integers...and MachineDoubles, and Dates, and Times, and by your own class
Fraction if you choose to add it! This is the synergy between inheritance and message sending:
many inherited methods in Smalltalk serve in multiple classes without needing to be copied, neither
as source code nor even as the underlying bytecode. At runtime, the virtual machine needs only
19All methods return self implicitly if they run to completion.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:46
Daniel Ingalls
Fig. 21. Bytecodes compiled for Number-max: in Smalltalk-76
one entry for this method in its method cache; that means more space for other methods, and that
means a little more speed: always a good thing.
5.14
The Multipane Window Interface
As we began serious development in Smalltalk-76, we wanted to be able to see the whole codebase
“online.” With over 50 classes and 500 methods, Smalltalk-74’s class-per-file file editor did not allow
one to jump around the system in a nimble manner. Before long, Larry Tesler came up with a
multipane browser that made it easy to scroll to any class in the left pane, and then to any message
selector in the right pane, and immediately see just that method in the bottom pane. This was
already useful by itself, but with our overlapping windows, it was also easy to have several such
browsers open on various parts of the system at the same time, and to jump between them with a
click of the mouse. As the system grew, so did the browser, soon reaching the standard form that
includes system categories and method categories for further organization.
The multipane paradigm also offered a perfect way to inspect any object, with a list of instance
variable names on the left and a place to print or change their values on the right. Here again,
several of these in separate windows made a wonderfully clear way to visualize the various parts
of a system in development.
More than any other tool, the debugger benefited from this method of presentation. By putting
the context stack in a scrollable pane, it became possible to see and explore the entire state of a
suspended computation. Any context that was selected could reveal its details, such as temporary
variables and instance variables, in separate panes. The ability to select a point in a suspended
context, change a value, and then resume was the highlight of many Smalltalk demonstrations, and
it changed the people who saw it.
5.15
Projects
Soon after we had Smalltalk-76 running, it occurred to me that if we saved the window scheduler
as an object, we could jump between two or more complete views of the system just by restoring
the screen from the different window lists. The system kept track of changes for the purpose of
being able to save them on file and collaborate with others. By replicating the change tracking
along with the scheduler for each of these “project” views, it suddenly became possible to work on
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:47
a number of different tasks without ever having to leave the Smalltalk environment. I remember
being able to create this whole facility in an afternoon because the scheduler, the windows, and the
change sets, were already simple and independent objects. In that one day, Smalltalk-76 acquired
the feel of a designer’s notebook.
5.16
Summing up Smalltalk-76
Smalltalk-76 was all we had hoped for, and more. The combination of the terseness of Smalltalk
and the compactness of the OOZE object memory meant that we could enjoy an address space
of 60,000 objects on a computer that barely offered 32k bytes of working storage. We also had a
compilable library of general classes that represented all the data structures needed to support a
personal computing kernel with a graphical user interface.
Among its remarkable properties for computing systems of the day:
• all code was live and editable, with a turnaround time of a few seconds
• inheritance and messages combined to produce compact compiled code
• the entire system could be emulated with augmentation, as for tracing or profiling
• the debugger was written entirely in the source language, and could run as a live window in
the system being debugged
• the system could be interrupted at any time (with ctrl-C) to open a debugger and learn about
all the objects at work
• it was possible to enumerate all the instances of any class
• when arithmetic on SmallIntegers overflowed, the result became a LargeInteger; inherited
operations continued to work with the LargeInteger values
• robustness and power came from the doesNotUnderstand: facility
• Smalltalk-76 ran over 10 times faster than Smalltalk-74, fulfilling our need for speed
We enjoyed presenting our integrated development system, and these demonstrations began
to attract interest from industry. While this outreach would become our primary focus, we began
with efforts to use Smalltalk’s simplicity and visual interface to reach Xerox upper management.
5.17
Significant Projects
One of the most ambitious projects in Smalltalk-76 was the “Kearns Curriculum,” later known as
the “Simulation Kit”—a job-shop simulation designed by Adele Goldberg to teach Xerox executives
about software in a hands-on manner. It was an amazingly gutsy project, and Adele led it from
beginning to end, designing and implementing the curriculum,20 and promoting it to the top
executives at Xerox. She organized everyone in our group to contribute to it, and ultimately to sit
each beside one of the executives as they went through the curriculum. The theme of the workshop
attended by the executives—historically accustomed to creating specialized hardware with software
as a sideline—was to understand the growing importance of software as the driving product of the
computer industry. David Kearns, then president and later CEO, was an exIBMer who, as it turned
out, knew how to program!
Figure 22 shows a screenshot of the Simulation Kit. Each station could have a different role, and
jobs followed a scripted trajectory from one station to the next, waiting on an input queue until
20Adele was the second beneficiary of a skunkworks Alto at home since her second child had just been born.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:48
Daniel Ingalls
Fig. 22. A snapshot of the Simulation Kit. In this example PCBoard 1 was slowed down because it failed
testing and had to repeat part of its agenda. It soon became clear that “Stuffing” needed more staff. To run
the SimKit, click this image or run https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/HOPL-St78.html?simkit
the receiving station was ready to process another job. Each station had an input and output queue
and specified allocation of workers. As jobs exited the simulation, they reported their history in the
‘Performance measures’ panel. It shows animated circuit boards being stuffed, inspected, soldered,
tested, and packed for shipping. This particular example was chosen to be relevant to Versatec—a
Xerox company at the time.
The Kearns curriculum came off without a hitch, in spite of a hugely risky change to the system
just days before (described in Appendix B.4). Respect for our group (the Learning Research Group)
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:49
Fig. 23. A snapshot of my screen while debugging a problem with stylized text when converting the Simulation
Kit code to run live in Smalltalk-78. I made the snapshot because I was struck that this was still a first-class
debugging environment, yet it was written more than 40 years ago. All it lacked at the time was a bigger
screen and faster processor, and we knew these were coming.
rose enormously as a result. Within the group too, we had a new-found sense that we could do
anything that we put our minds to.
Fast-forward to 2019, when we found that one of the Alto disks appeared to have the Smalltalk-76
source files for the Simulation Kit on it. Since the Smalltalk-78 language is nearly identical to
Smalltalk-76, it occurred to me that I might be able to get the Simulation Kit to run in our revived
Smalltalk-78, emulated in a web browser. It was not a trivial task because the representation of rich
text was changed in Smalltalk-78.
Another major project attempted in Smalltalk-76, which took full advantage of OOZE’s large
capacity, was PIE. This stood for “Personal Information Environment,” [Goldstein and Bobrow 1981]
and was a large information network architecture developed by Danny Bobrow and Ira Goldstein,
researchers in CSL, and collaborators in our Smalltalk explorations.
As his thesis project at Stanford University, Alan Borning [Borning 1979, 1981] wrote his in-
novative Thinglab constraint-oriented programming environment in Smalltalk-76—Figure 24
shows a screenshot. This project has been resurrected in Smalltalk-78 and can be explored at
https://constraints.cs.washington.edu/thinglab/. The quadrilateral visible in the ThingLab browser
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:50
Daniel Ingalls
Fig. 24. A screenshot from ThingLab. The forces in the bridge framework due to the suspended weight are
calculated as the weight is changed, or the anchors are moved. Note that some members are in compression,
others in tension.
can be manipulated by choosing, e.g., “move” as the operation, and “point” to let you attach the
mouse to a point. The example in Figure 24 is “FixedBridge.”
5.18
Reflections
We could “smell” the coming microprocessor revolution, and the combination of a compact BitBlt
graphics kernel and some work on the VM made it clear that this would soon be an interesting
piece of technology for research and industry alike.
6
SMALLTALK-78
In 1978, 16-bit Microprocessors were coming into production, offering us the chance to build a
portable Smalltalk computer. Memory costs were also dropping, so that it was reasonable to fit an
entire Smalltalk image in main memory without OOZE. Alan managed to find some extra funding
for a young Xerox engineer, Doug Fairbairn, to build a prototype portable machine. The machine
was named “NoteTaker,” and used three Intel 8086 processors on an innovative bus structure that
Doug had designed, coupled to 256K bytes of resident memory.21
I was excited about anything in the direction of a portable computer because portable meant
personal. The move from the Alto to a single-chip microprocessor was a step down in power, but it
seemed that if we had enough RAM to get by without OOZE, we might get Smalltalk to run usably
on such a machine. I started to think of how to port all our existing assembly code, and how to
squeeze every last cycle out of Smalltalk-76 on the 8086.
21The NoteTaker actually had three 8086’s; one to manage the disk, one to run Smalltalk, and a special “fast” 8Mhz 8086 to
manage the Ethernet. Ever looking for more cycles, I wrote a special version of BitBlt that ran in the Ethernet processor,
and took BitBlt commands off a queue from the main Smalltalk processor. This nearly doubled the speed of text-heavy
operations.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:51
6.1
Porting Smalltalk-76
The Smalltalk-76 virtual machine consisted at the time of roughly 16K bytes of assembly code.
About half of this comprised the interpreter, memory manager including OOZE, OS, IO and process
scheduler; the other half was devoted to line drawing, bitmap sketching operations, text display,
and scrolling. I settled on the following strategy to make Smalltalk run on the new machine:
• Copy the bulk of the Smalltalk system verbatim from Smalltalk-76.
• Eliminate OOZE in favor of in-memory objects up to the size of available memory.
• Hand-translate the kernel virtual machine from Nova code and Alto microcode to 8086 code.
• Rewrite line drawing, text display, and all other graphics to use only BitBlt.
• Map Smalltalk’s contexts onto the 8086 support for overlapping stack frames.
Copying the bulk of Smalltalk (after eliminating as much as possible) was simple. Ted retargeted
the SystemTracer to output a new format for the NoteTaker. In the process, he eliminated OOZE
by writing a direct-pointer object table and corresponding object data file. Because we were
porting Smalltalk-76 verbatim, creating the kernel virtual machine required only a straightforward
translation from Nova assembler and Alto microcode to 8086 assembly code. This reduced the
porting task to rewriting text and graphics, and rewriting the management of contexts to use
contiguous overlapping stack frames.
6.2
Unified Text Display with BitBlt
From our experiments in Smalltalk-74 and Smalltalk-76, we had learned that it should be possible to
implement all the necessary graphics by calls on BitBlt, with the surrounding logic all in readable,
malleable, Smalltalk code. Moreover, faced with the task of translating Smalltalk-76’s assembly
code from Alto Novacode to the Intel 8086 instruction set, the chance to reduce the task by half
was appealing. Therefore, as we moved to the NoteTaker, we committed to implementing all of
the graphics operations in Smalltalk itself, with calls on BitBlt. I had already written BitBlt in Alto
microcode; surely 8086 assembly code would not be that bad?
Still in Smalltalk-76, I began to reimplement the layout of text entirely in Smalltalk, except for
one kernel call on BitBlt. Managing the layout of characters in a string consists of three tasks:
arranging the characters of a string in a rectangle (and possibly displaying them), detecting which
character lies at a given position (for locating a mouse click), and determining the bounds of a given
character in the string (for displaying a selection). I soon discovered that subtle coding differences
could cause inconsistencies between these three operations. For this reason, I designed the kernel
of text display around a single method scanWord:, which is shown in Figure 25.
The loop in scanWord: will scan and optionally print text (depending on the flag printing) until
• a given some horizontal position (stopX) is reached,
• a particular character (determined from exceptions) is found, or
• the end of a range in the text (endRun) is reached.
A great advantage of condensing all the logic into a single simple method was that it was easy
to write an (optional) primitive for this method, so that the performance of all these functions
was close to what would be achieved if the whole layout package had been written in primitive
code. Once the scanWord: method and its surrounding interface were working, I segregated the
old text code and left it all behind when we wrote the new image for the NoteTaker. BitBlt, the
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:52
Daniel Ingalls
Fig. 25.
A single method implements all layout, mouse-finding and display of text in Smalltalk-78 and
subsequent Smalltalks. The method runs in a context where the source is a font and the destination is the
display.
scanWord: text loop, and a similar loop for drawing lines (see Byte [Ingalls 1981]) comprised the
entire graphics package for Smalltalk-78 and the Smalltalks that followed.
6.3
Linearized Context Stack
To achieve acceptable performance on the 8086, I reworked the Context architecture of Smalltalk-
76 to use a single large Process object with overlapping stack frames, according to the stack
discipline supported by the 8086 hardware. Using overlapping stack frames was not unheard of, but
I had to work hard to map Smalltalk’s independent Context objects onto that architecture. Special
“outrigger” RemoteContext objects made it possible for this single large hardware-supported object
to offer the same Smalltalk-level access as the more general architecture of Smalltalk-76 Contexts.
This demonstration that the runtime system could use more efficient primitive structures—while
still supporting the convenience and maintainability of clean object-oriented design—was never
published. I think it was generally known to, or independently derived by, a number of people who
worked on increasing the speed of Smalltalk on conventional processors [Deutsch and Schiffman
1984]. That said, the future implementations covered in this paper reverted to the cleaner, simpler,
context-objects of Smalltalk-76.
While the conversion to a linearized stack with outriggers was a complication that we dropped
in future Smalltalks, the move to BitBlt-based graphics stayed with us. It reduced the codebase
that needed to be ported, not only to the NoteTaker but also to the Dorado when we finally moved
away from the Alto as the platform for our Xerox Smalltalk work. Besides saving a lot of work
in porting, the smaller graphics kernel also simplified all the nice user interface features such as
overlapping windows, menus, animation, and high quality fonts.
This then became Smalltalk-78, also known as “NoteTaker Smalltalk,” from the name of the
(trans)portable machine being built to run it. The Smalltalk-78 architecture was nearly identical to
that of Smalltalk-76; in fact almost the entire Smalltalk codebase was mechanically written out from
Smalltalk-76 into a virtual image that could be read into the NoteTaker machine. The project was a
success, demonstrating a code-compatible version of Smalltalk-76 running on a microprocessor.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:53
Fig. 26. A screen shot of the Smalltalk-78 system on a Dorado-sized screen (1024×808) that is larger than
the 640×480 Xerox NoteTaker for which it was designed. With today’s VM (see Appendix E), performance is
excellent. To run this system live, click this image or visit https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/HOPL-St78.html?full
The virtual machine was half the size (roughly 6K bytes), and ran twice as fast on a single 8086
chip as the same language running on the Alto.
Being carefully winnowed to fit in the Notetaker with no virtual memory, Smalltalk-78 is a
satisfyingly small kernel for a complete personal computing system. We are fortunate that, out of
the 121 Alto disk packs that were saved, one happened to be the disk that wrote the object table
for porting the Smalltalk-76 codebase to the NoteTaker. Working from another Smalltalk virtual
machine in JavaScript, we were able to bring that system back to life as a running Smalltalk-78.
We actually did more. Rather than simply bring Smalltalk-78 back to life, Vanessa Freudenberg
and I, together with Ted and Yoshiki Ohshima, spent several weeks doing some of the further
development that we never had the opportunity to do on the NoteTaker, to the point that this
Smalltalk of 40 years ago became an interesting system for demonstrating the power of Smalltalk.
The video at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AnrlSqtpOkw shows a presentation that would
have turned many heads in 1978.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:54
Daniel Ingalls
6.4
The Impact of Smalltalk-78
Smalltalk-78, like Smalltalk-74, was mainly important as a transitional system. To make it work,
we had bundled up the best of Smalltalk-76 in a small and portable package, and made it runable
on a single-chip microprocessor. In the process, the non-Smalltalk component of the whole system
had shrunk from around 30K bytes of assembly code and microcode to just 6K bytes of 8086 code.
Ironically, our little bundle was soon to run on what was arguably the fastest personal computer of
the 1970s. Let’s pause to review our story. Smalltalk-72 had launched us into a new way of thinking
and building. The implementation was strictly “do what it takes,” but the effect on us as researchers
was profound. Out of that experience came the clean and powerful design of Smalltalk-76, but with
two complexities remaining from earlier systems: the pre-BitBlt “do what it takes” graphics code,
and the OOZE object memory required to work within the confines of the Alto. We have also seen
how the challenge of porting to the NoteTaker led to a compact resident object memory and a
simplified graphics system with the modern BitBlt graphics model.
6.5
Along Came the Dorado
In the late 1970s, while we were struggling with speed and space on the Intel 8086 microprocessor,
another project at Xerox was putting the finishing touches on a machine with more speed and
space than we had dreamed of. Dubbed the “Dorado,” this machine boasted up to 16 megabytes of
main memory and a 60 nanosecond processor cycle time. It was bulky for a personal computer
(think small refrigerator), but we knew that it was only a matter of time before we would all have
machines of this power on our desks, and then on our laps. We tweaked the NoteTaker memory
exporter to revert to the simpler Context architecture of Smalltalk-76, but to retain the new BitBlt
graphics kernel, and wrote a new object table file. Peter Deutsch ported the Smalltalk-76 virtual
machine to Dorado microcode.
Smalltalk-76 on the Dorado was astounding to us: it ran Smalltalk at a million bytecodes per
second. Coupled with our integrated development environment, this Smalltalk was dazzling to
everyone who saw it. Not just children, but serious developers, including banks, AI companies, and
publishers. Among the outsiders who saw Smalltalk was Steve Jobs, who negotiated with the Xerox
Venture Group for a possible Xerox-Apple relationship. I, along with Larry Tesler and Adele, had
the pleasure of entertaining Steve with a demonstration of Smalltalk. What he saw was Smalltalk-76
running on the Dorado, which is very similar to the Smalltalk-78 emulation shown in Figure 26,
because of the large screen and the execution speed.
6.6
The Jobs Demo
For my part of the demo, I began by evaluating the following:
Rectangle fromuser comp.
This prompts the user to select a rectangle, which it then complements (i.e., turns the black pixels
to white, and the white pixels to black). I did this several times in an empty area, as shown in
Figure 27, making the point that this is a system in which computing and play—even art—can
be freely mixed. In the midst of this doodling, I arranged to overlap a couple of rectangles with
a small offset, as shown in the upper center of Figure 27. We noted that complementing a region
twice, with an offset, provides a simple way to outline a region on the screen. This is invention in a
system that is designed for unanticipated creations.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:55
Fig. 27. Executing Rectangle fromuser comp.
I talked about how we display the selec-
tion in a block of text by complementing
the selected text (changing it from black to
white), and navigated in the browser to the
text shown in Figure 28. I explained some
of the details: how it complements the first
partial line, then a block of internal lines,
and finally the last partial line, in each case
sending the message compRect: to do the
job. All the while, I was selecting code to
indicate the ranges, and I made the obser-
vation that some executives and their staff
at Xerox were uncomfortable when large
areas of the screen turn black, as they do
when you make a large selection. Might it
be better to outline the region instead? We pondered. How hard would it be to do that?
I browsed to the neighboring method, compRect: shown in the lower left frame of Figure 28, and
added the two lines shown in the lower right. As soon as I accepted the change, in that method
and throughout the system, all selections in text appeared with an outline rather than as a black
rectangle.
I had prepared this demonstration, as I used it frequently to show off the Smalltalk-76 debugging
facilities. (In fact, I would sometimes hit the interrupt key in the process of making a selection, and
Fig. 28. Creating large black areas was found to be “scary” to non-technical computer users. As an experiment
to solve this problem, a simple change in Smalltalk-76 causes all text selections to appear outlined.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:56
Daniel Ingalls
make the change in the debugger.) However, what followed was unanticipated. When we viewed a
large method in the browser and scrolled it up or down, the text moved jerkily, line-by-line. You
can see this if you run the simulation. Steve wanted to see the text scroll smoothly. I said “I’ll have
to make a couple of changes, but I’ll show you after lunch,” since the suits were about to step out
anyway. I spent my lunchtime rearranging a couple of methods, which remained in the system
thenceforth. When the executives returned, I was able to change one line of TextImage>scrollUp:
from
[self scrollby: delta / self lineheight]
to
[self scrollby: delta asFloat / self lineheight]
With this one change, the integer division became a floating point division, thus preserving the
fractional part, and scrolling became silky smooth. Steve liked it.
Looking back from today, it is easy to miss the impact of these catchy demos. The mouse-and-
menu driven user interface, running on a large paper-white screen with attractive bold and italic
fonts, was already impressive to many. More amazing still was that the system itself could be
explored without even touching a keyboard.22 Finally, we showed that what we were navigating
was not merely a passive view, but the actual live system, and that it was instantly responsive to the
designer’s or user’s desires. This seemed like magic; everyone who saw it came away wanting it.
7
SMALLTALK-80
The Dorado experience showed us that Smalltalk had serious commercial possibilities, and the
NoteTaker experience proved that microprocessors could support a system like Smalltalk. We had
had the luxury of playing with computers of the future: now that future was becoming reality.
Aware of a huge potential audience for our work, the group charter shifted for a time from education,
graphics and music to building a product for public release. This public, sharable version of Smalltalk
became known as Smalltalk-80.
The advance of technology was not just affecting big business: it was bringing real computer
science into contact with the realm of clever hobbyists all over the world. Magazines such as
Creative Computing, Dr. Dobb’s Journal, and Byte nourished this burgeoning community of home
computer enthusiasts. We shared the enthusiasm of that community and were eager to make
Smalltalk accessible to those people.
In August of 1978, Byte magazine had published an issue devoted to the language Pascal, as
part of a tradition that August issues generally featured issue-wide attention to a single computer
language. Byte was arguably the leading publication for personal computing; other languages
honored by this tradition included APL, Forth, and Lisp.
The Pascal issue of Byte affected us—especially me—in a visceral manner because of its cover.
There, Robert Tinney’s artwork depicted a fanciful scene showing “Pascal’s triangle,” as well as a
number of other languages in a “sea” of programming languages. Smalltalk was depicted on an
island, isolated from the rest of the world. In the words of Carl Helmers’ “About the Cover” note:
22It was often after five minutes of opening windows, browsing code, executing and printing expressions, and finally
introducing a change, that I would point out “this is the first time I have used the keyboard.”
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:57
Travelling upward (in the picture) through heavy seas we come to the pinnacle, a snow white
island rising like an ivory tower out of the surrounding shark infested waters. Here we find the
fantastic kingdom of small talk, where great and magical things happen. But alas, just as the
impenetrable fog bank around the jungles of LISP hide it from our view, the craggy aloofness of
the kingdom of small talk keeps it out of the mainstream of things.
Fig. 29. The cover of the August 1978 issue of Byte magazine.
(Artwork by Robert Tinney.)
Nothing was more important to
some of us than to get off that
island and out into the world. A
public release implied a number of
changes. Among other things, we
had to document the entire system
and work toward getting Smalltalk
accepted as a standard. Adele and
Dave led the documentation and
publication effort [Goldberg 1983;
Goldberg and Robson 1983], and all
of us contributed to what seemed
to be the natural evolution of the
language into a system suitable for
a product.
The work toward a “standard”
was not done through profes-
sional societies, as had historically
been the case for other languages.
Rather, with the help of Bert Suther-
land (to whom our group reported
in 1979), Adele initiated a multi-
corporation project to create VMs
on multiple machines that would
all run the same virtual image. That
we managed to get cooperation
from Apple, Tektronix, HP, and
DEC, as well as several universities,
guaranteed a documented working
standard for the VM. This initiative also produced experience papers in the “Green Book” [Krasner
1983], and built a significant early community of implementors and users.
7.1
Drop the Special Characters and Go for ASCII
The move to ASCII went fairly smoothly, except for the loss of left arrow for assignment (for a
while we were stuck with underbar), and the loss of an infix operator for indexing collections. I was
not happy with those changes, but at some point we had to make a decision regardless of whether
it was perfect or not. Sadly, with all the stress about left-arrow vs underscore (the ASCII character
code suborned by Smalltalk-76 for a special ←glyph) for assignment, an important baby was
thrown out with the bathwater: Smalltalk-80 dropped the terminal left-arrow keyword construct
(see Section 5.2). With hindsight, the := combination now used for assignment could have replaced
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:58
Daniel Ingalls
the terminal left arrow keyword, and ! or @ could have replaced our • operator for indexing (@ is
even read as “at”).
The example of copying an element from one array to another serves to illustrate these choices:
In Smalltalk--76
a • i ←
b • i
In Smalltalk--80
a at: i put: (b at: i)
Smalltalk--80--didnahappen
a @ i := b @ i
or
a ! i := b ! i
A prime example of the damage, at: and at:put: robbed subscripting of its former algebraic
expressiveness. Moreover, without the assignment-level precedence of terminal left-arrow, at:put:
requires parentheses arround the put: argument.
7.2
Change the Evaluation Order to Left-to-Right
Smalltalk-76 required message arguments to be evaluated before the receiver, so that the receiver
would be on top of the stack at the time of the send operation. This post-evaluation of receivers
made the send operation very simple—with both receiver and message at hand, looking up the
method was straightforward. Unfortunately, this violated the otherwise-intuitive rule that Smalltalk
executed from left to right; this bothered me.23 But if the receiver were not on top, then how could
it be found? During the years of Smalltalk-76, I had time to reflect on this problem and, as part of
the changes to Smalltalk-80, I adopted the approach of encoding the number of arguments in the
“send” bytecode. This meant that the evaluation order was left-to-right (as one might expect), and
yet the receiver could be found even though it was not on the top of the stack.
7.3
Introduce Boolean Classes and More-Conventional Conditionals
From the beginning in Smalltalk-72, we had adopted the Lisp-like conflation of nil (in Smalltalk,
the undefined object) with the Boolean notion of falsehood. In addition, the earlier pattern for
conditionals was somewhat confusing, because of the asymmetry between the true and false
branches. If we wanted Smalltalk to find acceptance in the world, it seemed that the old conditional
pattern was a non-starter. I took on this problem, and was concerned at first with the likely need
for special primitives or other ugliness. If true and false were to both be instances of Boolean, then
they seemed to requires some circular logic inside them to test whether they were true or false... .
Suddenly it occurred to me to make them instances of distinct subclasses of Boolean. By giving each
of true and false their own class, the very mechanism of message dispatch does exactly what is
needed, with no need for circular primitives. Here are the definitions of ifTrue:ifFalse: in the
three classes; For convenience, Smalltalk also defines ifFalse:ifTrue:, as well as the single-armed
conditionals ifFalse: and ifTrue:.
23This counterintuitive order of execution was almost never noticed, and was even less often a source of error. However I
do recall a case where a 16-bit value was being read from a stream of bytes as (strm next * 256) + strm next. The
high-order byte came first in the stream, but here the right argument to + was evaluated first, and so it was the second byte
from the stream that was multiplied by 256. Notwithstanding that this should do what one might expect in reading left to
right, I hope the reader will agree that it is no way to write maintainable code.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:59
Boolean
ifTrue: trueBlock ifFalse: falseBlock
↑self subclassResponsibility
True
ifTrue: trueBlock ifFalse: falseBlock
↑trueBlock value
False
ifTrue: trueBlock ifFalse: falseBlock
↑falseBlock value
7.4
Come up with a Better Form of Blocks
The blocks of Smalltalk-76 did the job required for simple control structures, but the open-colon
syntax was subtle, and heaven forbid that we need another ASCII replacement for open colon!
There were substantive problems as well. In Smalltalk-76, because the creation of a remote context
for a block was associated with the open-colon keyword, there was no way to pass around a block
as the argument of a normal send. This would be necessary, if, for example, one wanted to add
the areas of every rectangle in a collection, and have the same code work for different kinds of
collections. The solution was to introduce Smalltalk-80’s bracket syntax for blocks. This created
essentially the same remoteContext object as the open-colon, but as an explicit literal, rather than
as a side-effect of the kind of keyword that preceded it. Such a block literal can be sent as an
argument with a normal message. The block is not evaluated until it is sent the message value, (or
value: if the block requires an argument, value:value: if it requires two arguments, and so on).
Figure 30 shows an example taken from the RunArray class. The “runs” are spans of the array for
which the value is constant. This makes it useful for compactly storing, e.g., the emphasis attributes
in rich text. The fontsUsed method calls withStartStopAndValueDo: to scan a text for all its font
changes. Without the client needing to know how RunArrays work, the block protocol makes it
easy to scan for changes in emphasis as well as the actual location of each change. In this example,
only the fonts are of interest, but the same method could be used to find where a given font is used,
or to locate an embedded object (also stored in the emphasis runs).
7.5
Support Class-Side Methods
For quite a while, Adele had been lobbying to introduce “metaclasses,” that is, to make classes
instances of other classes, so that each class would be able to have its own methods. She had good
reasons for this, the main one being to minimize the likelihood that users would have to deal with
uninitialized instances. At the time, Point new produced a point object with nil values for x and y.
One could have every class interpret new as ↑self basicNew initialize, with initialize installing
default values. However, this would either make all sends of new run slower, or all performance-
critical code would have to be rewritten to use, for example, basicNew instead of new. The situation
of uninitialized instances could easily lead to errors in code, and Adele had borne the brunt of
dealing with such errors in her experience introducing new users to Smalltalk.
I must confess to having been resistant on this issue, as metaclasses seemed to add a significant
level of complexity. This was a juncture at which we might have moved from a class language to a
prototype language, since working from a prototype gives you exactly this kind of pre-initialization,
as well as offering some related benefits in revealing more of the type relationships inherent in
the system. However, the prototype revolution was too much for us to confront, especially on the
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:60
Daniel Ingalls
RunArray >> withStartStopAndValueDo: aBlock
"Evaluate aBlock with start, stop, and value for each 'run'"
| start stop |
start := 1.
runs with: values do:
[:len : val | "Will be called with length and value for each range"
stop := start + len -- 1.
"Now call the original block with the start, stop and value"
aBlock value: start value: stop value: val.
start := stop + 1]
Text >> fontsUsed
"return the list of fonts used in me"
| fonts |
fonts := IdentitySet new.
runs withStartStopAndValueDo:
"Enumerate every run of emphasis"
[ :start :stop :attribs |
"attribs is the set of all attributes in this run"
attribs do:
[ :attrib | attrib isFontSpec ifTrue:
[fonts add: attrib font]]].
↑fonts
Fig. 30. The upper method, withStartStopAndValueDo:, in class RunArray, handles the details of navigating
the array. The client method, fontsUsed (in class Text) has all the hard work done for it, so that it is simple
to scan for all fonts used in a rich text instance.
eve of going public with what was already a fairly mature and capable system. It should be noted
that prototypes did not seem overly daunting to a junior faculty member at Stanford named Dave
Ungar. In collaboration with Randall Smith, his devotion to the prototype approach gave us the
language Self [Ungar and Smith 1987].
When I finally agreed to put in metaclasses, I was delighted to find that I could do so with no
change to the virtual machine. The key was to realize how metaclasses fit into the existing class
hierarchy. Figures 31 and 32 illustrate the change that was needed for a small sample of the system. I
wrote a snippet of code that ran through the system changing all the pointers in the class hierarchy
and, after a few crashes, it all worked and I saved the result.
The next day Adele arrived to find a picture of the metaclass hierarchy (like that in Figure 32) on
her door, and a Smalltalk complete with metaclasses on the server.
Because all the metaclasses inherit from Class, they all behave like classes. But because they
are distinct, every class can have additional methods, meaning that it can have its own behavior.
This is very useful for initialization, as well as other, class-specific, utility functions. Here are a few
examples of expressions that benefit from the presence of metaclasses.
Point x: 10 y: 20—create a point with cartesian coordinates
Point r: 100 theta: 90—create a point with polar coordinates
Number degreesToRadians: 90—perform a useful conversion
Rectangle enclosingPoints: myPolygon vertices—create a rectangle from several points
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:61
          nil 
 
  Object (isA Class) 
 
      Class (isA Class) 
 
      Collection (isA Class) 
 
           Set (isA Class) 
 
               Dictionary (isA Class)
Fig. 31. A fragment of the class hierarchy before the addition of metaclasses. The black arrows show the
subclass relationship.
 
  ObjectClass (isA Metaclass) 
 
      ClassClass (isA Metaclass) 
 
          MetaclassClass (isA Metaclass) 
 
      CollectionClass (isA Metaclass) 
 
          SetClass (isA Metaclass) 
 
               DictionaryClass (isA Metaclass)
          nil 
 
  Object (isA ObjectClass) 
 
      Class (isA ClassClass) 
 
           Metaclass (isA MetaclassClass) 
 
      Collection (isA CollectionClass) 
 
           Set (isA SetClass) 
 
               Dictionary (isA DictionaryClass)
subclass of
instance of
Fig. 32. After the addition of metaclasses, each class is now an instance of a new class—its metaclass. The
metaclasses themselves form a new inheritance hierarchy that parallels that of their instances, except at the
top. There, class Object is a subclass of nil, while class ObjectClass is a subclass of Class.
7.6
Improved Performance
As we looked toward more academic and industrial markets for Smalltalk, we sought to improve the
performance of our systems. The original design of the interpreter, as specified by Context step,
already provided ways to achieve decent performance of simple primitive operations such as
arithmetic and array access. As we gained experience with this architecture, we learned other tricks
that allowed us to improve performance of much of the other non-primitive code as well. The most
significant case involved the use of a method cache indexed by message selector and receiver class.
Once the interpreter had gone through the rather lengthy process of looking up a selector in one
or more classes in an inheritance chain, the selector, receiver class, and method could be installed
in a hash table. Once this was done, the interpreter could resolve the next such message by a single
query in that table. Even a relatively small cache of 500 entries would typically bypass 90 percent
of the message lookups. Further benefits can be achieved by including in the cache some of the
other information encoded in the method, such as primitive index and number of arguments, that
would otherwise require further decoding.
The Smalltalk virtual machine was a tinkerer’s dream come true. In addition to the method lookup
cache, considerable improvements could be made in the area of storage management, especially
with regard to the allocation, initialization and release of Contexts. Then there were tricks to
play with bytecode execution. For instance, one could maintain several different jump tables for
dispatching on the various bytecodes, depending on whether the top of stack were known to be
true or false, or, say, a small integer. Appendix E presents more discussion on performance.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:62
Daniel Ingalls
7.7
Model-View-Controller
Nothing helps the success of a newly released programming environment more than a set of useful
widgets and a paradigm for users to carry through the design of their own widgets according to
the same pattern. The Model-View-Controller (MVC) paradigm [Lalonde and Pugh 1991, Ch. 2],
developed by Trygve Reenskaug [1979], and later implemented in Smalltalk by Adele Goldberg,
Jim Althoff, and others [Goldberg 1983], filled this vital need in the Smalltalk-80 release. The
coordination of multiple views of a single model had been around in graphics for some time
already, but the pattern that came forth in Smalltalk-80 was applicable throughout the universe of
user-interface design, and answered the big question of “How do I get started building something
useful in this new system?”
7.8
Enumeration and Mutation
Smalltalk classes retain a collection of their instances only when designed to do so (as with open files
and windows on the screen). However from Smalltalk-76 on, the virtual machines have supported
a method that will enumerate all instances of any class. This enumeration enables gathering of
interesting statistics, and in Smalltalk-76 it was valuable in tracking down memory “leaks” when
reference counting might fail to reclaim a circular structure.
When we left OOZE behind, Smalltalk-78 and Smalltalk-80 were designed around object tables
that were indexed directly rather than hashed. This made enumeration trivially simple, and it also
opened the possibility of mutation. The support for mutation that we put into Smalltalk-80 was
simply to reverse the object table entries with the message become:. Thus one could add a new
variable, say borderColor, to an existing ProjectWindow class. Once the new class was created, the
old instances could be enumerated, copied into new instances with nil or some default value for
borderColor, and then become: the new instance. The primitive method become: exchanged the
object table entries for the old and new instances. By this means, every projectWindow instance in
the system would become an instance of the new class with whatever initialization might have
been specified. This facility added further to the malleability of Smalltalk itself, and to its ability to
support exploratory development.
We would sometimes show off this capability by halting the system and then, in the on-screen
debugger, add an area instance variable to class Rectangle. We would then open an inspector on a
pane of the debugger to see that in fact all its rectangles now included that extra property, as did
all the others in the system as we continued with the demonstration.
7.9
Robustness
We were always happy with the robustness of the earlier Smalltalks, but Smalltalk-80 definitely felt
more solid than the earlier OOZE-based systems simply because its in-memory architecture was
free of virtual memory delays. Only a few problems were ever likely to occur in Smalltalk-80:
• message not understood: This was always caught, and diagnosable by a debug window
• failure of a primitive method: Usually caught, and diagnosable by a debug window
• filling memory due to failure of reclamation by reference counts: Smalltalk is able
to enumerate all instances of any class, and this enabled various tools that would help to
diagnose such memory “leaks”
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:63
• infinite loop filling memory: This would typically fill memory very quickly, so the inter-
preter was equipped with safeguard heuristics that would almost always announce “I think
you may be in an infinite loop” in a debug window.
The “feel” of these message systems was simply more forgiving than many other systems of the era.
You were never confronted by meaningless bits when an error occurred—everything in memory is
an object, and every object knows how to present itself in a meaningful way.
I will always remember a debug emergency call I received during one of our student classes. A
girl was experimenting with numbers in Smalltalk-80, and suddenly her system froze when she
tried to reframe a window. Although the UI was unresponsive, the “emergency evaluator” window
was still operating so I was able to take a look at what had happened. Her window was trying to
display itself, but was encountering an error because BitBlt, responsible for painting the border,
had a width that was...wait a minute...a Fraction? We did not even have fractions in the student
system, but she said, “Oh yes, I added a Fraction class.”
Interestingly, BitBlt was written to be resilient, in that if it received a non-integer argument,
it would call itself again after sending the message asInteger to that argument. However, her
fractions did not have such a method, so the debugger had stopped at that point and was not even
able to show the problem because of another such infraction (er, sorry). I asked whether she had a
conversion to integer and she replied no, but that her fractions did have a makeFloat message. We
talked about the problem, and I got her to suggest defining
Fraction understands: 'asInteger' as:
'↑self makeFloat asInteger'
We were able to type this into the emergency evaluator, at which point the debugger miraculously
displayed itself, the window she had tried to reframe reappeared, and everything in the system
seemed to work again. Probably hundreds of methods in the system were now operating just fine
with rectangles whose coordinates were instances of a student’s newly defined Fraction class. This
illustrates the astounding ability of message-sending systems to absorb unanticipated constructions.
7.10
Impact of Smalltalk-80
Smalltalk-80 is not far linguistically from Smalltalk-76, and its virtual machine architecture is
nearly identical. This was good because it required all of our energy to carry out the character set
changes, the documentation, and the preparation of a reference interpreter to guide developers
in their own implementations at other companies. To seed the dissemination process, Xerox also
granted royalty-free licenses to a kernel memory image full of development tools to four interested
companies: Tektronix, DEC, Apple, and HP.
In celebration of the public release of Smalltalk-80, the August 1981 issue of Byte Magazine
was devoted to Smalltalk, and featured on the cover a valiant Smalltalk crew finally leaving
its ivory tower in a hot air balloon, shown in Figure 33. That issue, available online as https:
//archive.org/details/byte-magazine-1981-08, remedied the former aloofness by publishing twelve
articles about Smalltalk-80 by those of us then working on Smalltalk at Xerox.
The release of Smalltalk-80 with accompanying books and documentation, and the articles
in Byte Magazine, arguably started the Object-Oriented Programming revolution of 1980–1990.
Directly or indirectly, they introduced the world to OOP. Outside of our group at Parc it inspired
numerous individuals and organizations to build Smalltalk implementations or design other OOP
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:64
Daniel Ingalls
languages. Some of these Smalltalks were directly derived from licensed versions of Smalltalk-80
while others were created from scratch based upon the released documentation.
Dozens of organizations and hundreds of people spent the next 15 years establishing Smalltalk
as a serious computer language. It is not possible in such a short section to adequately cover all
that work. Dave Thomas’s article “Celebrating 25 Years of Smalltalk” [Thomas 1995] is an excellent
review of that history up to 1995.
7.11
About the Balloon
As soon as we had the agreement that Byte would cover Smalltalk in their August 1981 issue
(another great achievement by Adele), I knew what I wanted on the cover.
Fig. 33. The cover of the August 1981 issue of Byte magazine.
(Artwork by Robert Tinney.)
My favorite adventure story from
childhood was The Mysterious Island
by Jules Verne. In this story, Cyrus
Harding, a Union engineer held pris-
oner during the American Civil War,
escapes from behind the enemy lines
by commandeering an observation
balloon, along with four fellow pris-
oners and a dog. Their plan goes
awry when they are blown out to sea
in a storm and nearly perish, land-
ing finally on a deserted island some-
where in the Atlantic ocean. Through
ingenuity and a bit of luck, Harding
manages to recreate most of the ac-
complishments and comforts of civ-
ilization (with help from his friends,
an amiable orangutan, and an unseen
benefactor). Harding thus became my
childhood standard for resourceful-
ness, and the conviction that any-
thing can be accomplished if you are
clever and persistent.
The island connection made me
think of a hot air balloon as the ideal
vehicle for Smalltalk’s release. When
the opportunity came to design the
cover for the Byte issue on Smalltalk,
I made the suggestion of a balloon
lifting off from the island shown on
the Pascal cover, and everyone liked it. Robert Tinney executed the colorful graphic that we know
so well, and the rest is history.
There is a coincidence in this particular literary allusion. It is revealed at the end of The Mysterious
Island that the “unseen benefactor” is actually Captain Nemo, a childhood hero of Alan Kay.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:65
7.12
After Xerox
Larry Tesler left Xerox for Apple in 1980, not long after the Jobs demo. In 1979, Alan took a sabbatical,
and in 1981 became Chief Scientist at Atari. In 1984, I left Xerox and joined Apple, hoping to leverage
Apple’s existing nonrestrictive license to put Smalltalk on the Macintosh, and hence out into the
world. I worked for several years on this, and released several versions of Smalltalk-80 that were
available for free through the Apple Programmers and Developers Association (APDA). The next
year (1988), Adele left, with Xerox’s blessing, to form ParcPlace Systems, with the goal of making a
commercial Smalltalk business.
The APDA Smalltalk-80 began as something of a toy, since we were running on relatively slow
Macintosh and Lisa computers. However, an Apple Fellow, Rich Page, had a project to build a “Big
Mac” which was a Motorola 68020 processor with a 1024×768-bit display. He liked what we were
doing with Smalltalk, and he delivered a couple of early prototypes to us in 1985. I will never forget
the impact of that machine on our group. As I’ve said before, Smalltalk in the early days was ahead
of the computers that ran it. With the bigger screen and just that much extra processing power,
Smalltalk-80 become like clay to a sculptor. It seemed that anything was possible, and the only
thing slowing you down was the time it took to type in your ideas. Scott Wallace had joined my
project, and was just learning Smalltalk when our first “Big Mac” arrived. Scott took it home, and I
don’t think he slept at all that week. Scott was a perfect match for Smalltalk. He would work for a
while on some problem, and then when he was done, he would build all the tools he had wanted
during that sprint. Smalltalk returned the favor to Scott by making it just as easy to change the
system as to work on any other problem. In those first few weeks, Scott kept making our Smalltalk
smoother and easier to use, while we were also improving its speed.
Xerox had made two public releases of Smalltalk-80, “Version 1” and “Version 2.” Version 1 had a
limited distribution—to Apple, DEC, HP and Tektronix—but allowed these companies unrestricted
redistribution of any system they built. It was intended that way, to encourage the spread of
Smalltalk. Version 2 had restrictions on its licensing, and fortunately Apple never signed on with
Version 2. There was not a lot of difference that I can recall between the two versions, except that
Version 2 had a spelling corrector that I had worked on earlier at Xerox, as well as a type inference
system [Borning and Ingalls 1982c] and a multiple inheritance system [Borning and Ingalls 1982a,b]
that Alan Borning and I had written. When I joined Apple and took over the Smalltalk work, Mark
Lentczner worked with me for a while, and I had him build a spelling corrector. Meanwhile, I
worked on redesigning the UI so that it could be more-easily used with Apple’s one-button mouse,
and with a tablet which I hoped would come soon (this was 1985).
I had a lot of fun developing the APDA Smalltalk and sharing it with the Apple developer
community. As soon as it was stable, I used it to build a visual programming environment called
Fabrik [Ingalls et al. 1988; Ludolph et al. 1988]. Fabrik mingled the metaphors of GUI-builder and
dataflow, and a pen interface with pie menus for commands and wiring operations. It was possible
to build a working file browser in five minutes, and I thought it would be a great tool for hand-held
tablets. We published that work in 1987, and then I was drafted to take over a family business in
the mountains of Virginia where there was no interest in computers, let alone in object-oriented
programming.24
24I will always remember being at an Apple conference, walking between buildings, when John Sculley called over to give
me a ride in his limo. He said: “I hear you’re leaving us to go run The Homestead” (John had just attended a meeting of the
Business Council there) and I said, “Yes, sir.” He said, “Oh, don’t do that—we’ll find someone else to run The Homestead for
you. You should stay here.” With hindsight it probably would have been better all around if I had.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:66
Daniel Ingalls
8
SQUEAK
It was 1995, when I returned from my hiatus in Virginia. I spent the next year at Interval Research
where I helped Glenn Edens’s group to build a Smalltalk system by porting the APDA Smalltalk
to their hardware. At the time I was also talking with Alan Kay and his group at Apple who
were frustrated by the tools at their disposal and feeling the need for an expressive programming
environment where they could control everything—like Smalltalk, only more so.
I rejoined Alan’s group at the end of 1995 and thought that we could do another port of the
APDA Smalltalk as a start, since it had no restrictions on IP or distribution rights. However the
APDA VM was unusable Motorola 68000 assembly code, and the idea of writing and debugging
another virtual machine in C was daunting. We were a team of four and we wanted something
quickly. During my absence in Virginia, it seemed like nothing had changed much in computing
except that everything ran much faster, had more memory and was getting cheaper. I remember
driving to Apple in the rain one day, stopped at a light on Page Mill Road, and thinking, “OMG, we
could run the reference interpreter and then translate it to C.” I had actually worked a little on the
reference interpreter in 1983, although Dave Robson had done most of the work. It was published in
the “Blue Book” and freely available. With the free APDA image, and the free reference interpreter,
all we had to do was to start typing and debug it into existence.
8.1
Poof
We didn’t even have to do that. It turned out that the reference interpreter had already been typed
in by students in a class taught by Mario Wolczko, so in a matter of days we had it running and
loaded up with the APDA Smalltalk image. This ran slowly, entirely simulated on a commercial
Smalltalk (VisualWorks), but it was actually fast enough to get work done. The reference interpreter
was written in a style where the types of all variables are known; a subset of Smalltalk that is easy
for any programmer to translate to C or assembly code because it does not use the polymorphic
generality of message sends. We now call this subset “Slang.” Knowing this, I knew that we could
write a translator from Smalltalk to generate a version of the reference interpreter in C. That version
would certainly be usable and would be easy to work on, optimize, and extend in many ways. This
was the beginning of Squeak.
Fig. 34.
The original Squeak crew. Left-to-right: Alan Kay,
Pat Brecker, Dan Ingalls, Scott Wallace, Ted Kaehler, John
Maloney, Kim Rose.
John Maloney set to work on a trans-
lator from Slang to compilable C code.
Since Smalltalk already had a parse tree
system (see Appendix D) capable of pretty-
printing all the code in the system, it did
not take long to ugly-print it to produce
executable C code.
Scott Wallace simplified and reworked
the file system. In a system where the
source code is online all the time, it at first seemed as though we might have to give up on
our pleasant live development style for a while until the file system was working. However, with
Squeak running live we were able to rewrite the source code access to pull the entire source file
into memory, and thus continue with full read/write access to the system sources while the file
system was being worked on. This took only a day to complete, and it remains a handy trick when
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:67
porting as with the Mitsubishi M32R/D experiment (see Appendix E) or otherwise running without
full operating system support.
Ted Kaehler and I tackled the memory system. We had already noted that the move to 32-bit
systems was taking the “small” out of Smalltalk, so we committed to doing a 32-bit system. For
faster speed and more efficient use of space, we opted to do away with the object table approach
and use direct pointers. In spite of the use of 32-bit pointers, we worked hard to keep the system
as compact as possible. A simple approach would be to allocate at least 3 words of object header
(class, length, and storage management bits (including object hash)), but we arranged that up to 32
classes could be declared to be “compact” and thus over 80 percent of the objects required only a
single word of overhead on each instance.
For garbage collection, we started with the two-generation garbage collection (GC) scheme of
the APDA Smalltalk, inspired by Dave Ungar’s SOAR [Samples et al. 1986] memory system. By
noting stores into “old” objects, it became easy to trace all new objects, so incremental GC was very
quick (under 25 ms even for machines of the 1980s). A pleasant surprise was that we were able to
perform compaction as part of the incremental sweep, thus eliminating all the overhead and logic
that had been required to maintain free lists for the reclaimed objects in our earlier design.
The one remaining challenge for the memory system was how to support the become: operation
required for mutating instances of a class being reshaped. With direct pointers, the simple approach
would require a scan of the entire object memory for each object pointer being changed. To begin
with, we removed all uses of become: that were not really necessary in the base system, such as
growing collections. This left only the need to mutate instances when a class has been reshaped.
While several subtle approaches have been used on other Smalltalks, we opted for a simple variant,
which was to scan the whole of memory, but to mutate an entire array of pointers in that one
scan. This handled the dominant use of become:, and it was easily adapted to any other uses by
aggregating the candidates into an array.
None of the four of us was aware of the details of the various high-performance VMs in existence
at the time. Our goal was to pull off something clever in the very simplest way possible—so that
we could actually do it, so that it would be easy for others to use and to port, and so that it would
be easy for us to extend to quality graphics and sound and other special behavior that we might
encounter in building interesting educational artifacts.
In only seven weeks, the entire Smalltalk was working, albeit slowly, and in the tenth week
John’s translator finally produced a virtual machine in C that ran. It ran 20 times as fast as our
simulated lash-up, and Squeak became entirely self-supporting. More details can be found in the
OOPSLA paper describing the Squeak Smalltalk design and experience [Ingalls et al. 1997].
The performance of Squeak was not stellar, but it was no toy either. We knew that it could be
improved (as it has been), and its 32-bit design has stood the test of time in a number of serious
applications. Even in the first release of Squeak, real-time animation, graphics and music ran without
hiccups on machines of modest power. Most important for us were its simplicity, malleability and
small footprint.
The malleability of Squeak was what really gratified us. The strategy of simulating a Smalltalk
VM and then translating it to a low-level language left us with one of the most productive research
environments we know of. We never would have tackled some of the technical challenges in Squeak
if we had not been able to write and debug them all in Smalltalk, and then “push a button” to release
them into the production interpreter. Among these otherwise-daunting challenges were:
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:68
Daniel Ingalls
• an enhanced BitBlt operation that included scaling, rotation and anti-aliasing,
• the ability to save the entire state and restore it on machines of different word size and
endianness,
• large integer numerical support,
• real time music synthesis, and Fourier analysis of sound,
• the ability to instantly mutate all objects of a class in place,
• the ability to extract and save projects as “image segments” (see Section 8.8),
• a footprint for an entire IDE that is under 1 megabyte, and
• support for 1-, 2-, 4-, 8-, 16-, and 32-bit color depths.
Every one of these challenges answered one need or another from real users, and supported our
goal of producing an exploratory software system for children of all ages.
8.2
The Beginnings of the Morphic User Interface
John Maloney joined Alan’s group just before my rejoining in December of 1995. John had just
come from Sun Microsystems where he had worked with Randy Smith and Dave Ungar on the
Morphic interface for Self. Soon after John was done with the Slang translator and Squeak was
starting to run well, he put together a demo of Morphic for Squeak that enchanted us with its
simplicity. Morphic is about the simplest way you can compose objects and organize their behavior
on a computer screen:
• Morph is a superclass of graphical objects; it has methods that let those objects respond to
events and display themselves.
• All morphs have bounds (rectangles on the screen), and can have submorphs.
• The world (the screen or page) is itself a morph. This gives you the basic model for a scene
graph displayed on the screen.
• A hand object, shown as the cursor (and also part of the world), can pick up other objects
and drop them elsewhere, thus effecting not only motion but also changes in the structure of
the scene graph. The hand is also the source of user event messages such as mouseDown: and
mouseMove:.
• User events such as mouseDown: are passed as messages from the screen, down through the
scene graph, to the frontmost morph that contains the location of the event.
• Morphs typically define methods that respond to user input events like mouseDown:, or to the
passage of time through a tick message from the world.
• When a morph’s position or appearance changes, a changed message causes the Morphic
display system to update the screen efficiently, and without flashing.
• Both normal screen changes and animations are handled by a simple iterative kernel:
forever do:
detect and dispatch user events, such as mouseDown:, mouseMove:
run step methods defined for any morphs,
compute the affected screen area, and update it using double buffering.
John fleshed out the implementation in a very small number of classes, and we began to build a
whole new graphical environment for Squeak. I worked with John to get this new world working
with Squeak’s evolving BitBlt primitive, especially BitBlt’s ability to scale and rotate images. I also
worked on a number of morphs such as polygons, curves, and the full “run-around” text package.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:69
The combination of Morphic’s stepping and screen update mechanism provided “liveness”: the
ability for multiple morphs to be active simultaneously, as opposed to the single active window
supported by MVC at the time. The liveness of Morphic was made possible by the increase in
processing and graphics speeds since the Alto.
8.3
MVC and Morphic
The Smalltalk codebase that first came alive as Squeak was a direct descendant of the Version 1
Smalltalk-80 release from Xerox and ParcPlace, as modified and distributed through the Apple
Programmers and Developers Association. Its user interface comprised the normal Smalltalk-80
MVC components of windows, menus, browser, editor and debugger.
A significant part of the early Squeak community were using—and liked using—the MVC
framework. This was because of its relevance to their “day jobs,” where they used commercial
Smalltalks that were running normal Smalltalk-80 systems with an MVC architecture. The main
interest in Squeak was its free and open-source license, its great self-supporting tooling, and its
radical portability. The Squeak community was not large, and we welcomed all Smalltalk-80 users
to discussions and contributions of code.
To keep open a bridge between Squeak and other Smalltalks, for a number of years I maintained
a compatibility package, so that most MVC programming tools would work in Squeak. This effort
at synergy not only increased the energy in our project, but it also infused new energy into the
Smalltalk community at large, at a time when commercial Smalltalk endeavors were falling out of
favor.
8.4
The Comfort of Smalltalk and the Power of Primitives
The ease of writing and debugging primitive code in Squeak meant that we could return to our
former loves for sound and graphics. Dusting off our FM and waveform synthesis techniques from
the days of Alto microcode in Smalltalk-72, we were able to rewrite these in understandable and
debuggable Smalltalk, and run even more voices on the increasingly powerful hardware of the day.
We collaborated on timbre editors, MIDI players, and piano roll displays, with all of these being
able to run at the same time that music was playing. For sound input we now had sampling, along
with filtering and clipping; some of these sampled sounds survive to this day. For example, there is
a sound in the Etoys programming environment that is used to signify the dropping of a program
element into a script. This is actually a slowed-down replay of the first sound ever sampled in
Squeak: John Maloney clinking his coffee cup with a spoon. I had implemented a Fourier transform
function, which enabled John to write a nice real-time spectral “sonogram” facility.
8.5
BitBlt and WarpBlt
BitBlt too flourished with the ability to write and debug complex primitive code. I began by
supporting all the different color modes on the modern Mac displays. This freed a lot of pent-
up creative energy in the group, and made it possible to support graphical interface facilities
appropriate to the evolving expectations of children and other general computer users. Ted and
others worked on new paint tools to explore this dimension of our system.
For many years, Alan had a tradition of convening a “Learning Lab” each summer at a music
camp in New Hampshire. These were a delightful combination of fresh experiences and demos to
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:70
Daniel Ingalls
Fig. 35. The Squeak Mandala: WarpBlt copying
its output into its input with scaling, rotation, and
a change to its color map. Moving the mouse con-
trols scale and rotation. To see the mandala live,
click on the image or visit https://smalltalkzoo.
thechm.org/HOPL-Squeak.html?mandala.
Fig. 36. Demonstration of text within a curved container,
following a curved path, and flowing around a curved
obstacle. To see the demonstration live, click on the image
or visit https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/HOPL-Squeak.
html?liquidText.
which a number of computer and education people outside our group were invited (and always a
contingent from Mitch Resnick’s group at MIT). It was two days to relax, discuss blue-sky ideas,
and, when the muse struck, to hack. John’s real-time voicegram was produced at one of these
getaways, as was the ability of BitBlt to perform scaling and rotation.
It had occurred to me that one could treat the input side of BitBlt as a relatively independent
travelling point, delivering samples to the output rectangle side. I wrote a crude version of this
in one evening at the music camp, and that experiment became the WarpBlt operation of Squeak.
While it was not a breakthrough in the field of computer graphics, it was a remarkably simple piece
of code which provided years of interesting graphical capabilities in Squeak and Etoys. With the
right parameters, it could rotate images by any angle, and expand them or shrink them, as shown
in Figure 35. This function was provided as a property of any Morph, so that any of the objects
built in Morphic could be scaled and rotated and, of course, animated in motion.
8.6
Run-around Text
For some reason, the implementation of text layout and display in Squeak fell to me. I remember
driving somewhere with Alan when he remarked “Now that we’ve got paragraphs working, we
need to be able to chain them together so we can get on to making real documents.” I told him that
shouldn’t be too hard. Then, in typical Alan fashion, he added that it would be nice if I could do
“something like what Word does going around other shapes.” At first this sounded really difficult,
and I just let it sit. Then I realized that, going back to the original request, text layout simply
amounts to filling a chain of rectangles. I began by generalizing the existing text containers from
rectangles to arbitrary polygons, and then added the possibility of having additional occluding
shapes. Having done that, I needed only to find open rectangles in the resulting shape. I did this all
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:71
Fig. 37. MathMorphs on the left, and speech synthesis together with animated faces in Squeak on the right;
two contributions from the University of Buenos Aires in Argentina. To try the speech synthesis live, click on
the faces or visit https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/HOPL-Squeak.html?noel
with BitBlt in much the same way as I had done years before in my OCR project (see Section 4.7.1);
first producing a shadow shape from the outline and the occluding figures, then scanning downward
with a one-pixel slice to find the left and right edges of any open space, and finally developing a set
of rectangles capable of holding text.
I was so excited when I got this to work that I went on to add what Alan liked to call an “Oh,
by the way...” capability. Since I already had polygons and curves working and, since WarpBlt
could rotate anything, including text, it was not that hard to make a chain of rectangles along a
curve and chain the text along those rectangles. Figure 36 demonstrates my final answer to Alan’s
request for chained text. The bounds of the round area, the linear curve, and the occluding ellipse
can each be dragged, causing the justified text to flow back and forth through the garishly colored
“pipe” in response.
8.7
Serendipity
Almost as soon as we had Morphic running in Squeak, we started getting messages from Leandro
Caniglia and others at the University of Buenos Aires in Argentina. They had built a curriculum
around numbers and math and later physics, with a very free user interface inspired by Morphic.
They carried on relatively independently, but frequently contributed surprising and delightful
tidbits to Squeak. One of these I will never forget: a tour de force by Luciano Notarfrancesco,
consisting of a complete package with real-time speech synthesizer and animated faces, which is
shown in Figure 37. It can be fully appreciated only by running this example, which he released
in December of 1999. It demonstrates the capability for which we strove, which was that any
enterprising user who knew Smalltalk could start from scratch and synthesize sound and images,
all in the service of a personal artistic vision.
During 2001, the Squeak community was treated to an extraordinary series of publications
by Tansel Ersavas. Tansel built many active essays that taught Squeak and demonstrated its
creative possibilities. He communicated outwardly to the community and brought interesting
examples inward from other members. Fortunately many of these issues have been preserved at
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:72
Daniel Ingalls
Fig. 38. The Method Finder shows the obvious response to 3. 4. 7, as well as two other surprising but
nonetheless enlightening results. In each case the Method Finder also lets you browse all the classes that
implement the method in question.
https://github.com/tansel/SqueakNews, and they can be viewed directly in a version of Vanessa
Freudenberg’s SqueakJS emulator at https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/SqueakNews/index.html.
Another piece of magic in Squeak came from Ted Kaehler. Ted had always had empathy with
first-time users. Years before, he had put an “explain” feature into Smalltalk-80 that would try to
explain anything you typed, whether it was a Class, or some system object, or an expression in a
method. In Squeak he returned to this project and produced the “MethodFinder,” shown in Figure 38.
This remarkable widget allowed you to type in one or two values and a result, separated by periods;
it would find methods in the system that produced that result from those arguments. This was a very
useful tool for anyone new to the language. For example, a new user might type 'ab'. 'cd'. 'abcd'
to find out how to concatenate strings. The response would come back: 'ab' , 'cd' --> 'abcd',
informing the user that comma was the concatenation message.
8.8
Image Segments
Alan’s never-ending thirst for creating and demonstrating examples of dynamic media shaped and
stretched the Squeak system itself. The system that we demonstrated at OOPSLA in 1999 consisted
of 72 linked project worlds, all live in the same image. Compact objects notwithstanding, that image
file was 120MB, comprising 742,119 objects. The size of this image made it unwieldy to deal with
as a file. Moreover, if a full garbage collection were invoked, the user could experience a noticeable
delay. We figured a way similar to the VmemWriter to export project worlds and later re-import
them, but the process was slow for large projects.
Since projects were already modeled as worlds unto themselves, they had, or could be made to
have, very few objects that were accessible by pointers from outside the project’s world. These
objects were the “roots” of the world. I wanted to somehow use the garbage collector (GC) to mark
all the objects accessible exclusively from the roots of a world. Running the GC would indeed mark
all the accessible objects, but it would naturally continue and mark all the other objects pointed to
from within the world—which would be almost everything. While thinking about this, I realized
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:73
that if I first marked the roots of an inner world, and then ran the GC, it would mark all the objects
in the image except for those in this inner world, thus providing a fast way of identifying a piece of
the image that could be exported. The pre-marking worked like a parasol, casting a shadow over
the inner world. By borrowing from other GC logic, it was then possible to copy the objects of that
world into an image-like structure called an ImageSegment that could be exported and imported
very quickly (often in less than a second). Not all projects were amenable to this form of export,
but enough of them were that we were able to reduce such huge images to more manageable sizes.
Worlds so exported were replaced by a root stub that would cause a fault, bring in the image
segment, and continue running, like a segment-swapping virtual memory. To make this work I
defined an ImageSegmentRootStub that could replace (using in-place mutation) any class or instance
or whole world that had been swapped out. While designed as a virtual memory facility, the same
mechanism made it possible to eject nearly all of the system, and then instrument the minimal
working set needed to run any given application.
8.9
Licensing
With help from Jim Spohrer at Apple, Alan and Ted authored the Squeak Open Source License.
The license allows commercial systems to be created in Squeak and sold royalty-free. Approved
by Apple in 1996, this was one of the early open-source licenses, and one of the first granted
by a profit-making company that did not have open source as its business model. Ted also built
and maintained our website, Squeak.org, until it was later taken over by others in the Squeak
community.
8.10
3D
No one did more with Squeak’s ability to expand itself through primitives in Slang than Andreas
Raab. Andreas earned early entrance to Squeak Central25 by carrying out the port to Windows in
little more than a week. He soon started to extend Squeak’s graphics to provide anti-aliasing and
gradient fills; this greatly improved our pixelated graphics front end. Andreas’s work grew into the
Balloon graphics system, around which he built a Flash graphics renderer capable of displaying
sections from Lion King, and other beautiful graphic material. It seemed that there was nothing
Andreas could not do! Balloon grew into Balloon-3D, and became the vehicle for Jeff Pierce’s Squeak
implementation of the Alice 3D composition system [Pierce 2002].
A meeting with Alan Kay, Andreas, David Smith, and David Reed spawned the idea of a live
collaborative 3D system in Squeak. We would never have attempted such an ambitious project in
previous Smalltalks, but the Slang primitive interface enabled Andreas to provide high-performance
graphics with a clean interface, so that the other challenges of collaborative 3-D could be met
with relative ease in Squeak’s interactive world. The resulting Croquet [Smith et al. 2003] project
went on to serve as an industrial multi-person communication and collaboration environment.
Some highlights of Croquet include an escalator that would carry the user from one 3D room to
another, a Verrazano bridge oscillation that morphed into a waving Canadian flag, and mirrors that
would faithfully create the “infinite corridor” effect when properly aligned. A video is available at
https://vimeo.com/257578323
25Squeak was designed, implemented and released by four of us in Alan’s group at Apple and then Disney. We managed the
releases and related communications and soon came to be referred to as “Squeak Central.” Others joined us along the way,
but the inner circle always remained small and mostly acted as one.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:74
Daniel Ingalls
8.11
The Squeak Update and Release Process
For the first few versions of Squeak, I oversaw the release process, after which this role passed to
Scott Wallace. Various contributors would make their improvements known, and at some point
I would merge all of those that I thought deserved inclusion, test the resulting system as best I
could, and then post it as a new version with a descriptive message. The curious reader might
enjoy following the series of these releases, all of which run in Vanessa Freudenberg’s SqueakJS
emulator https://squeak.js.org/run/, and many of which can be launched by their link on the
SqueakJS launcher page https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/HOPL-Squeak.html?launch. Ted and Scott
wrote the Squeak “ChangeSorter,” which made it easy to manage a number of different ChangeSets.26
The ability to move changes around in different files and detect conflicts between ChangeSets made
it much easier to run the release process.
Even better, Ted and Scott developed an automatic update mechanism for changes that were
candidates for the next release. With this feature, if someone had published a change since the last
time you started Squeak, you would receive a notification that “Updates” (that is, new changes)
were available. You could choose to ignore them (the safe choice), or you could choose to accept the
updates. Most of us in the inner circle would opt to take the latest updates, and so were performing
a constant beta test of the next release. If something went wrong, the problem was fixed, or the
change was withdrawn if the problem was serious.
Each new update had a sequence number, and even when a new official release had not been
made, it was easy to request changes through, e.g., update #1538. Making an official release was
greatly simplified by this facility, since the person in charge already knew that, say, all updates
through 1538 had been well tested, and little was required other than to update to that level, write
a release message, and save an image as the new current release. Ted wrote the original update
mechanism, using simple FTP. It did not require any new server code and ran very reliably as a
result. As Squeak evolved and the community grew larger, the management of releases passed out
of Squeak Central to the community at large. It is now generally managed using the Monticello
change management system.
8.12
The Impact of Squeak
Squeak arrived at a time when Smalltalk needed a boost. Arguably, one of the biggest impacts of
Squeak is that it kept Smalltalk alive and nurtured a world-wide community just when commercial
Smalltalk endeavors were falling out of favor and failing. It was Squeak’s simplicity and aliveness
that re-energized the existing Smalltalk community, and led to significant adoption in education, as
well as in a number of “stealth” projects.
Most primitives in Squeak Smalltalk could be written in Slang, and thus ported to other platforms
without needing to be rewritten. This made Squeak extraordinarily portable. We had done all our
Squeak development on Apple Macintosh computers, but within a week after we released the first
Squeak, Ian Piumarta had it running on Unix, and in two more weeks, Andreas Raab had it running
on Windows.
The ease of writing primitives in Squeak also enabled us to lavish attention on compatibility of
images across the different ports. Thus, from an early date, a Squeak image could be halted in the
26A ChangeSet is a dictionary that records all the changes you make while working in a given world. It can be saved on a
file, passed to others, and combined or taken apart with the aid of a ChangeSorter.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:75
middle of a debugger, saved on one computer, sent across the country, and resumed on a different
computer with the opposite endianness. Everything would resume with bitwise fidelity.
Almost as soon as Squeak was released, the nascent Squeak community lit up with applications
to the Internet. Georg Gollmann added a web server, and many Squeak images were downloaded
just to get that free and elegant web server. The fact that most of the primitive code was written in
Smalltalk, and thus easily ported to, maintainable on, any machine, made this a viral introduction.
Soon after, Mark Guzdial at Georgia Tech and a student of his, Lex Spoon, put out a Wiki server
(“Swiki”) based on Ward Cunningham’s work. Later Ted Kaehler added disk code to the Georgia
Tech Swiki, and this project became Comanche (now KomHttpServer). Yet another outgrowth of
this early work was the AIDA Smalltalk web framework.
The Seaside web development framework is built around the ease of making continuations with
Smalltalk’s Context objects, and the ease of implementing web servers in Smalltalk. Squeak was
also the progenitor of CUIS Smalltalk by Juan Vuletich and others and Pharo Smalltalk which began
as a wholesale copy of the Squeak system. The Pharo project offers similar functionality with more
emphasis on stability and commercial support.
Squeak, CUIS, and Pharo have been joint beneficiaries of the extraordinary Cog work of Eliot
Miranda’s team, who have pioneered techniques for just-in-time (JIT) compilation of Smalltalk [Mi-
randa 2011; Miranda et al. 2018].
Finally, Squeak was the inspiration and the model for Lively, the live-coding JavaScript environ-
ment in which the simulations referenced here were constructed [Ingalls et al. 2016].
The following link allows you to run several versions of Squeak: https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.
org/HOPL-Squeak.html?launch Choose the Squeak 2.8 image (from June 2000). It offers a number
of fun demos that can be opened by clicking the icon in the upper right corner:
• Play With Me 3: a graphics demo world Shows clipping by the shape of a font, and anti-aliasing.
The ellipse is a magnifier that you can move around the screen
• Play With Me 4: Drop the yellow ellipse in the text to see runaround text. Use right-click to
get handles on the ellipse, and drag the brown one
• Play With Me 5: Even more text fun.
• In any text window, paste this text, select it, and choose doit (or cmd-D)
Display restoreAfter: [WarpBlt test3]
The first couple of years of Squeak saw a joyful explosion of clever ideas and completion of
many yearnings we had had in earlier systems, especially in the areas of sound and graphics. When
Squeak came to life, it was a huge rush of energy for all of us. Suddenly we could work on all our
favorite problems in a wonderful language and environment, and yet everything ran at decent
speed. “Everything” included multicolor bitmap graphics with anti-aliasing, zooming linked worlds
for multiple projects, performance and portability of the VM, waveform and FM music synthesis
with many voices in real time, painting tools, programming tools, and more. Squeak epitomized
our goal of a simple yet general programming system; one that was built to fulfill unanticipated
computing ideas with ease.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:76
Daniel Ingalls
8.13
Etoys
When we set out to do Squeak, there were two main goals. The one I’ve written about so far
was to do a small, fast, “cool” (i.e., with sound and graphics) Smalltalk—essentially to revisit all
the things we thought we could do in Smalltalk before but hadn’t. This was the goal for which I
carried the flag. The other goal, hinted at earlier, was to build a software vehicle in which we could
completely control our destiny. This was what Alan wanted, because he knew that if we were going
to reach children—if we were going to get them excited, and keep them excited, about ideas and
how to bring ideas to life in a computer—then it wasn’t going to be with paned windows and text.
Through all the excitement, Alan reminded us that Squeak was a vehicle, not the goal itself. Alan
always contended, and we gradually came to see, that if something is good for first-time users, it is
generally good for experts as well. Etoys was our reach out to the world of children and first-time
users and, true to Alan’s belief, the Squeak system just got better and better as we went forward.
Etoys can be thought of as a subsystem of Squeak, because that is how it was implemented. It
can also be thought of as new, graphical, Smalltalk language. A number of forces and ideas fed into
the Etoys system, and a number of improvements to Squeak emerged from it. The Etoys project
deserves a paper on its own, but I will summarize some of the innovations here.
8.13.1
Inception. We had a meeting at Ted’s house to brainstorm the real goal. None of us can
recall exactly how it went, but there was a napkin or scrap of paper that captured the notion of
a split screen with a concrete scene on the left and various analytical controls on the right—or
at least this is how I remember it. I have always considered this to be the real breakthrough that
launched us into the world of Etoys. When a student sees numbers for x- and y-positions change
immediately while dragging an object, there is little need for explanation. The association between
the object’s location and the coordinates goes straight to the brain as unshakeable experience. And
in case there is any question, scrolling the numbers in the analytical view confirms the association,
as the concrete object moves in response.
This juxtaposition of concrete and analytical views was the beginning of EToys. As we worked
on content and instruction, we developed a number of improvements to the user interface, and to
the language as well. To my mind, the most important conceptual shift actually came with Morphic:
the shift from “apps” like browsers, editors, and drawing tools, to independent (but interacting)
objects in a world like circles, squares, sketches and images.
8.13.2
Halos. Squeak had already moved away from a global menu bar to local menus (for opera-
tions such as moving and editing), but even these seemed too “app-ish,” that is, overly focused on
global functions as opposed to local content. Local menus served us well for our early programming
needs, but were too stilted for the kind of content we had in mind, both for children and ourselves.
We wanted any object in the world to somehow “glow” with its capabilities, and we came up with
the notion of a “halo” of handles. Some of these worked like the old menu commands (in fact,
usually one handle would bring up a conventional menu), but others worked as direct manipulation
handles for dragging, scaling, rotating and so on. Also important to the morphic model of objects
in a scene graph was that clicking and dragging an object meant picking it up (that is, removing it
from the scene graph), to be reinserted elsewhere in the scene graph when it was dropped. There
were, of course, times when one wanted to move a morph without removing it from its owner; the
halo of handles provided separate grab and drag handles to make this distinction.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:77
The halo of Figure 39 shows a Car morph with the following handles (clockwise from the
bottom-left):
• Rotate the object.
• Make a tile representing the object.
• Open a “viewer”—an inspector with executable messages on a flap, as shown on the right of
Figure 40.
• Collapse the object to the side of the screen.
• Delete the object—it can be retrieved later from the trash.
• Bring up a conventional menu with further commands.
• Pick up the object, removing it from its prior owner.
• Drag the object without removing it from its prior owner.
• Duplicate the object.
• Choose and open any of several inspectors on the object.
• Open a paint program on the object.
• Shrink or grow the object.
In addition, a little blue ring appeared within the halo; moving it had the effect of relocating the
programmatic position of the object with respect to its image. The green arrow emanating from the
ring could be moved to indicate the “heading” of the object (i.e., the direction in which the object
would move if sent a “forward by” message) with respect to its image.
Fig. 39.
Command-click on
any object in a Squeak world
brings up a “halo” of manipu-
lation handles.
8.13.3
Flaps. As we and our users gained experience with Etoys,
we found the need for various “panels” that would not compete for
valuable screen real estate. We have already alluded to the “control
panels” that displayed such metrics as position, scale and rotation of
an object, as well as push-button scripts, such as turn-by or rotate-by.
Rather than put these in windows, we put them on “flaps”—off-screen
areas that could slide on or off the screen as necessary. We soon
enhanced this facility with labelled “tabs,” so that a number of such
flaps could be off screen, but instantly accessible by clicking a tab at
the edge of the screen. This flap-tab facility was lovingly improved by
Scott Wallace so that the tabs could be moved along the edge of the
screen, and ultimately to any side of the screen, and settle themselves
so as not to interfere with other tabs. They also came to remember
how far out to extend when clicked. Finally, control panel tabs could
display as a miniature image of the object under inspection as well as
a textual label. Off-screen flaps came to serve a number of other uses, such as access to an editable
menu of useful executable statements, or a palette of morphic shapes ready to be dragged into the
world.
8.13.4
Etoy Affordances. The Etoys project, being the direct progenitor of Scratch, has had more
impact in education and end-user access to computing than any other application in Squeak. Etoys
pioneered the brilliant juxtaposition of concrete and analytical views of dynamic processes for
children. On the left we see the ball moving, on the right we see its numerical coordinates changing,
whether in simulation or being dragged by the user’s mouse. It also made a point of having the
user create objects from sketches, so as to be personally invested in their later dynamic behavior.
Finally, EToys introduced code as concrete manipulable tiles, so the same concreteness applies even
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:78
Daniel Ingalls
Fig. 40. On the left, an Etoys scene with a script that tells the car to turn around if it encounters any color
other than the background. On the right, a flap with the car’s viewer has been deployed, and the car’s “pen
down” has been set to “true”, causing it to make trails as it moves in the world. To run Etoys live, click on the
left or visit https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/HOPL-Squeak.html?etoys.
to the construction of programs. The use of tiles mostly eliminated the need to type on a keyboard,
and made syntax errors nearly impossible, both huge advantages for young learners.
8.13.5
Worlds. Etoys also introduced several changes to the user experience and the language itself.
For instance, the “project” mechanism that had been present since Smalltalk-76 (see Section 5.15)
evolved into a Morphic “World” that could be saved and loaded independently (using the image
segment facility of Squeak described in Section 8.8). For linear presentations, a BookMorph offered
a simple page-flipping viewer of collections that could each be a separate world. But to build a
personal universe, the choice was to add worlds to other worlds with small iconic links. Each world
had a parent link so that all one’s worlds could be navigated as a tree, and nice zoom-in/out effects
enhanced the feeling of an infinite linked universe of live simulated worlds. Alan’s amazing slide
shows drove the creation and fine-tuning of many such facilities.
8.13.6
Namespaces. The morphic projects inherited the convenience of independent changeSets
from earlier Smalltalks. But each WorldMorph also served as a namespace, so that various objects
in a world could refer to each other by their world-local names, and even by class or other selection
criteria.
8.13.7
Control Panels. With the availability of flaps came the ability to present much of an object’s
behavior in a visual and dynamically manipulable way. Control panels began as simple inspectors
with manipulable presentations of, eg, position, heading, color and such. Soon we added a number
of methods, not just as abstract methods, but with concrete arguments, ready to run, such as
car forward by 5 and car turn by 5. To these we added a little yellow do-it button, reminiscent
of Smalltalk-72’s bold exclamation mark. A sample control panel appears in Figure 40, as its tiny
iconic flap-tab on the left of the figure, and as the fully extended flap on the right. We made the
concrete arguments editable, and naturally we wanted a way to tie the methods together into
meaningful scripts.
8.13.8
Scriptors. We made it possible to spawn an editor from the control panel, and soon made it
so that one could simply drop a method into an empty space in the world to create a “scriptor” object
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:79
Fig. 41. On the left, we see a “scriptor” that defines a script on a “Car” object. It can be executed once, or
set to ticking at various rates. Further right, a “make sound” command has been dragged out of the control
panel, and is about to be dropped into the green “drop zone.” In the rightmost frame, the drop has taken
place; now, every time the car runs into something, it will make a “croak” sound.
with the script in it as shown in Figure 41. A scriptor duplicates the do-it button functionality, but
adds to it the ability to repeatedly run the method or methods enclosed, or trigger them on various
events. Most importantly, the scriptor allows other scripts to be dropped into it, thus building-up
a small sequential program. There is a place to name the script, thus putting it on equal footing
with the system-supplied scripts, and making it visible in the control panel. The easy progression
from dragging out one command, to having a full method, helps students to build their project
as a group of scripts. The live morphic environment enables many such scripts to be active and
interacting continuously. Figure 40 shows flaps, control panels, and scriptors in use in a tutorial
Etoys world at https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/HOPL-Squeak.html?etoys
8.13.9
Uniclasses. The Etoy/Morphic development style emphasized creating and scripting indi-
vidual objects rather than developing classes. While Squeak’s linguistic base was a class-based
Smalltalk-80, we needed a simple way to create and program singleton objects, as in the Self and
JavaScript languages. For this, Scott Wallace developed a scheme called “uniclasses” that made
it simple to add a script on any object by making it a solitary instance of a new class. We also
introduced an extension dictionary to enable the addition of arbitrary properties to any Morph
without concern for Squeak’s conventional model of fixed-sized instances.
8.14
Scratch
Etoys were the direct progenitors of Scratch. After leaving the Squeak project, John Maloney, who
had been active in developing Etoys, worked at MIT with Mitch Resnick on Scratch. The first
versions of Scratch actually ran in Squeak, and you can run one of these at https://smalltalkzoo.
thechm.org/HOPL-Squeak.html?scratch. To reveal the underlying Squeak, shift-click in the loop
of the “R” in the logo, and choose “turn fill screen off.” This will reveal a border where all the
Squeak menus, browsers, etc., can be accessed. Scratch benefited from key funding from the
NSF; teacher experience and feedback from the Computer Clubhouse network gave the Scratch
team valuable input over the course of almost three years of internal testing before the public
release of Scratch in 2007. At the time of this writing, Scratch had over 50 million users (see
https://scratch.mit.edu/statistics/).
8.15
My Favorite Etoy Project
My favorite Etoy project is one done by Alan Kay. Illustrated in Figure 42, it begins with a multi-
timbral real-time MIDI player mostly built by John Maloney. It is not just reading a MIDI score; it
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:80
Daniel Ingalls
Fig. 42. A multi-timbral MIDI player animated with Etoy scripts. Each player can be moved left and right
with the mouse to pan the corresponding voice in the MIDI-player, and near and far to control the volume. To
try this live, click on the image, or visit https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/HOPL-Squeak.html?bailey
is synthesizing every voice being played. As one moves the musicians left and right and near and
far, they control (through Etoy tile scripts) the volume and pan parameters of the MIDI player. The
sizes of the players automatically scale with vertical position, through another iconic tile script.
One can also edit the parameters of each instrument’s sound in a live panel—all while the piece is
being played.
9
CONCLUSION
Even today, many of these Smalltalk systems seem remarkable. The ability to model objects,
especially engaging objects with graphics and sound, in an environment in which they can be
freely connected in almost any manner, invites innovation. Because it is all immediately reactive, it
is exciting and fun.
I have sometimes said that we had a “free ride” in the Smalltalk project: the computers were
getting just fast enough, and small enough, and cheap enough; the graphical displays were getting
just good enough. All that is true. But the key was really people, not technology. Alan wanted
something great: a personal computer to foster human creativity and understanding. Adele wanted
to improve education, and to push technology out into the world. I wanted to make it easy to play
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:81
with words and numbers and graphics and sound, and with the tool itself. As we grew and evolved,
all the people who came to the project came with a passion to reify some aspect or other of Alan’s
compelling vision.
Ordinarily I would not talk about money in the context of Smalltalk, but none of this work
could have happened without sponsorship. Alan and Adele both radiated a passion that was strong
enough to co-opt even cost-conscious executives on a journey to a place they couldn’t really
understand.
Once you have the people, and the vision, and the money, then good things can happen. But there
is one more crucial factor if you want to leave the world a better place, and that is engagement.
People must have access to what you are building; they must use it, have trouble with it, complain
about it, and, ideally, inspire you make it better.
Our group evolved, as did our engagement, over the years. It began with the our contribution to
the “Office of the Future” vision at Xerox, while Alan and Adele were experimenting with teaching,
and also giving talks.
With Smalltalk-80, Adele went squarely for commercial distribution. This led to a different kind
of engagement, but it absolutely shaped the product and induced a new, and keen, focus: one that
had major impact in the world. That engagement infected the industry, and I felt that we did change
the world in several good ways.
When we reconvened around Squeak, we sought to engage a community of children who were
hungry to make their own media, and yet we needed to retain the open field of raw materials and
logical concepts to foster basic experimentation and learning. That was the genesis of Etoys and
later Scratch, and these are satisfying results.
And here we are, looking back on the journey, and evaluating the results. Nevertheless, this
article it is not an ode: the thing is not dead. Although the community is small, many people still
turn to Smalltalk, Pharo, or Squeak to build a little app, or try out some unanticipated idea with
graphics or sound. Some people choose to start in a workspace, some in an inspector, some in the
debugger. There’s plenty more to do. What can we learn from this still glowing ember, that will
lead us to a new tool of learning for children of all ages?
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I owe everything to the wonderful people with whom I worked on these projects. We had so
much fun, and I never could have done the things I did without the excitement and joy we created
together.
Special thanks to Alan Kay for giving me and all of us such great problems, for nudging me
when I got off course, and for sustaining the vision that computers were made to help us think and
learn and create.
Thanks to Andrew Black for his many great suggestions about the paper, and for bulldozing a
path through LATEX, BibTEX, and Git. I could never have done it without him. He was my friend in
need as he “shepherded” me through the challenges of writing a HOPL paper.
Thanks to Vanessa Freudenberg for her great work on SqueakJS, for her work with Ted Kaehler,
Yoshiki Ohshima, and me on the Smalltalk-78 simulation, and for her help with setting up the
smalltalkzoo website.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:82
Daniel Ingalls
Thanks to Richard Gabriel, Adele Goldberg, Ted Kaehler, Alan Kay, John Maloney, Dave Robson,
and Allen Wirfs-Brock for innumerable useful comments and suggestions on various earlier drafts.
Thanks to Chris Thorgrimsson and C. H. Huang for their warm encouragement of this writing.
The Learning Research Group at Xerox (Smalltalk-72 through Smalltalk-80):
Alan Borning, Karla Garcia, Adele Goldberg, Dan Ingalls, Chris Jeffers, Ted Kaehler, Alan Kay, Glenn
Krasner, Diana Merry, Steve Putz, Dave Robson, John Shoch, Steve Weyer, and Bert Sutherland,
director of our lab at Parc.
The Apple Smalltalk group (APDA Smalltalk-80):
Yu-Ying Chow, Ken Doyle, Barry Haynes, Dan Ingalls, Frank Ludolph, Mark Lentczner, Scott
Wallace.
The Squeak group at Viewpoints Research (Squeak and Etoys):
Vanessa Freudenberg, Dan Ingalls, Ted Kaehler, Alan Kay, Aran Lunzer, John Maloney, Yoshiki
Ohshima, Ian Piumarta, Andreas Raab, Kim Rose, Michael Rueger, David A. Smith, Scott Wallace,
Alex Warth.
Visitors to our group at Xerox over time:
Jim Althoff, Ron Baecker, Bill Bowman, Barbara Deutsch, Marian Golden, Laura Gould, Bob Flegal,
Susan Hammett, Bruce Horn, Tom Horsley, Lisa Jack, Kathy Mansfield, Eric Martin, Steve Purcell,
Steve Saunders, Dick Shoup, Bob Shur, David Canfield Smith, Bonnie Tenenbaum.
From other groups at Parc:
Daniel Bobrow, David Boggs, Bill Bowman, Larry Clark, Jim Cucinitti, L Peter Deutsch, Bill English,
Doug Fairbairn, Ira Goldstein, Ralph Kimball, Butler Lampson, Bob Metcalfe, Ed McCreight, Mike
Overton, Bob Sproull, Larry Stewart, Larry Tesler, Chuck Thacker, Truett Thatch, and Bob Taylor,
director of the Computer Sciences Lab at Parc.
Help with the simulations:
Josh Dersch for use of his Alto Emulator,
Larry Stewart and Al Kossow for rescuing Alto disks,
Robert Krahn and Marko Roeder for work on Lively Kernel for the simulations.
Support from major organizations:
The Xerox Corporation for supporting all the early work on Smalltalk,
Apple Computer, Inc. for supporting work on APDA Smalltalk and the birth of Squeak,
The Walt Disney Company for supporting work on Squeak and Etoys,
The Hewlett-Packard Company for supporting work on Squeak and Etoys,
Applied Minds, LLC. for office space and other support,
The Computer History Museum for hosting the smalltalkzoo website.
Thanks and love to my wife Kat for continually encouraging me to finish this paper.
A
ARCHAEOLOGY AND RESURRECTION
We are fortunate to have just enough scraps of history to piece together a fairly full collection
of running Smalltalk artifacts. When the Smalltalk group and other Alto users left Xerox Parc,
machines and disk packs were discarded. A Parc researcher became aware of this at the eleventh
hour, and took the initiative to spare a number of Alto disk packs from the dumpsters; another tech
who had worked with us over the years noticed when a number of additional disks showed up at a
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:83
Bay Area electronics salvage store. These were then copied onto then-standard media (CDs), and
this treasure trove made its way to BitSavers. Many of these disks were not Smalltalk disks but,
remarkably, it has turned out that we have representative software from every one of the early
Parc Smalltalks.
How could we be so lucky? It is rare enough that 121 disk packs were saved from the dumpster.
But, regarding Smalltalk’s history, how could we ever have hoped that these included the following:
(1) one and only one disk with a running Smalltalk-74 system,
(2) one and only one disk with the construction of Smalltalk-76 in Smalltalk-74,
(3) one and only one disk with a running Smalltalk-76 system that includes complete Smalltalk
sources, and
(4) one and only one disk that includes the two object files that comprise the last freshly written
copy of Smalltalk-78.
A.1
Smalltalk-72
Smalltalk-72 was widely used in the lab, especially in several longitudinal education projects, so
many disks have running versions of the system, preserved as SWAT memory images.
The Alto OS provided an “outload debugger” named SWAT. It functioned by outloading the
entire memory to disk and then enabling you to debug the program that had been in memory by
reading and writing the disk. When you were ready to proceed, SWAT would load it all back and
resume execution. Smalltalk quit and resume made use of this full-speed store and reload of the
Alto memory image.
The interpreter for Smalltalk-72 was written entirely in Nova assembly code, and I began to look
around for enough of the assembler files, or paper listings, to reassemble a working system. At the
time I was working on Lively-Web [Ingalls et al. 2016], a Squeak-inspired live coding system in
JavaScript. It occurred to me that, since the old Smalltalk executable files were simply snapshots of
the entire state of memory, “all that would be needed” was to read the file into a big JavaScript array,
and write a JavaScript program to emulate the Novacode operations, not unlike the microcode
emulator on the Alto.
In a week I figured out how the memory snapshots were stored, and also how to get them into a
JavaScript array with good access performance. In another week I had the instruction set working,
and another week sufficed to format the code so that it was readable enough to aid in debugging.
In about a month, an ancient Smalltalk-72 system again produced “bits on the screen.”
You can run the live system at https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/HOPL-St72.html?snippets. When
you start this page, you will see a panel showing either a memory snapshot with Nova instructions,
or an Alto screen, depending on the setting of the Show Nova / Show Smalltalk button. If you
choose “Show Nova”, and press restart, you will be looking at the exact place in memory where
the program counter was frozen. (The JSRII jump instruction leaves the PC just following the
instruction where this Smalltalk last quit.)
You can the push “step” repeatedly to watch the Nova instructions executing and see the contents
of the four registers change accordingly. If this gets tiresome, push “run” to let the Nova run without
waiting after every instruction. If you still find it boring or meaningless, it is time for the “show
Smalltalk” button. In this mode, emulation runs at full speed and the display shifts to show the
contents of the section of Alto memory that normally appears on the Alto screen. It should show a
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:84
Daniel Ingalls
Fig. 43. A screen shot from the only Smalltalk-74 disk. Compare to Figure 13.
REPL window with a character that looks like a tiny Alto beckoning you to type some Smalltalk
expressions. Try “3+4\”—the backslash has the effect of typing the “doit” bold exclamation character.
For those who are interested in further exploring Smalltalk-72, we suggest that you use the
button to “Open the Smalltalk-72 Instruction Manual” and continue to explore this environment.
The examples in the text of this article will also give you a sense of how the language and system
work.
The Smalltalk-72 simulation runs entirely live in the Lively development system [Ingalls et al.
2016]. Lively is a live-coding environment with a Class library and Morphic graphics model similar
to that of Squeak, except that it is all written in JavaScript and runs live in any web browser. Readers
curious to know more about Lively are referred to https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/welcome.html.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:85
A.2
Smalltalk-74
That Smalltalk-74 was so quickly abandoned explains why, out of 120 salvaged disk packs, we found
only one with Smalltalk-74 on it. That disk is full of pieces of the Smalltalk-76 simulation, and its
screen and scheduler is full of content from Alan’s Scientific American article—see Figure 43.
I was able to get this Smalltalk-74 image to run on Josh’s Dersch’s Alto emulator (it required
microcode support which I had not added to my Smalltalk emulator). Sure enough, there appeared
on the screen several items reminiscent of the Scientific American article. I started to work with
it, cleaning up the scheduler and figuring out how to do things again, but I could not get the edit
menu required for evaluation of code snippets. It would always place the menu in the wrong place,
and the selection rectangle elsewhere on the screen. By being persistent, though, I was able to infer
what item was being selected and could, when lucky, get a few things to execute. As I was able to
clear the screen, I noticed in one of the windows a snippet of text that appeared to create the edit
menu anew. I carefully managed to select this and invoke “doit” from a menu with its disembodied
selection rectangle. Mirabile dictu, suddenly the edit menus worked correctly everywhere! Thrilled
with this result, I executed user quit to save that image. I copied it to a backup, and returned to
carry on my investigations.
Fig. 44. The code that quits
Smalltalk, and immediately
after restart, fixes the edit
menu again.
Alas, when I resumed that Smalltalk, it had the same old problem with
edit menus. Apparently, this was something that went amiss every time
the system was restarted. Even in those early systems, the Smalltalk
save logic saves and restores the exact state of computation in process
at the time of executing the quit command. Knowing that, I tried (you
would have too, right?) copying the bug fix that restored the edit menu
directly after the quit command, as shown in Figure 44. This worked
like a charm. Thereafter, when I wanted to quit, I just needed to select
and execute both the quit command and the bug fix that followed it.
Now we have a Smalltalk-74 image that, while full of project frag-
ments, is entirely usable. Until I track down the bug, it is necessary to
use this circumlocution whenever exiting the system. Upon reflection, I
remember an emergency bug alert from Diana when she was preparing
Alan’s article. I kept in my office a Radio Shack plastic helmet with a
rotating red light and siren on top. On occasions such as this, I would
don the helmet and rush to visit the scene where a bug was reported. With hindsight, I believe this
was the very problem that occurred at that time, and probably why this disk was abandoned in its
current state.
A.3
Smalltalk-78
In the arc of Smalltalk implementations, two particular gems of simplicity and compactness stand
out: Smalltalk-78 that ran on the NoteTaker portable 8086 machine and the Mini2.2 Squeak image
that ran on a Mitsubishi microprocessor M32R/D with on-chip main memory.
As described in the text, Smalltalk-78 was nearly identical to Smalltalk-76, except for its more
efficient context architecture and the move to a BitBlt-centered graphics kernel. This provided a
2× raw speed increase over the Alto, together with a much more immediate experience owing to
the absence of swapping delays from a virtual memory.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:86
Daniel Ingalls
Among the discarded Alto diskpacks, we found one that had been used to write an object memory
image for porting to the NoteTaker. The Smalltalk-76 system on that disk was unusable, but the
object memory file that it wrote for the NoteTaker was still there.
Given the success of the Smalltalk-72 revival in JavaScript and the SqueakJS emulation of Squeak
(see below), Vanessa Freudenberg and I talked about performing a similar JavaScript resurrection
of that NoteTaker image. When Alan heard this he became excited about a related project he had
in mind, and so we set about producing a simulation of Smalltalk-78 to run in browsers.
We determined to bring it to life by reusing the object memory system and BitBlt code from
SqueakJS (mainly Vanessa), and rewriting the interpreter to work with the Smalltalk-76 bytecode
set and the unique contiguous-stack context architecture that was designed for the Intel 8086
microprocessor (mainly Me).
After a bit of sleuthing, we were able to decipher the file and read it into the Lively JavaScript
development environment. We then began the process of debugging this little time capsule into
existence. Vanessa read in the object table, dealing with integer and object formats and then went on
to adapt the code to Smalltalk-78’s earlier BitBlt conventions. Meanwhile I worked on the bytecode
differences and the completely different Context structure. In only a couple of weeks we had “bits
on the screen.” We were able to browse and work with decompiled source code, and we began
cleaning up various things that we had never had the chance to do on the NoteTaker itself. Ted
managed to import a lot of missing comments from a Smalltalk-76 source code file, and Alan began
his project to build a presentation system in Smalltalk-78.
Run the live system at https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/HOPL-St78.html?base
This version of Smalltalk-78 is identical to that which was ported and run on the Intel 8086-based
NoteTaker, except for a few small code changes and additions, and the fact that it runs much faster.
You are encouraged to play around with this system. You can use the screen menu to open a
browser and a workspace; these will give you a chance to explore the system. Note that if you make
a new selection after editing in the browser, it will simply flash the pane until you choose cancel
from the edit menu. “Doit” in the edit menu will evaluate the selected expression and print the
result at that place in the text, as you might expect. You might want to try evaluating 100 factorial.
In case you’re not confident of the result, evaluate 100 factorial / 99 factorial.
Having revived Smalltalk-78 running in a browser, we have found its lean kernel and responsive-
ness to be a surprisingly usable (albeit black and white) media kernel. More details of the project to
revive Smalltalk-78 can be found in our paper presented at IWST 2014 [Ingalls et al. 2014].
A.4
Smalltalk-80
Although Smalltalk-80 is a current programming language, well-supported in the industry, I thought
it would be good to resurrect its two earliest manifestations. For this I started with Vassili Bykov’s
elegant Smalltalk-80 Hobbes simulator. Hobbes uses the storage manager of the host language for
its objects, thus considerably increasing its performance. I ported Hobbes to Squeak in order to run
the ParcPlace Version 2 release, and then made the necessary changes to run the APDA Smalltalk-80
that I worked on at Apple. The APDA release is notable partly because it has a one-button user
interface (menus can be invoked from scroll bars and window title bars) that enables use on tablets
without mice, but its real claim to fame now is that it is the original image from which we started
to build Squeak.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:87
Fig. 45.
The ParcPlace Version 2 release of Smalltalk-80, together with version 0.4 of the Apple APDA
Smalltalk-80. Both are active in Squeak Morphic windows. To run this live, click the image or visit https:
//smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/HOPL-Squeak.html?earlyst80
For fun, I have loaded both of these simulations in a Squeak system, where they run inside
two active Morphic windows as shown in Figure 45. This simulation is all the more remarkable
because the Squeak system is running in Vanessa Freudenberg’s SqueakJS [2014]: two Smalltalk-80s
simulated in Squeak, and emulated in JavaScript!
A.5
Squeak
Although Squeak is still available for most computers, SqueakJS has become the easiest way to run
Squeak for most users. It runs in just about any web browser, which helps in schools that do not
allow the installation of non-standard software.
The germ of the SqueakJS project began not long after I was hired at Sun Microsystems. I felt I
should learn Java; casting about for a suitable project, I naturally chose to implement a Squeak VM.
This I did; the result still appears to run at http://weather-dimensions.com/Dan/SqueakOnJava.jar.
This VM is known in the Squeak community as “Potato” because of some difficulty clearing names
with the trademark people at Sun. Much later, when I got the Smalltalk-72 interpreter running in
JavaScript, Vanessa and I were both surprised at how fast it ran. Vanessa said, “Hmm, I wonder
if it’s time to consider running Squeak in JavaScript.” I responded with “Hey, JavaScript is pretty
similar to Java; you could just start with my Potato code and have something running in no time.”
“No time” turned into a bit more than a week, but the result was enough to get Vanessa excited.
The main weakness in Potato had been the memory model, and Vanessa came up with a beautiful
scheme to leverage the native JavaScript storage management while providing the kind of control
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:88
Daniel Ingalls
that was needed in the Squeak VM. Anyone interested in hosting a managed-memory language
system in JavaScript should read her paper on SqueakJS, presented at the Dynamic Languages
Symposium [Freudenberg et al. 2014].
From there on Vanessa has continued to put more attention on performance and reliability, and
SqueakJS now boasts the ability to run every Squeak image since the first release in 1996. To run
the system live, visit this url: https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/HOPL-Squeak.html?launch
B
BOOTSTRAPPING OVER THE YEARS
B.1
Smalltalk-72
Smalltalk-72 consisted of an interpreter and a text file (ALLDEFS27) with the initial code library. The
interpreter was all written in Nova assembly code (which ran on the Alto), and comprised storage
management, text and graphics routines, and the Smalltalk evaluator. When building a new system
from scratch, the interpreter would parse incoming text from a bootstrap file named ALLDEFS into
an array (a Smalltalk-72 “vector”) of atoms (unique strings), numbers, and subarrays delimited
by parentheses. A few definitions were hand-coded in the interpreter, such as to, which would
assemble tokens into a function or class definition. With those minimal capabilities, the entire
ALLDEFS file could be read in (with definitions for string, vector, textframe, turtle, files, etc.),
and Smalltalk was ready to run. After a bit of testing, we would save the entire state as boot file so
that it could be started up in its fully loaded state. Interested users are encouraged to start up the
Smalltalk-72 simulation page which offers push-button access to the ALLDEFS bootstrap file. The
entire file is only about 20 pages (38k), including comments and several pages of file and directory
definitions for the Alto OS.
B.2
Smalltalk-74
Smalltalk-74 was bootstrapped in a similar manner, from a file named MDefs.28 That file devotes
the first page or so to building a few classes such as class, dictionary, for, function and arec
(“activation record,” that is, stack frame), and populating their method dictionaries with basic
methods. From that point on, MDefs is pretty similar to Smalltalk-72’s ALLDEFS, except that it
includes the basic protocol for access to BitBlt, and a rudimentary process scheduler for handling
keyboard interrupts.
B.3
Smalltalk-76
Smalltalk-76 began with a clear architectural plan. Our experience with Smalltalk-74 had taught
us what was needed to support a nice personal computing environment with windows, menus,
line and bitmap graphics, and basic text editing facilities. I wrote an entirely new bootstrap named
SysDefs.29 This file is comprehensive, with complete modern definitions of Object (inherited by all)
Class, Context, Number, Array, Stream, Point, Rectangle, etc. It is the origin of the modern Smalltalk
class library.
27A copy of the file “ALLDEFS St-72” is available as auxiliary material for this paper.
28A copy of the file “MDefs St-74.pdf” is available as auxiliary material for this paper.
29A copy of the file “SysDefs St-76.pdf” is available as auxiliary material for this paper.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:89
In Smalltalk-72 and Smalltalk-74, very little native code was required to read bootstraps; only
enough to read code vectors, and to parse the arguments to the defining function to. Smalltalk-76,
however, required a real compiler to read from the bootstrap definitions and create complete class
structures with method dictionaries, byte-coded methods, and so on. The one tool at my disposal
was Smalltalk-74, so I started by defining Smalltalk-74 proxies for each of the classes required to
build the new image, called GenClass, GenContext, etc. Then I wrote a compiler in Smalltalk-74
that could compile the bootstrap method text into string objects that would become Smalltalk-76’s
bytecoded methods. Finally, Ted wrote a version of the VmemWriter that would create a fresh new
OOZE file with all these proxy objects in the final format of a Smalltalk-76 image. The VmemWriter
would also take any Smalltalk-74 object in the mix and write a clone of it directly into the new
image. Finally I wrote Novacode and microcode for the VM, and we began the process of debugging
the new system into existence.
Figure 46 shows the file “launch.ft”30 that would set up a simulated image in Smalltalk-74, ready
to be written as a new Smalltalk-76 image. Note the initial similarity to the earlier Smalltalks with
a dispframe for text display, and a Root context that sends ev to user, an instance of UserView. The
line
 Current ←Root. repeat do (Current step)
could be selected and executed in Smalltalk-74 to test the prenatal Smalltalk-76 before committing
to run it with the real VM.
SpecialOops was a list of objects known by the virtual machine. These objects were chosen on a
statistical basis to speed up common operations or to save space in the compiled code. The special
constants enabled a single bytecode instruction to load that constant immediately, and with no need
to provide space in the method for a literal object. This saved both time and space. Similarly, the
special message selectors compiled to a single bytecode and required no extra literal reference in
the method. These bytecodes were used for “high-frequency” constants and operations—those that
were frequent both statically (number of occurrences in the codebase) and dynamically (number of
executions per second). This special treatment improved both the compactness of the code and the
speed of its execution.
Smalltalk-76 and its successors were themselves powerful development environments. Most of
the evolution of these systems took place live in the system. With each notable set of improvements,
after some testing, we would save a copy of the entire “image,” and that would become the next
release. From time to time we wanted to make an invasive change, such as changing the object
format. This would be effected by running Ted’s SystemTracer with transformation methods in
place. We would save the system with a restart flag, transform the saved image, and then start it up
again running new code based on the restart flag. From that time forward, we never built Smalltalk
from a bootstrap, but instead maintained a fully running Smalltalk image along with this tool for
writing out a mutated copy of the system.
B.4
SystemTracer
The SytemTracer began as a tool (then called the VmemWriter) to effect the migration of an early
Smalltalk-74 system into an OOZE virtual memory. Then, in the early days of Smalltalk-76 it became
clear that we could make good use of the SystemTracer’s ability to mutate one Smalltalk-76 to an
altered form. Even with no mutation methods in place, the SystemTracer was often employed as an
30A copy of the file “launch.ft” is available as auxiliary material for this paper.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:90
Daniel Ingalls
 a←{nil}. a bitsinto 1 mem 67.
 atomtable ←a[1].
a bitsinto 1 −1.
Smalltalk define  USTable as atomtable.←-
"atom connexion"
textframe evals (
"unfinished business"
STstyle ’s maxascent ←11
STstyle ’s maxdescent ←3)←-
Smalltalk define  DefaultTextStyle as textframe evals (⇑STstyle).←-
Smalltalk define  mem as genCoreLocs 0 −1.←-
Smalltalk define  kbMap as kmap.←-
Smalltalk define  CodeKeeper as stream of vector 4.←-
Smalltalk⊙ CodeKeeper ’s (  i ← s swap i).←- "new inst format"
"Make up a UserView with a new dispframe"
Smalltalk define  user as
genUserView rectangle 0⊙0 576⊙768 20 16 1
0 nil genDispframe (dispframe rectangle 10⊙10 300⊙200) nil.←-
"Make up an activation with the message  test"
 Root←genContext.  superflag ←false←-
Root send  ev to Smalltalk⊙ user from nil←-
 ByteTrace ←false. dsoff.
"**only for simulation**"
 Current ←Root. repeat do (Current step)
"Here are the oops needed by the microcode"
 SpecialOops ← ( ,→(Object method  error) "error handler"
−1 0 1 2 10 ,→(nil) ,→(false) ,→(true)
+ -- < > ≤≥= ,
* / \ | min: max: land: lor:
⊙,→('⊙←'atomize) next ,→('next←'atomize) length ≡,→(nil) ,→
(nil)
class and: or: new new: to: oneToMeAsStream asStream).←-
Fig. 46. The file “launch.ft” set up the bootstrap image of Smalltalk-76 in Smalltalk-74, ready to be written as
a new Smalltalk-76 image.
“overnight garbage collector” (at the time it could take over 6 hours to rewrite an entire Smalltalk
system). This was valuable because normal work on the system could leave garbage that was not
reclaimed by reference counting, such as killing an error in the debugger, or creating a circular
structure without properly releasing it. Eventually Ted reworked the SystemTracer to write a new
system directly from the predecessor system running live, rather than from an image file. This
made it considerably faster.
The SytemTracer attended almost every birth of a new Smalltalk system. It was used to write
the non-OOZE object memory for the NoteTaker (Smalltalk-78), for the first Smalltalk-80 images,
and especially for Squeak where we experimented with a number of compact memory formats. By
that time, with live tracing, direct object pointers, and faster processors, the time required to create
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:91
a mutated Smalltalk image was a matter of minutes or even seconds, depending on the size of the
system being traced.
The most exciting use of the SystemTracer took place just days before we had to present the
software Simulation Kit to Xerox executives. As we rehearsed things a week before the date, we
found that we were running out of object space in OOZE. Not actually running out of space, but
running out of “pclasses.” OOZE was designed to partition Smalltalk’s object space into 256 zones
of 256 objects each. Each of these zones had instances all of the same class (and if variable, then
all of a given octave size). We referred to these as “pseudoclasses,” or “pclasses” for short. The full
Kearns curriculum stretched the limits of OOZE in this regard, and, if something weren’t done,
it began to look as if we might have Smalltalk crash in the middle of one of the most important
demos in Parc’s history.
Ted and I conferred about this, and it seemed that “all we would need to do” was to change to
a mapping that allowed for 512 zones of 128 objects each, change the code that performed this
mapping, and then, using the SystemTracer, read the whole old system in the old format, and write
it in the new format. We started the SystemTracer off that night, and proceeded to edit the crucial
mapping routines while it ran. In the morning we had a new image. When we loaded it up, it ran
the first time. Once dangerously close to the 256-pclass limit, the new system used only about 350
of the 512 pclasses that were now available.
B.5
Smalltalk-80
Smalltalk-80 essentially is Smalltalk-76, except for a number of cosmetic and a few not so cosmetic
changes. There never was a file that suddenly made the changeover or that we would call a
“bootstrap.” Many of the changes were simply made live, after which we would save the new
memory image.
More invasive changes, as before, were made using Ted’s SystemTracer. By this time he had
modified it so that it could run from within the image, and with the increasing system speed, it
took only a couple of minutes to make even fundamental changes.
We have occasionally heard requests from others requesting something like a bootstrap for
Smalltalk-80 (and Squeak as well). Something along the lines of “Well, can I just read in the sources
file?” I have always felt that we should have had a good answer for that. When we built the
Smalltalk-74 simulation of Smalltalk-76, a Smalltalk SystemDictionary was built with all the globals,
and then the file “launch.ft” (shown in Figure 46) set up a “user” object that would run a REPL in a
simple window. From that time forth, though, we never had a need to do this again. It would have
been simple enough to do so, and it would have been useful for others to see this view of exactly
what it takes, in addition to the system source file, to bring a modern Smalltalk to life. It would
look very much like the Smalltalk-74’s Launch file, together with a reader to compile the system
sources into a new Smalltalk SystemDictionary.
B.6
Squeak
The bootstrapping of Squeak is another topic altogether. In this case the challenge was how we
could piece together a running system to get started. The main text details the process of running
the Apple APDA image with a VM consisting of the reference interpreter running on a commercial
Smalltalk. Once we had our translator running, it produced a performant version of the reference
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:92
Daniel Ingalls
interpreter, and from that time on, Squeak was entirely self-supporting and able to evolve by
changes made in the live system. It’s true that some changes were not entirely “live,” but for much
of the time we still had a “SystemTracer” available that could write a new memory image out of
a running system. This meant that if we wanted to change, say, how the bits were arranged in
method headers, we would make the change in the SystemTracer, write a new image, make the
change in the VM and then start it up with the altered image. The released Squeak memory system
was the result of many such cycles of study and mutation. Much of the work that was done in
Squeak to accommodate different word sizes, endianness, and color depths has this character of
bootstrap programming, and the SystemTracer remains an invaluable tool.
C
PRIMITIVE ACCESS
No high-level language can produce practical results without making contact with basic compu-
tational or I/O entities. Each Smalltalk system had some way of doing this, generally for access
to arithmetic, graphical, and user input functions. In Smalltalk-72, a reserved token, “CODE” was
recognized by the interpreter, and it was typically followed by an integer indicating which of 50 or
so native code routines should take over. Usually the native code performed some simple operation,
such as fetching an argument, performing some arithmetic operation, and returning a result. In
some cases, it might carry out the “isnew” clause as well, and in one particular case (string or
vector recognizing a “[“ token) it would return a value or proceed with either true or false back to
the Smalltalk code. The file system and text display required so many primitive accesses that we
used patterns like “4 CODE 51” or “6 CODE 51” just to keep the text and file dispatches together. As
described in the main text, Smalltalk-74 code was nearly identical to that of Smalltalk-72, and the
code escapes were also nearly identical. One exception is that in the case of text and files the multiple
related dispatches were handled with a slightly different pattern, namely, eg, “CODE 51 SUB 4” or
“CODE 51 SUB 6”. Here, as in Smalltalk-72, the code escapes could be embedded either before or after
normal code.
Smalltalk-76 introduced an entirely new interface to native code that was better suited to the
higher performance expected of that system. Any method could include a phrase such as “primitive:
26” following its definition. This caused an immediate execution of the numbered primitive routine,
which would often complete the method response and return without ever creating a context. In
exceptional conditions the primitive could fail, causing the normal code body to run. Smalltalk-80
and Squeak follow almost the same convention as Smalltalk-76, except that they allow the insertion
of primitive invocations, such as <primitive: 26>, between the method definition pattern and the
code body. This has the somewhat more intuitive effect of indicating that the primitive will get
control first, if it is present. This interface can be very effectively streamlined by including the
primitive index (or even the address of the associated service routine) in the method lookup table.
Beginning with Smalltalk-80, we paid some attention to minimizing the number of essential
primitives so that less effort was required to get Smalltalk running on a new machine or operating
system. Non-essential primitives could simply fail, and the message would be handled in slower or
more general Smalltalk code. Later on, these primitives could be implemented in native code to
improve performance as desired.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:93
D
THE SMALLTALK PARSE-TREE COMPILER
Smalltalk-76 introduced the modern Smalltalk keyword syntax. I wrote a compiler for it from
scratch in Smalltalk-74, which was the system I had to work with at the time, and then transcoded
that to Smalltalk-76 as things began running. It was simple and compact, but it offered no useful
structure for extension to other features or variations.
Not long after we had Smalltalk-76 running, we began to want other features such as macro
versions of various conditional and looping constructs. Larry Tesler took it upon himself to produce
a new compiler built around a parse tree with nodes for all the Smalltalk syntax entities. While this
may not have been quite as approachable as the original compiler, it was much better organized
and made it possible to add these new features in an understandable manner. The Tesler compiler
has remained at the heart of Smalltalk syntax experiments ever since.
Almost the first trick that Larry pulled off with the new compiler was to turn it around and make
it into a decompiler by writing a parser for bytecoded methods that could regenerate a parse tree.
Once you have a parse tree it is simple to decorate it with pretty-print methods to regenerate the
Smalltalk code.
The decompiler made it possible to carry on development when, due to space or network
limitations, it was not possible to access the full system source code base. We had a flexible strategy
so that you could work with full sources for your particular project, and decompile when you
needed to understand or debug code from elsewhere in the system. Because of Smalltalk’s relatively
verbose class and method names, decompiled code is very readable except for temporary variables
being shown as, e.g., t1 and t2. Because instance variable names were retained, this was a minor
shortcoming. Later, in Squeak, I added to the bytecode a compressed version of temporary names
so that even these were preserved, while requiring almost no space. This gave us readable source
code for the entire system.
Late in the era of Smalltalk-76, when we were using Dorados, it was clear that OOZE would not
be adequate for the truly large applications that we could envision. This led Ted Kaehler to design
a new virtual memory called LOOM, for Large Object-Oriented Memory. LOOM established “local”
16-bit address spaces (which we figured matched the “project” spaces in Smalltalk-76) embedded in
a higher space with 32-bit inter-zone pointers. Ted wrote a simulation of the entire LOOM memory
in Smalltalk-76, and was able to test it out that way. It was an interesting lash-up with a completely
independent Smalltalk image simulating the LOOM code primitives. Ted wrote his code in a style
that presumed all variables to be of fixed type, and he then used the decompiler logic to translate his
Smalltalk code to BCPL, a C-like language supported on the Alto and Dorado. As each new feature
was tested, it would be translated to BCPL and become part of the native virtual machine. The
LOOM project was discontinued when competing 32-bit Smalltalk architectures started appearing,
but the Smalltalk-to-C path for developing system facilities had been proven.
Around the same time, Alan Borning and I investigated a system for inferring the type of variables
in Smalltalk methods [Borning and Ingalls 1982c]. Here we designed a set of methods for each of
the parse tree nodes that constituted a system for abstract evaluation of Smalltalk. A given method
could be evaluated for value, essentially interpreting the parse tree and producing the expected
value object, or it could be evaluated for type (with types as input arguments as well), producing a
type as its result. Having the analysis code as part of the living core of the system made it very
easy to do experiments and gather statistics about many details, such as the tendency for types to
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:94
Daniel Ingalls
“leak out” and reduce the entire inference system to knowing no more than that everything was an
Object.
Much later, when building Squeak, we wished to generate a production virtual machine in C
from our running and debugged Smalltalk reference interpreter. John Maloney adopted the same
scheme to generate C code from the parse trees of the many methods of the reference interpreter.
It was a very productive process, because we knew that the code in the parse tree was essentially
bug free. When the code generator finally generated C code that worked, it all worked. It remained
a live and malleable code body, so that when we wanted to try inlining certain methods, it could all
be tested in Smalltalk and then translated to C and compiled with near certainty of success. The
same was true of other experiments, such as whether to keep certain variables in registers.
Squeak eventually provided many such live views of code, all generated from the parse trees.
These included the following:
• source—the actual stored text of the method
• prettyPrint—a conventionally formatted version of the stored text
• colorPrint—a conventionally colored and formatted version of the stored text
• altSyntax—a rendering in an alternate (colon-free) syntax experiment that Alan and I tried
• decompile—a prettyPrint version generated by decompiling the bytecoded method
• bytecodes—annotated bytecodes of the method
• tiles—draggable syntax tiles in the style of Etoy scripts
E
SPEED AND SPACE OVER THE YEARS
Almost from the beginning, our work with Smalltalk was an attempt to answer the conceptual
question: Can we build a practical computer language around sending messages? For that reason
speed was not our first concern. Most important was to make it run; next, in the context of the Alto,
was to provide enough space to do interesting work. Smalltalk-72 showed that a message-based
system was possible, Smalltalk-74 provided enough space for interesting work, and Smalltalk-76
finally provided reasonable speed. From that point on, the main users of Smalltalk were either
commercial or media-focused; both groups required large address spaces. Over the years, the
Smalltalk-80 systems and Squeak grew to provide over 100 megabytes of live object space, without
compromising the original goals of a simple language and relative compactness in the basic system.
E.1
Sizes of Smalltalk Images
Table 1 shows the space available on various generations of Smalltalk systems, and Table 2 shows
the number of classes and methods, and the sizes of the code, total image, and source.
The large “Squeak-large A” image reported in Table 2 was one of Alan Kay’s demo images with
all 78 projects loaded. It contained 729,000 objects at the time. The “Smalltalk-80-large” image is an
industrial example running in VisualWorks Smalltalk, and containing over six million objects.
We were also interested in seeing how small we could make a Smalltalk image. “Squeak-min”
in Table 2 is a Squeak 2.2 image that I stripped down by the iterative process of deleting classes
and method that I didn’t think were needed, and then mechanically removing all the classes and
methods that were no longer accessible as a result.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:95
Table 1. Available space in various generations of Smalltalk.
System/year
Platform
Memory Architecture
Avail. space
Smalltalk-72
Alto
16-bit direct pointers, ref counts
20k
Smalltalk-74
Alto
OOZE: 16-bit hashed pointers; ref counts
1.5Mb
Smalltalk-76
Alto, Dorado
OOZE: 16-bit hashed pointers; ref counts
1.5Mb
Smalltalk-78
8086
16-bit indirect pointers; ref counts
200k
Smalltalk-80
x86, 68K
16-bit indirect pointers; ref counts or GC
1.5Mb
Smalltalk-80
multiple
Later 32-bit systems; direct and indirect; GC
>32Mb
Squeak(-96)
multiple
32-bit direct pointers; generation GC
>32Mb
Table 2. Sizes of various Smalltalk images.
System
# classes1 # methods
code bytes
image bytes
source bytes
Smalltalk-72
20
200
15k
30k
38k
Smalltalk-74
20
200
15k
30k
41k
Smalltalk-76
50
500
20k
100k
93k
Smalltalk-78
82
1997
77k
192k
?
Smalltalk-80-V2
446
4495
159k
681k
1411k
Smalltalk-80-APDA
472
4925
166k
725k
1476k
Smalltalk-80-large
30080
314k
10.67M
57.1M
316.7M
Squeak-min
402
4592
240k
602k
856k
Squeak-large A2
3186
26964
1519k
121.9M
8605k
Squeak-large B3
5426
60592
6095k
126.9M
20.4M
1 For Smalltalk-80 and Squeak, this number includes metaclasses, so the number of user-facing classes is
one half this figure
2 Squeak 2.6 (1997) with many projects.
3 Squeak 5.2 (2018) “all-in-one” image with 64-bit objects, source code, and VM; so not comparable with
other images.
The Smalltalk-80 release image was around 1MB in size with 16-bit pointers. The Squeak object
memory was so compact that I wanted to see if Squeak could also fit in 1MB, in spite of being a full
32-bit system. Indeed it could: the image was just over 600kB, including rich text editor, synthetic
fonts, browser, debugger, and inspector. I added a feature that saved the names of temporary
variables in compressed form, so the decompiled code was still extremely readable. The source code
thus encoded in the image totaled 850kB: more than the size of the image itself! We joked that it was
like source code compression with a complete Interactive Development Environment thrown in for
free. Interested readers will want to try out this little image: https://smalltalkzoo.thechm.org/HOPL-
Squeak.html?mini. Note that, although stored as a 640×480 monochrome display, this image can be
immediately opened to 16- or 32-bit color, and 4k pixels, making it anything but a toy.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:96
Daniel Ingalls
Fig. 47. Ceremonial luggage tag containing a Mit-
subishi M32R/D chip similar to the chip that ran
Squeak embedded in 1997.
The Squeak mini image was also the basis of a col-
laboration with Mitsubishi Research to put Squeak
on their new M32R/D chip in 1997. The M32R/D
chip was notable at the time for integrating dy-
namic RAM with a full CPU, and thus being capable
of being a complete platform for Squeak and similar
systems. John Maloney worked with an intern at
Mitsubishi who implemented an adequate BIOS for
the port. The whole Squeak group visited Mitsubishi
Research in June of 1997 to see Squeak running on
the chip shown in Figure 47. As part of the cere-
mony, Alan Kay was given the controls, and (with
the aid of an external memory chip that anticipated
their next-year’s RAM capacity) was able to run a
complete “Drive-a-car” Etoys demo on that chip.
Craig Latta, a long-time Squeaker, has made im-
ages as small as 16k as part of his Spoon project.
Such images are not full systems, but are minimal
kernels sufficient to import the rest of a full system.
Spoon is a project for creating minimal live object
systems. It is motivated by a modularity effort called
Naiad (for “Name And Identity Are Distinct”) [Latta
2015], which seeks to make Smalltalk more under-
standable, collaborative, and deployable. Spoon has
produced novel tools for code transfer and removal, and also for visualization of live systems.
E.2
Performance Benchmarks
Early in the history of Squeak, we defined a simple measure of performance called tinyBenchmarks.
The method tinyBenchmarks, in class Integer, times the execution of two other methods, benchmark
and benchFib, and returns the results in terms of immediate operations (such as arithmetic and
subscripting) per second, and in terms of the approximate number of activating message sends per
second. Figure 48 presents the code for this benchmark. It would be a mistake to attribute a precise
meaning to its results, but we have found them to be reasonable measure of relative performance
of most Smalltalk virtual machines.
Although tinyBenchmarks was conceived in Squeak, it runs in Smalltalk-80, and I have done
my best to back-port it to the earlier Smalltalks covered in this paper. The results are shown in
Table 3. I had to take some liberties, such as using a string instead of a vector in benchmark, because
Smalltalk-72 did not have enough space for a vector of 8192 elements. In the case of the Smalltalk-78
on the NoteTaker, with no hardware at my disposal, I have listed the overall performance as being
roughly twice that of Alto Smalltalk-76. This is an estimate based on my recollections; the NoteTaker
produced better numbers for send and return because of its optimized stack architecture. I have
scaled the numbers for the Dorado to match my recollection that it ran around a million bytecodes
per second. Interestingly, casual communication among VM implementers of the time (especially
surrounding the public release of Smalltalk-80) characterized the performance of a virtual machines
as, e.g., “1.6 Dorados,” meaning 1.6 million bytecodes per second.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:97
<Integer>tinyBenchmarks
"Report the results of running the two tiny Squeak benchmarks."
"0 tinyBenchmarks"
| t1 t2 r n1 n2 |
n1 ←1.
"Double the argument to benchmark until >= 1000 milliseconds"
[t1 ←Time millisecondsToRun: [n1 benchmark].
t1 < 1000] whileTrue:[n1 ←n1 * 2]. "Note: #benchmark's runtime is
about O(n)"
n2 ←28.
"Increment the argument to benchFib until >= 1000
milliseconds"
[t2 ←Time millisecondsToRun: [r ←n2 benchFib].
t2 < 1000] whileTrue:[n2 ←n2 + 1].
"Note: #benchFib's runtime is about O(k↑n),
where k is the golden ratio = (1 + 5 sqrt) / 2 = 1.6180..."
↑((n1 * 500000 * 1000) // t1) printString, ' bytecodes/sec; ',
((r * 1000) // t2) printString, ' sends/sec'! !
<Integer>benchmark
"Handy bytecode--heavy benchmark"
| size flags prime k count |
size ←8190.
1 to: self do:
[:iter |
count ←0.
flags ←(Array new: size) atAllPut: true.
1 to: size do:
[:i | (flags at: i) ifTrue:
[prime ←i+1.
k ←i + prime.
[k <= size] whileTrue:
[flags at: k put: false.
k ←k + prime].
count ←count + 1]]].
↑count
<Integer>benchFib
"Handy send--heavy benchmark"
"(result // seconds to run) = approx calls per second"
↑self < 2
ifTrue: [1]
ifFalse: [(self--1) benchFib + (self--2) benchFib + 1]
Fig. 48. The source code for tinyBenchmarks, used to compare the relative performance of Smalltalk virtual
machines. It measures the rates of message send and of execution of immediate operations.
E.3
Higher Performance
One of the benefits of the commercial release of Smalltalk was to put real financial incentive into
work on Smalltalk implementations. From the earliest days of the Smalltalk-80 release, there was
significant interest in the dynamic translation work of Peter Deutsch and Alan Schiffman [1984].
Their work produced a performant implementation on the Motorola 68020 microprocessor. This in
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:98
Daniel Ingalls
Table 3. An approximate comparison of the speed of various Smalltalk systems.
System/year
Platform
Simple ops per second
Sends per second
Smalltalk-72
Alto
694
54
Smalltalk-74
Alto
607
46
Smalltalk-76
Alto
16.13k
118
Smalltalk-76 (est)
Dorado
1.0M
50k
Smalltalk-78 (est)
5MHz 8086
30k
250
Squeak(1996)
110MHz Power PC Mac 8100
4.1M
175k
Squeak(2020)
1.7GHz MacBook Pro Core i7
1.1G
23.4M
Squeak(2020)
Same with 64-bit JIT
3.7G
290M
turn put Smalltalk in the hands of many more researchers because of the lower cost of hardware
capable of running the system.
As ParcPlace Systems gathered momentum, they were able to pay for the development of a
series of just-in-time (JIT) compilers that offered performance improved by factors of 3 to 5 over
naïve implementations such as the one that I made available free from Apple’s Programmers and
Developers’ Association (APDA).
With the development of Squeak, it became easier to experiment with JITs for Smalltalk. Several
were produced by Ian Piumarta and Marcus Denker, but none was ever stably deployed. Later, the
spin-out of Croquet to Quaq, and then TelePlace, motivated improved performance, and provided
the capital to invest in it. This led to the excellent work on the Cog Smalltalk Virtual Machine by
Eliot Miranda [Miranda 2011]. For more than a decade, the standard Squeak release has come with
Cog, which has contributed greatly to Squeak’s speed and stability. Squeak would not be the same
without Eliot’s work.
The Pharo branch of Squeak, overseen by Stéphane Ducasse at INRIA, Juan Vuletich’s CUIS
Smalltalk, and Gilad Bracha’s excellent work on NewSpeak at Cadence, have also afforded motiva-
tion and opportunity to tune the Squeak VM even further. Eliot’s latest work with Clément Béra
and Elisa Gonzalez Boix was reported at VMIL’18 [Miranda et al. 2018].
F
THE ALTO COMPUTER
An important part of the Parc zeitgeist was to be able to make and support about 100 of anything
that was invented. Thus, most inventions weren’t just “demos,” but were engineered well enough to
be replicable and usable tools. A big decision was to abandon calligraphic (line-drawing) displays
in favor of an “omni-display” of a page’s worth of pixels that could display anything (perhaps a
little coarsely). We calculated that the minimum would be about 500k bits (808×606), which is a bit
less than 64k bytes. Packaged memory for the Nova in the early 1970s was about 2.5¢/bit, so just
the display memory would be about $12,500 in 1971 dollars (about $78,000 in 2020 dollars).
Many parts of the system had to be fast enough to paint an entire page of stylized text rapidly,
synthesize many real-time voices of music, to run bit-map animations at “Disney frame rates”
(about 10 frames/second), and especially to run efficient interpreters for the higher-level languages
we planned to invent and use at Parc.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:99
Fig. 49. The Alto. On the left we see a desk supporting the Alto display and keyboard, and a rack with five
exchangeable disk packs. The Alto itself is the box under the desk that looks like a small refrigerator. On the
right is a block diagram showing the major components of the Alto.
Chuck Thacker’s solution was to use as much as possible of the first viable integrated circuit
memory (the Intel 1103), at a little less than 1¢/bit, and design a “meta-computer” in which as many
needs as possible could be emulated in microcoded software rather than hardware. The Alto made
use of the Texas Instruments 74181 bit-slice processor chips that had just become available. Using a
reloadable microstore of 1024 microinstructions, 5–6 microinstructions could be executed in one
memory cycle.
The many different emulations that had to be carried out “concurrently” were facilitated by
16 interleaved program counters—tasks—with a small amount of “lookaside” hardware to decide
which one to use to select the next microinstruction. These included emulators for a disk controller,
a display controller, an input scanner for 1024 possible input lines, keyboard and mouse translators,
a default “computer” emulator (most of a Data General Nova). There was even a software task to
ping different parts of the Intel 1103 memory to keep the dynamic RAM chips from losing their
contents! Soon added were emulators for graphics rendering, sound synthesis, 2.5D animations,
and virtual machines for high-level languages designed and built at Parc. More information about
the Alto can be found in the Byte article by Thomas Wadlow [1981].
For many years, only 1024 microinstuctions were available, so not every emulator could be used
at once. A lot of effort went into making efficient use of what was there. For example, the BitBlt
screen-painting primitive used only 300 microinstructions, but was able to do all the painting and
compositing processes needed for a complete graphics system. The guts of the first Smalltalk virtual
machine emulator were about the same size.
Another limitation was the combination of only 64K of main memory for program and data
storage. Secondary storage was a very slow Diablo Model 30 disk drive; this was really intended as
a third-level file storage medium, not a swapping disk. Nonetheless, Smalltalk, which acted as its
own operating and development system, did the best it could with cleverness in its OOZE virtual
memory [Kaehler 1981].
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:100
Daniel Ingalls
REFERENCES
Ronald M. Baecker. 1976. A Conversational Extensible System for the Animation of Shaded Images. In Proceedings of the
3rd Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques (Philadelphia, Pennsylvania) (SIGGRAPH ’76).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 32–39. https://doi.org/10.1145/563274.563281
Alan Borning. 1979. Thinglab—a constraint-oriented simulation laboratory. Ph.D. Dissertation. Stanford University, Dep.
Computer Science (March).
Alan Borning. 1981. The Programming Language Aspects of ThingLab, a Constraint-Oriented Simulation Laboratory.
TOPLAS 3, 4, 353–387.
Alan H. Borning and Daniel H. H. Ingalls. 1982a. Multiple Inheritance in Smalltalk-80. Technical Report Technical Report
82-06-02. University of Washington, Department of Computer Science (June).
Alan H. Borning and Daniel H. H. Ingalls. 1982b. Multiple Inheritance in Smalltalk-80. In Proceedings of the Second AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania) (AAAI’82). AAAI Press, 234–237.
Alan H. Borning and Daniel H. H. Ingalls. 1982c. A Type Declaration and Inference System for Smalltalk. In Conference
Record of the Ninth ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages. ACM Press, Albuquerque, NM, USA,
133–141.
L. Peter Deutsch. 1973. A LISP Machine with Very Compact Programs. In Proc. 3rd International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (Stanford, USA) (IJCAI’73). Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 697–703.
http://www.softwarepreservation.org/projects/LISP/interlisp-d/Deutsch-3IJCAI.pdf
L. Peter Deutsch and Allan M. Schiffman. 1984. Efficient Implementation of the Smalltalk-80 System. In Conference Record of
the Eleventh ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages. Salt Lake City, 297–302.
Doug Englebart Institute. 2008. The Demo @ 50. https://thedemoat50.org non-archival.
Douglas C. Engelbart and William K. English. 1968. A Research Center for Augmenting Human Intellect. In Proceedings
of the December 9-11, 1968, Fall Joint Computer Conference, Part I (AFIPS ’68 (Fall, part I)). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 395–410.
Bert Freudenberg, Dan H.H. Ingalls, Tim Felgentreff, Tobias Pape, and Robert Hirschfeld. 2014. SqueakJS: A Modern and
Practical Smalltalk That Runs in Any Browser. In Proc. 10th Symposium on Dynamic Languages on Dynamic Languages
((DLS’14)). ACM, New York, NY, USA (Oct.), 57–66. SIGPLAN Not. 50(2).
A.J. Goldberg. 1983. Smalltalk–80: The Interactive Programming Environment. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA (May). xi+516
pages.
Adele Goldberg and David Robson. 1983. Smalltalk–80: The Language and its Implementation. Addison-Wesley. xx+714
pages.
Ira P. Goldstein and Daniel G. Bobrow. 1981. PIE: An Experimental Personal Information Environment. Technical Report
Technical Report CSL-81-4. Xerox Palo Alto Research Center.
Daniel Ingalls, Tim Felgentreff, Robert Hirschfeld, Robert Krahn, Jens Lincke, Marko Röder, Antero Taivalsaari, and
Tommi Mikkonen. 2016. A World of Active Objects for Work and Play: The First Ten Years of Lively. In Proc 2016
ACM Int. Symp. New Ideas, New Paradigms, and Reflections on Programming and Software (Amsterdam, Netherlands)
(Onward! 2016). ACM, 238–249. https://doi.org/10.1145/2986012.2986029 More information on Lively can be found at
https://lively-web.org/welcome.html.
Dan Ingalls, Bert Freudenberg, Ted Kaehler, Yoshiki Ohshima, and Alan Kay. 2014. Reviving Smalltalk-78: The First Modern
Smalltalk Lives Again. In Proc 6th edition International Workshop on Smalltalk Technologies (IWST), Alain Plantec and
Jannik Laval (Eds.). 109–118. http://freudenbergs.de/bert/publications/Ingalls-2014-Smalltalk78.pdf
Dan Ingalls, Ted Kaehler, John Maloney, Scott Wallace, and Alan Kay. 1997. Back to the Future: The Story of Squeak, A
Practical Smalltalk Written in Itself. In Proceedings Twelfth ACM Conference on Object-Oriented Programming Systems,
Languages and Applications. ACM Press, Atlanta, 318–324.
Dan Ingalls, Scott Wallace, Yu-Ying Chow, Frank Ludolph, and Ken Doyle. 1988. Fabrik: A Visual Programming Environment.
SIGPLAN Not. 23, 11 (Nov.), 176–190. https://doi.org/10.1145/62084.62100
Daniel H. H. Ingalls. 1978. The Smalltalk-76 Programming System: Design and Implementation. In Proceedings of the 5th
ACM SIGACT-SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (Tucson, Arizona) (POPL ’78). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 9–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/512760.512762
Daniel H. H. Ingalls. 1981. The Smalltalk Graphics Kernel. Byte 6, 8, 168–194. https://archive.org/details/byte-magazine-
1981-08/page/n181/mode/2up
Daniel H. H. Ingalls and Daniel H. H. Ingalls, Jr. 1985. The “Mah¯abh¯arata”: Stylistic Study, Computer Analysis, And
Concordance. Journal of South Asian Literature 20, 1, 17–46. http://www.jstor.org/stable/40872708
Kenneth E. Iverson. 1962. A Programming Language. Wiley. (4th Printing, May 1967).
Ted Kaehler. 1981. Virtual Memory for an Object-Oriented Language. Byte 6, 8 (August), 378–387.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
The Evolution of Smalltalk
85:101
Alan C. Kay. 1972. A Personal Computer for Children of All Ages. In Proceedings of the ACM Annual Conference - Volume 1
(Boston, Massachusetts, USA) (ACM ’72). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 1, 11 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/800193.1971922
Alan C. Kay. 1977. Microelectronics and the Personal Computer. Scientific American 237, 3 (September), 230–245. https:
//www-jstor-org.proxy.lib.pdx.edu/stable/24920330
Alan C. Kay. 1993. The Early History of Smalltalk. In The Second ACM SIGPLAN Conference on History of Programming
Languages. ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, Chapter XI, 511–598.
Glenn Krasner. 1983. Smalltalk–80: Bits of History, Words of Advice. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading,
Massachusetts.
Wilf R. Lalonde and John R Pugh. 1991. Inside Smalltalk. Vol. II. Prentice-Hall International, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
B. W. Lampson, W. W. Lichtenberger, and M. W. Pirtle. 1966. A user machine in a time-sharing system. Proc. IEEE 54, 12
(Dec), 1766–1774. https://doi.org/10.1109/PROC.1966.5260
Craig Latta. 2015.
a detailed Naiad description.
January 2015.
https://web.archive.org/web/20161113033728/https:
//thiscontext.com/naiad/
Frank Ludolph, Yu-Ying Chow, Dan Ingalls, Scott Wallace, and Ken Doyle. 1988. The Fabrik Programming Environment. In
IEEE Workshop on Visual Languages. Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 222–230. https://doi.org/10.1109/WVL.1988.18032
John McCarthy. 1960. Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and Their Computation by Machine, Part I. Comm.
ACM 3, 4 (April), 184–195. https://doi.org/10.1145/367177.367199
John McCarthy. 1978. History of LISP. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 173–185.
https:
//doi.org/10.1145/800025.1198360
John McCarthy, Paul W. Abrahams, Daniel J. Edwards, Timothy P. Hart, and Michael I Levin. 1965. LISP 1.5 Programmer’s
Manual (2 ed.). MIT Press. http://www.softwarepreservation.org/projects/LISP/book/LISP%201.5%20Programmers%
20Manual.pdf
Eliot Miranda. 2011. The Cog Smalltalk virtual machine — writing a JIT in a high-level dynamic language. In Proc. 5th
Workshop on Virtual Machines and Intermediate Languages (VMIL 2011). 7. https://zenodo.org/record/3700608 Presented
at the workshop, but not archived in the ACM Digital Library.
Eliot Miranda, Clément Béra, Elisa Gonzalez Boix, and Dan Ingalls. 2018. Two Decades of Smalltalk VM Development:
Live VM Development through Simulation Tools. In Proc. 10th ACM SIGPLAN Int. Workshop on Virtual Machines and
Intermediate Languages (Boston, MA, USA) (VMIL 2018). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA
(November), 57–66. https://doi.org/10.1145/3281287.3281295 HAL Id: hal-01883380.
Kristen Nygaard. 1970. System description by SIMULA — An introduction. Technical Report S-35. Norsk Regnesentral /
Norwegian Computing Center (November).
Kristen Nygaard and Ole-Johan Dahl. 1981. The development of the SIMULA languages. In History of programming languages
I, Richard L. Wexelblat (Ed.). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Chapter IX, 439–480. https://doi.org/10.1145/800025.1198392
Sandra Pakin. 1968. APL\360 Reference Manual. Science Research Associates (SRA).
Jeff Pierce. 2002. Alice in a Squeak Wonderland. In Squeak: Open Personal Computing and Multimedia, Mark Guzdial and
Kim Rose (Eds.). Prentice Hall, Chapter 3, 69–96.
Trygve Reenskaug. 1979. Models–Views–Controllers. Technical Note. Learning Reseearch Group, Xerox Palo Alto Research
Center (December). 2 pages.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3676092 Also at non-archival http://heim.ifi.uio.no/
~trygver/1979/mvc-2/1979-12-MVC.pdf
A. Dain Samples, David Ungar, and Paul Hilfinger. 1986. SOAR: Smalltalk without bytecodes. SIGPLAN Not. 21, 11 (June),
107–118. https://doi.org/10.1145/960112.28708
Steve Saunders. 1977. Improved FM audio synthesis methods for real-time digital music generation. Computer Music Journal
1, 1 (February), 53–55.
D. V. Schorre. 1964. META II a Syntax-Oriented Compiler Writing Language. In Proc. 1964 19th ACM National Conf. (ACM
’64). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 41.301–41.3011. https://doi.org/10.1145/800257.808896
Ernst Friedrich Schumacher. 1973. Small is Beautiful: A Study of Economics as if People Mattered. Blond & Briggs.
D. A. Smith, A. Kay, A. Raab, and D. P. Reed. 2003. Croquet—a collaboration system architecture. In First Conference on
Creating, Connecting and Collaborating Through Computing (C5). (Jan), 2–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/C5.2003.1222325
Gary Starkweather. 1997. Birth of the Laser Printer (video; non-archival). https://youtu.be/BZFaQiItckU (published 27 Oct.
2017; 80 minutes; retrieved 20 Feb. 2020). https://archive.computerhistory.org/resources/access/text/2017/10/102738575-
05-01-acc.pdf (transcript, titled “Birth of the laser print [sic],” created Jan. 1999; CHM Reference number 102738575;
retrieved 20 Feb. 2020).
Physicist Gary Starkweather discusses his work developing the laser printer at Xerox Parc in the early 1970s. Beginning
with a discussion of his time at Bausch + Lomb, Starkweather describes how Xerox’s earlier innovations, including the
xerographic process, influenced the invention of the laser printer, initially at Xerox’s Rochester headquarters, and
later at Parc. Starkweather illustrates the printing methods used prior to the laser printer, the challenges he faced in
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
85:102
Daniel Ingalls
developing it, and the methods he used to overcome them.
Collection of the Computer History Museum, Mountain View, California, USA.
Dave Thomas. 1995. Celebrating 25 Years of Smalltalk. Mojowire.
http://www.mojowire.com/TravelsWithSmalltalk/
DaveThomas-TravelsWithSmalltalk.htm (also at Internet Archive 12 June 2013 05:51:49).
David Ungar and Randall B. Smith. 1987. Self: The Power of Simplicity. In Proceedings OOPSLA’87 (International Conference
on Object-Oriented Programming Systems, Languages and Applications). 227–242.
Thomas A. Wadlow. 1981. The Xerox Alto Computer. Byte 6, 9 (September), 58–68.
https://archive.org/details/byte-
magazine-1981-09/page/n58
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. HOPL, Article 85. Publication date: June 2020.
