Distributed Simulation and the 
Time Warp Operating System 
David Jefferson (UCLA) 
and 
Brian Beckman, Fred Wieland, Leo Blume, Mike DiLoreto, 
Phil Hontalas, Pierre Laroche, Kathy Sturdevant, Jack Tupman, 
Van Warren, John Wedel, Herb Younger (Jet Propulsion Laboratory), 
and 
Steve Bellenot (The Florida State University) 
Abstract 
This paper describes the Time Warp Operating System, 
under development for three years at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory for the Caltech Mark III Hypercube multi- 
processor. Its primary goal is concurrent execution of 
large, irregular discrete event simulations at maximum 
speed. It also supports any other distributed applica- 
tions that are synchronized by virtual time. 
The Time Warp Operating System includes a complete 
implementation of the Time Warp mechanism, and is 
a substantial departure from conventional operating 
systems in that it performs synchronization by a general 
distributed process rollback mechanism. The use of 
general rollback forces a rethinking of many aspects of 
operating system design, including programming in- 
terface, scheduling, message routing and queueing, 
storage management, flow control, and commitment. 
In this paper we review the mechanics of Time Warp, 
describe the TWOS operating system, show how to 
construct simulations in object-oriented form to run 
under TWOS, and offer a qualitative comparison of 
Time Warp to the Chandy-Misra method of distributed 
simulation. 
We also include details of two benchmark 
simulations and preliminary measurements of time-to- 
completion, speedup, rollback rate, and antimessage 
rate, all as functions of the number of processors used. 
1. Introduction 
Discrete event simulations are among the most expen- 
sive of all computational tasks. One sequential execu- 
tion of a large simulation may take hours or days of 
processor time, and if the model is probabilistic, many 
executions will be necessary to determine the output 
distributions. Nevertheless, many scientific, engineer- 
ing and military projects depend heavily on simulation 
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted 
provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct 
commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of 
the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying 
is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To 
copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specfic 
permission. 
© 1987 ACM 089791-242-X/87/0011/0077 
$1.50 
because it is too expensive or too unsafe to experiment 
on real systems. Any technique for speeding up simu- 
lations is therefore of great economic importance. 
One obvious approach is to execute different parts of 
the same simulation in parallel. Most large systems 
that people want to simulate are composed of many in- 
teracting subsystems, and the physical concurrency in 
these systems translates into computational concur- 
rency in the simulation. When the system to be simu- 
lated is extremely regular in its causal/temporal behav- 
ior, i.e. at each simulation time most objects in the 
simulation change state, and the real time needed to 
compute that change of state is approximately constant, 
then a time-stepped approach is reasonable. Cellular 
automata and docked logic circuits fall into this cate- 
gory. Such systems can often be easily parallelized by 
executing different parts of the model synchronously in 
simulation time, so that all subsystems are simulated in 
parallel at simulation time 1, and then all in parallel at 
time 2, etc. However, it is a much greater challenge to 
extract concurrency from systems that are highly irreg- 
ular in their temporal behavior. For them the event- 
driven paradigm (as opposed to the time-stepped) is ap- 
propriate. 
In this paper we discuss the design and performance of 
the Time Warp Operating System (TWOS) a multipro- 
cessor operating system directed toward parallel discrete 
event simulation. 
TWOS is a prototype system run- 
ning on the 32-node Caltech/JPL Mark III Hypercube. It 
is not intended as a general-purpose operating system, 
but rather as an environment for any single concurrent 
application (especially simulations) in which synchro- 
nization is specified using virtual time [Jefferson 84]. 
Besides simulations, potential applications include 
large distributed databases, real time systems, and ani- 
mation systems. 
The main innovation that distinguishes TWOS from 
other operating systems is its complete commitment to 
an optimistic style of execution and to process rollback 
for almost all synchronization. Most distributed oper- 
ating systems either cannot handle process rollback at 
all, or implement it in a limited way as a rarely-used 
mechanism for special purposes such as exception han- 
dling, deadlock breaking, transaction abortion, or fault 
77 
recovery. But the Time Warp Operating System em- 
braces rollback as the normal mechanism for process 
synchronization, and uses it as often as process blocking 
is used in other systems. TWOS contains a simple, 
completely general distributed rollback mechanism 
capable of undoing or preventing absolutely any side- 
effect, direct or indirect, of an incorrect action. In par- 
ticular, it is able to control or undo such troublesome 
side effects as errors, infinite loops, I/O, creation and 
destruction of processes, asynchronous message comm- 
unication, and termination. 
The basic Time Warp mechanism [Jefferson 82] has 
been implemented or simulated several times before, 
but always on top of other systems, e.g. Lisp [Jefferson 
82], Jade [,Joyce 87], [Li 87], [West 87], [Xiao 86], or Simula 
67 [Berry 86]. However, there are good reasons to be- 
lieve that Time Warp should not run on top of another 
operating system, but should be the operating system. 
Rollback forces a rethinking of almost all operating 
system issues, including scheduling, synchronization, 
message queueing, flow control, memory management, 
error handling, I/O, and commitment. Since all of 
these are handled in some way by every operating sys- 
tem, building the Time Warp mechanism on top of 
another operating system would require having two 
levels of scheduling, two levels of process synchroniza- 
tion, two-levels of message queueing, and so on. Ours 
is the first implementation where the Time Warp 
mechanism is the primary level of operating system on 
a true multiprocessor. 
TWOS is written in C (with some assembly language in 
the lowest layer) and has been under development for 
three years at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. It was 
originally designed for the Caltech Mark II hypercube, 
but now runs instead on the newer Mark III hypercube 
[Fox 85], [Peterson 85], and also on a network of seven 
Sun workstations. The older Mark II hypercube, a fore- 
runner of the Intel iPSC, was constructed of 32 nodes, 
each of which contained an Intel 8086 processor and an 
8087 floating point coprocessor with 256K bytes of RAM. 
The nodes were connected by bidirectional channels in 
the topoloR¥ of a 5-dimensional Boolean hypercube. 
The newer Mark III hypercube nodes consist of one 16 
MHz Motorola 68020 processor for computation, a 68881 
floating point coprocessor, a second 68020 processor 
dedicated to internode communication, 4 megabytes of 
dynamic RAM, and internode communication chan- 
nels with a 64M bit/sec peak transfer rate. The meas- 
urements given later in this paper were all made on the 
32-node Mark III at JPL. When a larger 128-node mach- 
ine is completed later this year, we will extend our 
measurements for larger simulations to that scale. 
TWOS is a single-user system that supports distributed 
applications composed of processes communicating by 
message. It can use any number of processors, not just a 
power of two, since the hypercube topology is rendered 
invisible above the lowest level of software. Each node 
is multiplexed so that as many processes can share a 
node as can fit in its memory. 
TWOS is not intended to support general time sharing 
among independent processes. Furthermore, since it is 
still a prototype, it has some significant limitations. It 
does not yet permit dynamic creation of processes at 
runtime, nor dynamic migration of processes for load 
management. Because of architectural limitations 
there is only low bandwidth output from the applica- 
tion, and no interactive input. TWOS applications 
today operate in a simple download-and-go manner. 
TWOS retains' the same general modular decomp- 
osition as an ordinary distributed operating system; it 
differs only in that different algorithms are used inside 
those modules. Although it has highly unusual proc- 
essor scheduling, memory management, process 
synchronization, message queueing, and commitment 
protocols, they each play the same familiar roles as they 
do in other distributed operating systems. 
In the remainder of this paper we will describe the gen- 
eral issues of Time Warp and virtual time. Then in 
Section 3, 4, and 5 we describe the programming model 
imposed on users by TWOS, the TWOS calls used to 
program a simulation, and give an small example sim- 
ulation intended for execution under TWOS. In Sec- 
tion 6 we give a qualitative comparison between the 
Chandy-Misra approach to distributed simulation and 
the approach taken by Time Warp. In Sections 7 and 8 
we talk specifically about the TWOS implementation, 
first its structure and then its performance. Section 9 
offers some conclusions and future directions. 
2. Time Warp and Virtual Time 
2.1 Background 
The basic Time Warp mechanism, which is at the heart 
of TWOS, was invented by Henry Sowizral and David 
Jefferson (then at the Rand Corporation and the Uni- 
versity of Southern California respectively) as a method 
for speeding up discrete event simulations [Jefferson 
82]. The major contribution of that work was the idea 
that process rollback should be considered a funda- 
mental synchronization tool for distributed simulation. 
Before Time Warp was described most researchers 
probably believed that general rollback in an asynch- 
ronous environment was either fundamentally im- 
possible to implement, or prohibitively expensive. 
Time Warp offered a simple and elegant implement- 
ation based on the notions of antimessages and annihi- 
lation. 
Later the theory of virtual time was introduced as a 
paradigm for organizing and synchronizing certain 
kinds of distributed systems [Jefferson 85]. Virtual time 
is a global temporal coordinate axis defined by the ap- 
plication as a measure of its progress and as a scale 
against which to specify synchronization. The Time 
Warp mechanism was then reinterpreted as being not 
just a distributed simulation mechanism, but as the 
primary implementation for the broader abstraction of 
virtual time. There is a strong space-time symmetry 
"/8 
between the theories of virtual memory and virtual 
time, and between their respective implementations, 
demand paging and the Time Warp mechanism. 
2.2 When is Time Warp needed? 
Time Warp may not be appropriate for every distrib- 
uted application. But those applications whose be- 
havior can be specified using an artificial time scale (e.g. 
logical time, simulation time) are candidates. Even 
then there are protocols simpler than Time Warp that 
may perform better under certain conditions. For ex- 
ample, when a simulation can be described as a static 
network of interacting processes such that most of the 
arcs in the network have an approximately equal 
amount of message traffic, then the Chandy-Misra dis- 
tributed simulation mechanism [Chandy 81] may per- 
form better than Time Warp. (See the cautionary study 
[Reed 87].) Whenever "time slip" is not important to 
the analysis of a simulation model, the SRADS mech- 
anism [Reynolds 82] is simpler and may perform better. 
However, Time Warp seems to have the widest applic- 
ability with the fewest restrictions, and seems to be the 
only choice for applications that contain instances of 
the following virtual time synchronization problem. 
2.3 The Virtual Time Synchronization Problem 
Assume that an application is composed of processes 
that communicate by timestamped messages. One such 
process, together with incoming messages from many 
different senders, is shown in Figure 1. The figure 
shows several messages that have already arrived and 
are queued in increasing timestamp order. All incom- 
ing messages are funnelled into a single input queue. 
Messages in 
transit 
I Receiving 1 
1,2.811,.31 9.71 .s 
process 
Input queue 
Figure 1: Virtual Time synchronization problem 
The message timestamps are not real times, but virtual 
times, and are assigned by the senders to specify the or- 
der in which the messages must be processed. We do 
not assume that messages will arrive nicely in increas- 
ing timestamp order. Although all timestamp-driven 
synchronization mechanisms perform better when 
messages arrive in approximately the correct order, in 
general we must assume that they might arrive in any 
order. Furthermore, we do not know anything about 
the subset of the possible timestamps that will actually 
appear on arriving messages. Timestamps may be real 
numbers, and it is not the case that successive time- 
stamps must be separated by some minimal difference, 
so we cannot even bound the number of messages that 
might arrive bearing timestamps between t I and t2. 
The virtual time synchronization problem then is this: 
How can the operating system control the execution of 
a process so that it receives its messages in nondecreas- 
ing timestamp order and is guaranteed to make pro- 
gress? We might try examining the next unprocessed 
message in the input queue. If it is the 'true next' mes- 
sage, i.e. the message with the next highest timestamp 
from among all those that have arrived or will ever 
arrive, then we should execute it; but if it is not then we 
should block the process until the 'true next' message 
does arrive. Unfortunately this strategy cannot work 
because, since timestamped messages can arrive in arb- 
itrary order and we cannot know what timestamps will 
appear, there is no way to recognize the 'true next' 
message when it does arrive. 
In general, it is impossible to solve the virtual time 
synchronization problem using local information if the 
only synchronization tool allowed is process blocking. 
But with a stronger synchronization primitive, namely 
process rollback, we can solve it. 
2.4 Sketch of the Time Warp mechanism 
The Time Warp mechanism [Jefferson 82, 84] takes an 
optimistic approach, and assumes at each moment that 
the messages already in the input queue are the 'true 
next' ones and proceeds accordingly to execute them in 
timestamp order. Of course, new messages can arrive 
asynchronously during this execution, and as long as 
they have timestamps higher than the highest time- 
stamp processed so far, the arriving messages are simp- 
ly enqueued in their proper order. But whenever a 
message arrives with a timestamp t less than some that 
have already been executed, then the optimism was 
unjustified and Time Warp must 
(a) 
roll back the process to a time just before 
virtual time t ; 
(b) 
execute the new message at virtual time t; 
and 
(c) 
start re-executing messages with timestamps 
greater than t, again in timestamp order, 
cancelling all of the effects of any output 
messages that were sent after t during the 
last forward execution but were not re-sent 
in this one. 
In order to support rollback TWOS regularly takes a 
snapshot of the state of each process. These states are 
stored in a queue associated with the process and are 
reinstated whenever it is necessary to roll back. The 
difficult part of rollback is the implementation of step 
(c), the cancellation of the effects of messages that 
should never have been sent. To accomplish this Time 
Warp introduces the concept of antimessages. 
"/9 
Every event-, query-, and reply-message (the three 
kinds of messages that are exchanged among processes) 
is considered to have a sign, either + or -. Two mes- 
sages that are identical in all fields but of opposite signs 
are said to be antimessages of one another. Whenever 
a process P requests a message to be sent, TWOS actually 
creates a messa~e-antimessa~e pair. The positive mes- 
sage is delivered to the intended receiver's input queue, 
while the negative one is retained by P in its output 
queue. As long as P does not roll back because of a 
message arriving with a timestamp in its past, the neg- 
ative messages remain in the output queue and are 
eventually garbage-collected as part of commitment. 
However, when P rolls back to simulation time t and 
executes forward again, it will usually take a different 
execution path and send a different sequence of output 
messages this time as it executes past simulation time t 
than it did last time it executed past simulation time t. 
As a process executes forward after time t, TWOS com- 
pares every message-send request from P with the old 
(negative) messages in P's output queue. If a new mes- 
sage is already represented in the output queue both it 
and its antimessage are discarded, since the receiver 
already has a copy. For any new message not represent- 
ed in the output queue TWOS transmits its positive 
copy and saves its negative copy in the output queue. 
Finally, any (negative) message in the output queue 
that is not re-requested for transmission during the 
new forward execution of P must be incorrect, and 
TWOS must cancel the corresponding positive mes- 
sage, meaning that all of its side-effects, direct and in- 
direct, must be undone. 
Positive and negative messages are treated exactly sym- 
metrically by TWOS in all respects. The only signifi- 
cance of the signs is this: whenever a message is insert- 
ed into a queue that contains its own antimessage, the 
two messages annihilate and the queue gets shorter. 
Thus, the queueing discipline in TWOS, which is used 
universally for timestamped messages, satisfies the fol- 
lowing algebraic laws for any queue Q and any positive 
or negative message m: 
-(-m )= m 
Insert(Insert( Q,m) , -m) = Q. 
With this understanding of antimessages, the rest of 
the Time Warp cancellation mechanism is simple: to 
undo the side-effects of a positive message m from P to 
Q, it suffices to remove the antimessage -m from P's 
output queue and transmit to Q's input queue. There 
are basically two cases to consider: 
(1) If-m arrives in Q's future, then it will annihilate 
with the m in P's input queue and the cancellation 
is finished;. 
(2) If -m arrives in Q's past, it will cause Q to roll 
back, but it will also annihilate with -m, so that 
when Q executes forward again neither +m nor -m 
exist Q will not see either of them. 
Although we do not have space to demonstrate it here, 
this cancellation mechanism (called lazy cancellation 
[Gafni 85]) works under any circumstances and guaran- 
tees progress of the simulation as a whole. If the mes- 
sages tend to arrive at a process in almost correct order, 
as they do in actual practice, then there will be compar- 
atively little rolling back necessary. In fact, it is essen- 
tial that messages arrive in almost correct order on the 
average. "Almost correct order" means that the num- 
ber of inversions in a long sequence be only linear in 
the length of the sequence, rather than quadratic (which 
is the worst case). Essentially all simulations of real 
physical systems can be expected to have this behavior 
if run long enough. 
3. The TWOS Programming 
Model 
The Time Warp Operating System supports a simple 
object-oriented programming model with a global 
process name space. Each process has a 20-character 
name that is globally unique. 
Any process can send a 
message to any other process at any time simply by 
referring to the name of the receiver. There is no 
notion of a 'channel', 'pipe', or 'connection' between 
two processes, and there is no need to 'open' a con- 
nection before sending messages. This model was cho- 
sen to provide maximum flexibility in the design of 
complex simulations, so that it is not necessary to 
declare statically which processes will communicate 
with each other. 
A process is logically composed of four parts, shown in 
Figure 2 in a Pascal-like syntax, although in fact we 
write them in C according to a discipline that approx- 
imates this structure. 
The StateVariables have scope global to all four en- 
try sections and retain their values between incoming 
messages. 
The Initialization 
Section is a code segment that 
is executed once-only at initialization time (when vir- 
tual time is -~¢) and whose main purpose is to initialize 
the StateVariables. It may send event messages with 
finite timestamps, but they will not be received until 
all initialization sections are complete. An Initial- 
ization Section may not send query messages, how- 
ever, since they have the effect of requesting informa- 
tion from earlier in virtual time, and there is no time 
earlier than -~. 
The EventMessage Section is invoked whenever a set 
of event messages is to be processed. It usually modifies 
the StateVariables and sends one or more query or 
event messages. 
80 
begin 
var StateVariables; 
{ Variables whose value 
across events } 
is retained 
Initialization Section: 
begin 
{ Code to be executed during 
initialization at time -~; 
end; 
EventMessage Section: 
begin 
{ Code to be executed when an 
event message is processed; 
Can have side-effects; can send 
Event Messages and Query 
Messages; } 
end; 
QueryMessage Section: 
begin 
{ Code to be executed when a 
query message arrives; 
Must be side-effect free and 
can send only Query Messages; 
Must send exactly one Reply; 
end; 
Termination Section: 
begin 
{ Code to be executed at 
termination at time +~; 
end; 
end. 
Figure 2: Structure of a TWOS process 
The QueryMessage Section is invoked to process a 
query message. It must be side-effect free, and thus can- 
not modify the state variables or send any event mes- 
sages (because they would cause side-effects). It may, 
however, send additional query messages. The Query- 
Message Section is required to generate exactly one 
reply message to the query message that invoked it. 
The Termination Section is invoked when the sim- 
ulation is ended, at virtual time +~0. Its main purpose 
is to allow final statistics to be output before termin- 
ating execution. It may send query messages, but not 
event messages sincethe latter would have to be 
processed later in virtual time and there is no time later 
than +¢¢. 
Any of the four entries may declare local stack vari- 
ables, but the values of those variables are not pre- 
served across invocations. Only SCateVariables re- 
tain their values across invocations. 
Except at initialization and termination the only time a 
process executes is to handle an incoming message. 
Processes are thus message driven, and do not execute 
between incoming messages. Of course, a process may 
send itself an event message. The processing of an 
event message is called an event, using terminology 
drawn from simulation. 
There are two significant restrictions imposed on the 
behavior of processes. First, a process must be rigidly 
deterministic in its input-output behavior. In order to 
prevent a domino effect during rollback it is vital that a 
process, when rolled back and restarted in an earlier 
state with the same input messages as before, should 
generate exactly the same output messages. This re- 
striction is a theoretical necessity, but it should not be 
exaggerated. For example, there is no problem with the 
use of pseudorandom number generators; they can be 
used freely as long as all random seeds are among the 
StateVariables 
so that their values can also be rolled 
back when necessary. 
The second restriction is that processes should not use 
heap storage (e.g. new 0 in Pascal or malloc 0 in C). 
To support rollback the entire state of a process must be 
saved from time to time, and heap storage makes state- 
saving difficult and/or slow. This restriction is just a 
performance issue, and although we have not found it 
to be too burdensome yet, it is a potential liability. 
The programming restrictions in this model are not 
enforced by TWOS. They are the kind of restrictions 
that should be enforced instead by linguistic mecha- 
nisms in an object-oriented simulation language. For 
now we rely on the discipline of our application pro- 
grammers. 
Processes request output by sending event messages to 
special operating system processes whose type is s t d- 
out, 
not by making operating system calls. This con- 
vention is convenient, but it is also necessary, because 
in an environment where rollback can happen at any 
time it is possible that an output request will have to be 
unrequested. Time Warp must buffer output requests, 
and not execute them until they can be committed. 
Discussion of commitment is deferred until Section 7. 
4. TWOS interface 
Here we present the system calls available to simula- 
tion programmers wishing to run under TWOS. These 
descriptions have been slightly simplified, primarily by 
leaving out error parameters. We will discuss their 
implementation in the next section. In what follows 
we will refer to the current virtual time, i.e. the virtual 
time at which the call is made, as Now. The underlined 
parameters are modified by the call. 
Time Warp Operating System calls: 
Me (MvName ) 
Sets the MyName parameter to the 20-character name 
of the calling process. 
81 
Virt ual Time (VTime ) 
Sets the VTime parameter to Now, i.e. the current 
simulation time. 
SendEventMessage (ReceiveTime, Receiver, 
Text) 
This call transmits an event message containing 
Text to the process named Receiver, and schedules 
it to be received at virtual time ReceiveTime. 
It can 
only be invoked from the EventMessage Section 
of the sending process, and then only if Recei ve- 
Time is greater than or equal to Now. 
At virtual time Recei veTime the operating system 
will invoke the EventMessage Section of the re- 
ceiving process, giving it access to this message and 
all other messages arriving at the process Recel ver 
with the same receive time. Although Recei ve- 
Time can equal Now, there must not be a cycle of 
processes each of which sends a message to the next 
with Re cei ve Time equal to No w. Semantically the 
behavior of such a cycle is analogous to deadlock, 
though under TWOS it will cause infinitely repeat- 
ed rollback instead. A process may send a message 
to itself, but if it does so it must be with a Receive- 
Time strictly greater than Now so as not to violate the 
rule about cycles. 
S endQueryMessage (Receiver, Text, Reply) 
This primitive transmits a query message contain- 
ing Text to the process named Receiver. It acts 
much as a remote, side-effect free function call to 
another object to obtain information about its state 
at time Now. The query message is scheduled to be 
received Now, i.e. at the current virtual time. It then 
blocks the calling process to await the reply, which 
also comes back at virtual time Now, and whose con- 
tent is delivered into the buffer Reply. 
At any given virtual time, query messages are pro- 
cessed before event messages; hence the reply to a 
query message sent at time 100 is based on informa- 
tion at the receiver before any event at time 100 is 
executed. In particular, if a process sends a query 
message to itself from part-way through the execu- 
tion of its own EventMessage Section, the reply 
will be based on the state variables as they were just 
before the EventMessage 
Section started execu- 
tion. 
It is permitted to have a cycle of query messages (all 
within the same virtual time). The behavior is 
analogous to recursive invocations of the Query- 
Message sections of the processes involved in the 
cycle. 
SendRepl yMessage (Text) 
This call must be invoked once and only once for 
each invocation of the QueryMessage Section of a 
process. It sends a reply message containing Text 
back to the sender of the query, to be received at 
virtual time Now. The reply is uniquely associated 
with the query message that caused it to be gener- 
ated, and is analogous to the return of a remote 
function call. When it arrives, the reply will restart 
the receiver (i.e. the sender of the query) at the point 
in the EventMessage section or QueryMessage 
Section where it was suspended. 
MCount (l~) 
Several event messages may arrive at a process at 
the same virtual time, and Mcount sets n to the 
number of such messages, typically one. It can only 
be invoked from the EventMessage Section of a 
process. 
ReadEventMessage (k, Text) 
This call reads the text of the k'th event message 
that arrived with timestamp of Now into buffer Text. 
It can only be invoked from the EventMessage 
section. 
ReadQueryMessage fText ) 
This call reads the text of the current query message, 
and can be invoked only from the #ueryMeszage 
section of a process. Since the QueryMessage 
Section of a process must be side-effect free, only 
one query message at a time is processed even if 
several queries arrive at the same process with the 
same virtual time. 
5. How to write a simulation under TWOS 
In this section we illustrate a simulation designed to 
run under TWOS. We will write a very simple simu- 
lation of one of the servers in a queueing network 
shown in Figure 3. There is one customer source, A, 
and three servers B, C, and D. Upon leaving station B 
90% of the customers (randomly selected) go to station 
D, and only 10% to station C. We will assume that all 
sources and servers are exponential with parameter A, 
and that queueing is FIFO. 
Figure 3: Simple queueing network 
The natural decomposition of this network is as four 
processes, one for each of the sources and servers. The 
following code fragment will implement server process 
B. Bear in mind that this pseudocode is presented only 
for illustration of the synchronization and message 
handling features in TWOS. 
82 
begin { Logical process B } 
{ Arrival and service rate } 
const A = 1.0; 
{ snare variables } 
var 
Q Len : integer; 
{ Current queue length } 
Seed 
: integer; 
{ Random seed } 
Cum Q Len : real; 
{ Cumulative, time-weighted 
queue length; for calculating 
mean queue length at end } 
Last Ev Time : VirtualTime; 
{ Simulation time of event 
preceding this one } 
Initialization Section: 
begin 
{ Code to be executed during initial- 
ization; } 
Q Len := 0; 
S-eed := 1234567; 
Cum Q Len := 0.0; 
Last Ev Time := 0.0; 
end; 
EventMessage Section: 
begin 
vat i : integer; { Loop counter } 
n : integer; 
{ Number of event msgs arriving 
at same virtual time } 
Type : string; 
{ Type of event, either 'End- 
Service' or 'CustomerArrival' 
} 
Current 
: VirtualTime; 
{ Read current simulation time } 
Virtual Time (Current) ; 
{ More than one event may be scheduled 
at this simulation time--up to two 
customer arrivals and one service 
end. Do all, in arbitrary order. } 
MCount (n) ; 
for i := 1 to n do 
begin 
{ Find out what kind of event } 
ReadEventMessage 
(i, Type) ; 
case Type of 
'EndService ' : 
begin 
{ Send customer onward } 
if random (Seed) < 0.9 
then 
SendEventMessage 
(Current, 
'D ', 'CustomerArrival 
') 
else 
SendEventMessage 
(Current, 
'C ', 'CustomerArrival 
') ; 
Cum Q Len := 
Cure Q Len + Q Len * 
(Current-Last 
Ev Time); 
Last Ev Time := Current; 
Q Len:= Q Len - i; 
if Q Len-5 
0 {Start service} 
then { Message to self } 
SendEventMessage 
(Current 
+ ExpRandom (Seed, A), 
'B', 'EndService ') ; 
end; 
' Cus t omerArri va i ' : 
begin 
if Q Len = 0 {Start service} 
then 
SendEventMessage 
(Current 
+ExpRandom (Seed, A), 
'B ', 'EndService ') ; 
Cum Q Len := 
Cure Q Len + Q_Len 
* 
(Current-Last 
Ev Time); 
Last Ev Time := Current; 
Q_Len : = Q Len + 1 
end 
end {of case stmt } 
end { of for stmt } 
end; { of EventMessage Section } 
QueryMessage Section : 
begin 
{ Empty. No queries in this example. } 
end; 
Termination Section : 
begin 
print ('Mean queue length 
of B = ' 
Cum Q Len / Last Ev Time) 
end; 
end. { of logical process B } 
The explanation for this code is as follows: 
5.1 State variables 
There are only four variables in the state of process B. 
Two of those, Seed and e Len actually represent the 
state of the system being ~mulated. Seed is the ran- 
dom seed driving both the service time distribution 
and the decision about where a customer goes when it 
leaves B. Q Len represents the length of the queue of 
customers 1J-ned up for service at B. In this case, since 
all customers are identical and queueing is FIFO, the 
state of the queue can be adequately represented by just 
its length. 
The other two state variables, Cure Q Len and 
Last 
Ev 
Time, are part of the instrumentation of the 
model, and are necessary to calculate the main per- 
formance parameter of interest, the mean queue length. 
5.2 Initialization Section 
In this code all four state variables are initialized. This 
initialization is considered to occur at simulation time 
-~,, i.e. before any events have taken place. 
5.3 EventMessage Section 
This code is invoked whenever an event is to be pro- 
cessed for B. An event message arriving at process B, 
signals one of two kinds of events. If the text of the 
message is ' cus t omerArri 
va 1 ' it signals the arrival of 
a customer, either from A or C. If the text is 'End- 
Service 
' it indicates that a service period has com- 
pleted at B and that the customer just served should be 
moved along to either C or D while the one at the head 
of the queue (if any) should begin service. 
83 
The first thing the EventMessage Section does is 
read the simulation clock, into the variable Now (using 
the Virtual 
rime call). This is necessary for the calc- 
ulation of mean queue length. 
The EventMessage Section then checks how many 
event messages have arrived at this simulation time, 
using the MCount call. This is necessary because in this 
model up to three distinct event messages may arrive at 
process B at the same simulation time, since one cust- 
omer's service may end at exactly the same simulation 
time that two other customers arrive from A and C. 
The simulation of those actions together constitute a 
single event in TWOS by virtue of the fact that they 
occur at the same place (B), and the same simulation 
time. However, in this: model the logic is such that any 
such compound event can be simulated by processing 
the (up to) three event messages serially, in any order. 
This is why the for loop that acts as the main control 
structure of the EventMessage Section. 
In the case that an event message signals the end of 
some customer's service three things must be done. 
First, the customer must be sent on to the next queue- 
ing station. This is done by the SendEventMessage 
call. Note that the 'CustomerArrival 
' event message 
is scheduled to be received at simulation time Now, i.e. 
at the same time as the current simulation time. This 
is because in a queueing model no time elapses between 
a customer's completion of one service and its entry 
into the next queue. 
Second, the queue length must be decremented (to re- 
flect the departing customer) and the statistical vari- 
ables must be updated. 
Finally, if the queue is still non-empty after one cus- 
tomer has left, then the service of the next customer 
must start. An event message indicating 'End- 
Service 
' is sent by B to itself, scheduling the time that 
the service period will be over. 
If, on the other hand, the event message signals the ar- 
rival of a new customer, then only two steps are neces- 
sary. First, the queue length must be incremented and 
the associated statistics updated. Second, if the arrival 
of this customer changes the queue from empty to 
nonempty then the arriving customer must immedi- 
ately start service and the end of his service must be 
scheduled. 
All of this computation in the event section takes place 
in one instant of simulation (virtual) time, and thus 
constitutes a single atomic action. 
5.4 Query Section 
This model does not need to use the TWOS query 
mechanism, and thus this section is empty. 
5.5 Termination Section 
The termination section is executed after the simula- 
tion proper is completely finished. In this case all that 
needed is to calculate and print the final statistic. 
6. Comparison with the Chandy-Misra approach 
The best known methods for distributed simulation are 
based on ideas by Chandy and Misra. Unfortunately, no 
comprehensive quantitative comparisons between 
their techniques and Time Warp have yet been per- 
formed, primarily because of the sheer size of the un- 
dertaking. But here we will try to give at least some 
qualitative comparison between the two. 
The Chandy-Misra methods share with Time Warp two 
requirements: (1) a simulation should be decomposed 
into logical processes (which we have been calling sim- 
ply processes) each of which represents a physical pro- 
cess, i.e. a subsystem of the model to be simulated; and 
(2) the logical processes communicate only via time- 
stamped event messages, each of which represents an 
interaction between subsystems at a particular simula- 
tion time. Both methods are asynchronous, in that 
they allow some processes to be ahead in simulation 
time while others lag behind in order to achieve greater 
concurrency. 
But there is little resemblance beyond these basic facts. 
Time Warp and the Chandy-Misra methods implement 
different paradigms of discrete event simulation; they 
require different amounts of static knowledge about the 
model to be simulated; they differ completely in their 
approach to the critical mechanisms of synchroniza- 
tion; and they perform best in different regions of the 
space of all simulations. The rest of this section will 
cover these differences in more detail. 
6.1 Differences in simulation paradigm 
A program written for Chandy-Misra is not directly 
runable under Time Warp, and vice-versa, because they 
represent different views of discrete event simulation. 
A logical process LP receives a sequence of timestamped 
event messages M1, M2 ..... Mn, with timestamps 
tl < t2 < ... < tn respectively. Under the Chandy-Misra 
mechanism, when an event message Mi with time- 
stamp ti is received by LP, LP simulates the behavior of 
physical process PP over the simulation time interval 
ti-1 to ti, i.e. the interval preceding ti. This sometimes 
requires event messages to be sent to other processes 
with timestamps strictly less than ti. The logic of the 
method, in particular the requirement that messages be 
sent in increasing timestamp order along each channel 
(see below), guarantees that there can be no cycle of 
interactions allowing an event to effectively cause 
changes in the past. 
84 
In contrast, when a Time Warp logical process LP re- 
ceives an event message with timestamp ti, it simulates 
a single instant in the behavior of the physical process 
PP, not an interval of its behavior. During an event it 
can send additional event messages with timestamps 
greater than or equal to ti, but not lower. 
As a result, a programmer tends to imagine the be- 
havior of his model as organized into a sequence of 
intervals in order to use the Chandy-Misra mechanism, 
but imagines it as a sequence of discrete events (in- 
stantaneous) in order to use Time Warp. Both para- 
digms are legitimate, but they force different idioms on 
the programmer for certain standard simulation effects, 
such as effectively preempting (or cancelling) a prev- 
iously scheduled event. 
6.2 Static restrictions 
Under the Chandy-Misra mechanism the model is rep- 
resented as a network of logical processes with discrete 
channels connecting them. A logical process may have 
any number of incoming or outgoing arcs, but the size 
and topology of the network is usually viewed as stati- 
cally declared. This is not a trivial restriction; we can- 
not simply consider the network to be fully connected 
and then use only a subset of the channels, because (as 
we shall see) in all variations of the Chandy-Misra 
mechanism there is considerable overhead associated 
with unused channels. 
Under Time Warp there is no network of channels 
connecting the processes. Instead, any process may send 
a message to any other at any time. The interaction 
topology is completely dynamic. It is thus easy to sim- 
ulate systems such as colliding pool balls, war games, or 
particle interactions, that have the property that which 
objects interact with which others is not statically deter- 
mined. 
Another difference between the two methods concerns 
the order in which messages can be sent between two 
processes. Under the Chandy-Misra mechanisms a 
process must send messages in increasing timestamp 
order along each of its output channels. See Figure 4. If 
a process A at time 80 sends a message with timestamp 
100 along channel c to process B, then A can never 
again send a message the same channel with a time- 
stamp less than 100. It is quite common in simulations 
for a process such as A to want to send later, at time 90, 
a message to B with timestamp 95, effectively preempt- 
ing (or modifying) the effect of the message with time- 
stamp 100. This is not impossible under the Chandy- 
Misra mechanism, but the preempting message cannot 
be sent to B along the same channel c; it must instead be 
sent along another channel c'. 
It may seem that establishing a second channel to han- 
dle the few cases when it is desirable to send messages 
out of order is at most a minor inconvenience. How- 
ever, when sending messages out of order is rare, then 
the second channel c' established to handle that case is a 
Figure 4: In the Chandy-Misra mechanism messages 
must be sent in timestamp order along each channel 
rarely used, and it is exactly in those cases that the 
Chandy-Misra mechanisms have their largest over- 
heads. 
The Time Warp mechanism does not require messages 
from A to B to be sent in increasing timestamp order; 
they may be sent in any order, although usually the 
more inversions there are in the sequence, the more 
often the receiver will have to roll back. 
6.3 Synchronization mechanisms 
The Chandy-Misra and Time Warp mechanisms differ 
most significantly in their synchronization mecha- 
nisms. The Chandy-Misra mechanisms are conserva- 
tive, in that a process is not allowed to receive a mes- 
sage with timestamp t until it is certain that no message 
will ever arrive with a timestamp less than t. In prac- 
tice this means that a process must usually be blocked as 
long as any of its input queues is empty. Thus, if one of 
the input queues to process P is rarely used, then P will 
remain blocked most of the time. 
Under Time Warp a receiving process does not have a 
separate input queue for each possible sender. Instead, 
all incoming messages are funnelled into a single time- 
stamp-ordered queue. Time Warp is optimistic in that 
it allows a process to receive a message at time t with no 
guarantee that there will not be another with a time- 
stamp less than t. Usually this optimism will be just- 
ified, but sometimes it will not; when a message does 
arrive with timestamp t' < t, the receiving process must 
roll back and cancel all incorrect side-effects back to time 
t ~. 
The major complication with the Chandy-Misra mech- 
anism is that its basic policy of blocking a process when 
one or more of the input queues is empty often leads to 
deadlock. Any cycle in the network of interacting pro- 
cesses can be the seed of a local deadlock, which then 
tends to expand to become global. The major challenge 
in implementing the Chandy-Misra mechanisms, and 
the main differences among them, is in dealing with 
deadlock. 
Many approaches have been studied for either avoid- 
ing deadlocks (e.g. the null message technique) or for 
breaking them (e.g. the circulating token technique), but 
no one method seems yet to work well in all cases 
[Misra 86]. Almost certainly a combination of mechan- 
isms, dynamically selected, will be necessary in any 
complex, irregular simulation. 
85 
With the Time Warp mechanism there is no need for 
deadlock avoidance or deadlock breaking. There is a 
global mechanism for GVT calculation that is necessary 
for commitment of irreversible actions, but its invoca- 
tion is driven by storage management and response 
time requirements, and not by the need to avoid dead- 
lock. 
6.4 Domain of high performance 
The Time Warp mechanism requires considerable 
overhead in the form of state-saving and the handling 
of antimessages in order to make rollback possible. 
When rollback occurs, additional processor and com- 
munication resources are consumed. In Contrast, over- 
head of the Chandy-Misra mechanism is almost entire- 
ly in the management of deadlock by whatever mech- 
anism is in use. 
These differences are not simply in the amount of 
overhead, but in the kind. Time Warp incurs its over- 
head in those parts of the model where there is activity. 
No state saving or message communication is necessary 
in those parts of the model that are quiescent. In addi- 
tion, the overhead of rollback, when it does occur, oc- 
curs off of the critical path of the computation, i.e. not 
in those processes that are farthest behind in simula- 
tion time. 
In the Chandy-Misra mechanism, however, most of the 
overhead is incurred where there is inactivity in the 
model. Deadlocks and unnecessary process blocking 
will be most common where there are unused or in- 
frequently used channels, and hence it is around the 
inactive channels that there is the greatest need for null 
messages or deadlock detection tokens. 
Although experimental verification is lacking, it would 
seem from the above discussion that the Chandy-Misra 
mechanism would probably be superior to Time Warp 
when the simulation can be decomposed into a static- 
ally-defined network of logical processes in which all or 
most of the logical channels have regular event mess- 
age traffic. Where there are numerous pairs of pro- 
cesses that can interact but do so rarely, or (which 
amounts to the same thing) if the topology of commu- 
nication changes dynamically, then Time Warp will be 
likely to perform better. 
7. Time Warp as an Operating System 
The Time Warp mechanism is described more fully in 
other papers, especially [Jefferson 82] and [Jefferson 85]). 
Our purpose here is to describe Time Warp in its role as 
an operating system, in contrast to other operating sys- 
tems. We do so briefly, by comparing it module by 
module with more standard operating systems. 
TWOS is structured as shown in Figure 5. 
User 
Simulation 
Code 
Scheduling 
Rollback 
Antimessages 
Annihilation 
GVT 
Flow Control 
Errors 
I/O commitment 
Creation 
Destruction 
Statistics 
Load Mgt 
e~,. 
Trap & interrupt handling 
Context management 
Reliable msg. communication 
Message routing 
Loading 
Host communication 
Caltech Hypercube Mark HI 
68~0 / 68881 
68020 comm. processor 
32 nodes 
4M bytes/node 
5 bi-directional 
channels / node 
Figure 5: Structure of TWOS 
Application 
Layer 
Time Warp 
Layer 
(portable) 
Kernel 
Layer 
~not portable) 
Hardware 
Layer 
The operating system is represented by the two middle 
layers. The lower of the two, called the kernel, provides 
basic interrupt handling, context management, and 
low-level message communication primitives. 
None 
of the kernel is specific to simulation; it is in theory 
quite generic. It is not necessarily portable, and some of 
it must be reimplemented on every machine that 
TWOS is to run on. Some of it is in assembly language. 
The upper layer, called the executive layer or the Time 
Warp layer, contains all of the code that implements 
the Time Warp mechanism. This code is entirely writ- 
ten in C and is portable. (It has already been ported 
from the Mark II, 8086-based hypercube to the Mark III 
68020-based machine.) 
As described earlier, TWOS has the same overall struc- 
ture as a conventional distributed operating system, but 
each of its parts contain very unconventional algo- 
rithms. The following subsections describe these 
differences in more detail. 
86 
7.1 Processor Scheduling 
Most distributed operating systems that allow more 
than one process per node schedule each processor ac- 
cording to some time-sliced, multiple-queue mech- 
anism with round-robin scheduling within each queue. 
The multiple queues distinguish high priority from 
low priority processes, or compute-bound from I/O- 
bound processes, etc., and different length time slices 
may be associated with each queue. 
Time Warp's scheduling algorithm is not timesliced at 
all, but pre-emptive lowest virtual time first. Time 
Warp always executes the eligible process that is at the 
lowest virtual time, with arbitrary choice to break ties. 
A process will execute indefinitely, as long as it has the 
lowest virtual time of any process on its processor. If, 
while executing one process, a message arrival and 
rollback causes another to become farthest behind on 
that processor, then the first process is pre-empted and 
the second one runs. 
In general a process is always eligible to execute as long 
as it has unprocessed messages remaining in its input 
queue. The only exception is in the handling of quer- 
ies. When a process sends a query message it is sus- 
pended until either (a) the reply message arrives, in 
which case the process is resumed, or (b) another event 
or query message arrives with a lower timestamp, in 
which case the process rolls back out of the suspended 
state to whatever virtual time is appropriate. 
7.2 Message Queueing 
Most operating systems use FIFO message queueing at 
every stage of routing, for reasons of simplicity and 
fairness, and because preservation of message order is 
often required in application-level communication 
primitives. 
But under TWOS messages are not necessarily pro- 
cessed in the order sent; they are processed in time- 
stamp order. Hence, they are always enqueued, both 
during intermediate routing and at their final destina- 
tion, in increasing timestamp order. Messages with low 
timestamps get preferential treatment and faster for- 
warding service than other messages, a convention 
that is consistent with the preferential scheduling treat- 
ment of processes with low virtual times. 
Negative messages traveling in the forward direction 
and positive messages traveling in the reverse direction 
(for flow control) get additional priority since they will 
likely free space and prevent wasted effort at their dest- 
inations. 
Negative messages cancel with their positive counter- 
parts whenever they are found in the same queue. In 
principle, this can be an intermediate forwarding 
queue, but this latter embellishment is not yet imple- 
mented. 
7.3 Process Synchronization 
Most distributed operating systems provide various 
blocking-oriented message receive primitives, i.e. if no 
message of the class being waited for has arrived, then 
the process blocks until one does. In those systems that 
recognize remote procedure calls or transactions there 
may be an abortion mechanism as well. 
Under Time Warp a process blocks only if it has no un- 
processed messages in its input queue or if it is waiting 
for the reply to a query. But it does a full rollback im- 
mediately (even if executing) whenever a message ar- 
rives with a timestamp less than the process' current 
virtual time. A process can roll back out of the blocked 
state, then execute forward and reenter the blocked 
state. 
7.4 Flow Control 
In most operating systems the only aspect of storage 
management sensitive to the relative speeds of the 
processes is message flow control, and there are various 
protocols for blocking a sender so that it does not over- 
flow the memory of the receiver. 
For several reasons, however, flow control under Time 
Warp is much more critical and difficult. First, Time 
Warp must concern itself not only with incoming mes- 
sages filling up memory, but also with outgoing mes- 
sages (of which the sender keeps a negative copy) and 
saved states as well. Second, because any process can 
send a message to any other with no explicit channels, 
flow control cannot be done on a channel basis. It must 
be done on a process or node basis. Third, most oper- 
ating systems delete a message and free storage as soon 
as the receiver has read it. But TWOS cannot do that 
because a rollback may require that the message be read 
again. Finally, because it executes most efficiently when 
there are many back states and messages available to 
support rollback TWOS generally attempts to run with 
memory almost completely full. This puts additional 
stress on the flow control and storage allocation mech- 
anisms. 
Time Warp's basic flow control tool is message send- 
back [Gafni 85]. There is not space here to describe the 
protocol in full, but it is based on the idea that when 
memory is full and space is needed for a new arriving 
message with timestamp t, then one way to make room 
is to find a message in an input queue with virtual send 
time greater than t, and return it to its sender, i.e. un- 
send it. This will likely cause the sender to roll back to 
a state before it sent the message, but it will then exe- 
cute forward again and resend the message later. Al- 
though message sendback may seem unusual, it is 
merely the communication analog of process rollback. 
7.5 Commitment 
Some operations, such as output, destruction of an ob- 
ject, discarding an old state or message, and process 
87 
termination are computationally irreversible and thus 
require commitment from the operating system before 
they can be performed. Many operating systems need 
no commitment protocol at all, and just perform ir- 
reversible actions on request. Others have commit- 
ment protocols designed to guarantee atomicity of 
transactions or remote procedure calls. 
Time Warp's commitment requirement is that no irre- 
versible action can be committed at virtual time t until 
all events that might affect the action or cause its can- 
cellation, namely those at virtual times less than or 
equal to t, are complete. Therefore, from time to time 
TWOS calculates an estimate of the quantity called 
GlobalVirtual Time (GVT), defined to be the mini- 
mum virtual time of any uncompleted event or mes- 
sage transmission in the application. Once GVT is 
known to be greater than or equal to some value t, then 
Time Warp can commit all output requests at virtual 
time less than t, release all message and state buffers 
with virtual times less than t, and report to the user any 
errors outstanding from virtual times less than t. 
8. The Performance of TWOS 
We are now engaged in a lengthy performance tuning 
and measurement progn m for TWOS. Since the goal 
is to execute multiprocess simulations as quickly as 
possible, the primary evaluation criterion is the time to 
completion of benchmarks. We are also interested in 
secondary performance measures, such as memory 
usage, the fraction of processor time spent in activity 
that ends up being rolled back, the fraction of messages 
that are negative, and the net processor utilization. 
Much of that data we do not yet have. 
All of the measurements we present here were taken 
on the Mark III hypercube in the July of 1987. In each 
case TWOS was set to save the state of each process after 
every event, i.e. to take snapshots maximally often to 
ensure minimal rollback cost. Processes that had 
events rarely had there states saved correspondingly 
rarely. We do not know yet if this setting is optimal; it 
could well be that the cost of taking additional snap- 
shots is not worth the savings in cost per rollback. Al- 
so, we set the interval between GVT calculations at 5 
seconds, except that toward the end of a run it was re- 
duced to 1 second. GVT calculation is a significant 
source of overhead, and we do not wish to do it any 
more often than is necessary to keep from running out 
of storage, but since termination can only be detected 
when GVT is updated, if we retained the 5 second in- 
terval to the end of a run our uncertainty in the time of 
termination would be as much as 5 seconds, which 
would bias our timings. 
Since we do not have dynamic process migration in 
TWOS we have had to try many different assignments 
of processes to processors, and in each case we are data 
from those runs that ran fastest. In the few cases where 
we show more than one data point for a given number 
of processors, they are for different configurations of the 
same simulation. 
The overhead per event message in TWOS is currently 
at least 3 milliseconds for messages sent within one 
processor, and 4.5 milliseconds when the messages are 
sent off-processor. These numbers were measured by 
running a trivial application that does nothing, and is 
basically "all overhead". The overhead per event in- 
cludes (a) the copying of the event message from the 
sender's memory to TWOS, (b) packeting and depack- 
eting, (c) creation of an antimessage copy retained by 
sender, (d) lazy-cancellation search to see if it is already 
present in the output queue, (e) lookup of the destinat- 
ion process in the routing table, (f) memory manage- 
ment, and queueing time on both ends, (g) transmis- 
sion delay, (h) scheduling and interrupt handling at the 
receiver, (i) saving state between events, and (k) occa- 
sional calculation of GVT. Not included are costs for 
flow control, and rollback, since neither occurred in the 
trivial application used in these measurements. 
In all cases the performance was measured without 
output. Including I/O made measurements unreliable 
because the low bandwidth communication out of the 
Hypercube could not keep up with the speed of the 
computation. However, all of software overhead to 
perform output except the physical transmission of the 
data is included, e.g. the routing of output requests to 
the stdout object on Node 0, the queueing of that out- 
put, and the commitment protocol. 
We used two benchmark simulations in the initial 
evaluation of TWOS. One is a version of the Game of 
Life, designed to test Time Warp on a regularly struc- 
tured model. The other is a fragment of a military 
command and control model that represents irregularly 
structured models. 
8.1 The Life Benchmark 
The Game of Life is a simple two-dimensional deter- 
ministic array automaton in which each cell has a 1-bit 
state whose value at time t+l depends on its value and 
those of its 8 neighbors at time t. We programmed a 
toroidally-connected 256 x 256-cell version of the game, 
decomposed into processes in three different granulari- 
ties: 
(a) 1024 processes, each representing an 8 x 8 region; 
(b) 256 processes, each representing a 16 x 16 region; 
(c) and 64 processes, each representing a 32 x 32 re- 
gion. 
The reason for the different versions is to vary the ratio 
of computation to communication to test the effect of 
granularity on TWOS performance. The game was 
programmed in a 'dumb' way, so that each process re- 
computes the state of the cells in its jurisdiction at each 
time step, with no optimization. At each time step a 
88 
process receives a message from each of its neighbors, 
indicating their old states, and then sends a message to 
each of them with its new state. In most cases our 
measurements were made on a subcube of the hyper- 
cube so that the load in the simulation was balanced. 
The Life Game, of course, has a tremendous amount of 
natural parallelism, and one can get good speedup from 
executing it concurrently in a synchronous manner 
without resorting to Time Warp. But Life is a good test 
for a distributed simulation mechanism for several 
reasons. First, it has an enormous amount of internal 
feedback, with every process being involved in many 
message communication cycles of every even length. 
Second, every object receives eight messages at every 
virtual time, so this is an opportunity to test the ability 
of TWOS to treat them as parts of a single message. 
The results are summarized in Figure 6 where we plot 
time-to-completion of simulations up to time 10. In 
these cases the speedup is slightly sublinear. This 
seems reasonable considering that the special structure 
of the Life Game and its synchronous, time-stepped 
nature are not taken advantage of by Time Warp. 
In this graph it is clear, as we would expect, that the 
fine-grained decompositions do not perform nearly as 
well as the more coarse-grained ones. In a simulation 
as regular as this the total TWOS time-overhead is pro- 
portional to the number of processes, and thus one 
would expect 16 times the overhead for the fine-grained 
decomposition as in the coarse-grained one. Further- 
more, the fine-grained decomposition requires 16 times 
the memory overhead as the coarsest decomposition, 
because there are 16 times as many processes, and 16 
times as many messages to be buffered. As a result we 
were unable to run the fine-grained decomposition 
(with 1024 processes) on fewer than four processors. 
8.2 The COMMO* Benchmark 
Our major benchmark, COMMO*, is designed to repre- 
sent irregular, military-type simulations. It is derived 
from a piece of the FOURCE wargame built by the U.S. 
Army in White Sands, New Mexico. It was designed 
two years ago by a one of the authors (FPW), with little 
consideration of the behavior of Time Warp. We be- 
lieve that TWOS can speed up models designed with- 
out knowledge its structure, and example corroborates 
this. 
COMMO* consists of 130 processes representing divi- 
sion, brigade, and batallion staffs that send orders, in- 
telligence reports, status reports, and other commun- 
ications up and down the chain of command during a 
conventional battle. The various command staffs have 
17 different message classes handled in different ways 
with different priorities and staff delays. Further 
complications arise because of competition for time on 
the various war communications media (radio links, 
telephone, courier, etc.), and because messages are 
sometimes lost in staff processing. The model contains 
a mixture of high- and low-frequency feedback loops. It 
has a long ramp-up time before its behavior stabilizes, 
and another long ramp-down time as it heads toward 
termination. The ramp-up and ramp-down time is in- 
cluded in our timings even though there is less con- 
currency available during those parts of its execution. 
Each execution involved 21,045 events. There were 
88,241 event messages committed (i.e. not including 
those that were annihilated). Hence, the average event 
involved 4.2 event messages. There were also 14,110 
queries (and the same number of replies). Thus there 
were always at least 116,461 messages transmitted 
(events, queries, and replies), not including additional 
messages that were annihilated by antimessages. 
Time 
(secs) 
280 
240 
200' 
160' 
120, 
80, 
40, 
0 
271 
0 
•167 
0 
190 
0 
• 
•0 
• 
e 
I 
t 
o 
• 
Life 
Life 
Life 
[256;32] [256;16] [256;8] 
• 
• 
• 
• 
32.7 
8 
0 
0 
O 
0 
O 
108 • 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m 
8.18 9 
0 
4 
8 
12 
16 
20 
24 
28 
32 
Processors 
Figure 6: Time to completion of a 256 x 256 cell Life game, divided into processes of size 32 x 32, 16 x 16, and 8 x 8 cells 
respectively. 
89 
During the intermediate stable period of COMMO*'s 
execution events happen at each integral simulation 
time, and at each such epoch there are approximately 
75-85 processes with events scheduled (mostly, but not 
exactly, the same processes each time). These events 
vary over an order of magnitude in the real time it 
takes to simulate them, so the model is not very well 
balanced. We regard this as typical of the kinds of 
simulations people will actually write. The 15 most 
computationally intensive processes (of 130 ) account 
for about 3.0% each of all cycles when COMMO* is exe- 
cuted sequentially. Since that 3% must be executed 
sequentially under TWOS as well, we know a priori 
that there can be no more than a factor of 33 speedup 
possible in this application, even if all processes were 
independent of one another. Since they are not at all 
independent there is surely considerably less than 33- 
fold concurrency available, but it is difficult to estimate 
how much less. The important thing is that COMMO* 
is exceedingly irregular in its behavior. It is intended to 
be as realistic and complex as possible for its size. Fur- 
ther details are available on request from the authors. 
The graph in Figure 7 shows the time-to-completion of 
COMMO* under TWOS as a function of the number of 
processors. The minimum time of 166 seconds was 
with 24 nodes. After 16 processors with a time of 201 
seconds (when the 15 cycle-hogs could all be by them- 
selves on different processors) there is little additional 
improvement. 
1800 
1600 
1400 
1200 
Time 1 000 
(sec) 
800 
600 
400 
200 
0 
In Figure 8 the same timing data is plotted as speedup. 
There are two curves, one calculated using as a basis the 
time to execute COMMO* under TWOS on one node, 
and the other, proportional to the first, using as a basis 
the time it took to execute COMMO* using a sequential 
event-list simulator on one node of the Hypercube. As 
the graph shows, we obtained a maximum speedup 
(relative to TWOS on one node) of 10.66 using 24 pro- 
cessors. At 16 nodes the speedup was already 8.62. For 
regularly-shaped computations one can usually sustain 
linear speedups until some critical point where the 
performance abruptly flattens out. For irregular com- 
putations one expects a smoother decline in efficiency, 
which is exactly what we observe here. Notice that the 
speedup in Figure 8 is nearly linear for small numbers 
of processor, but that diminishing returns sets in after 
about seven nodes. This is to be expected with a small 
simulation that has only a modest amount of concur- 
rency available; for larger models the near-linearity 
should be sustainable much longer. After 24 nodes the 
speedup declines slightly and rather erratically. We do 
not know as of this writing whether that is because of 
characteristics in the model, or (more likely) because we 
have not yet found the best assignments of processes to 
processors for the largest numbers of nodes. 
0 
• 
1767 
sec 
j 
1364 
sec 
i 
TW 1.05 
Commo 15 
130 Objects 
Seq Time 1364 secs 
5 August 87 
DD 
166 
sec 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
4 
8 
12 
16 
20 
24 
28 
I 
32 
Processors 
Figure 7: Time to completion of the irregular model COMMO* 
90 
10.66,~.... 
11.0 
10.0 
• 
• 
9.0 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
8.0 
• 
• 
o 
o 
O 
7.0 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
• -'V 
'-' 
v="eeau" 
6.0 
• 
• 
o 
• 
O 
5.0 
• 
o 
TW 1.05 
J 
4.0 
0o o° 
I 
Commo 15 
3.0 
• o 
130 Objects 
=o 
2.0 
i o 
5 August 87 
DD 
O 
1.0 
8 
0.0 
t 
t 
J 
t 
t 
t 
J 
t 
0 
4 
8 
12 
16 
20 
24 
28 
32 
Processors 
• 
Relative to 1-node Time Warp execution 
o 
Relative to sequential execution 
Figure 8: Speedup of COMMO* 
Rollbacks 
(Thousands) 
22 
20 
18 
16 
14 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 
0 
4 
8 
12 
A 
16 
20 
Processors 
TW 1.05 
Commo 15 
130 Objects 
5 August 87 
24 
28 
32 
DD 
Figure 9: Number of rollbacks in runs of COMMO* 
91 
30 
25 
Anti- 
20 
messages 
(Thousands) 
15 
Events + 
queries 
+ 
1 0 
replies 
5 
• 
0 
0 
4 
8 
12 
16 
20 
24 
Processors 
Q 
TW 1.05 
Commo 15 
130 Objects 
5 August 87 
DD 
| 
28 
32 
Figure 10: Number of antimessages sent during runs of COMMO* 
The total number of rollbacks experienced during exec- 
ution is shown in Figure 9. We count only those roll- 
backs that cause recomputation of events or queries; we 
do not count "technical rollbacks" that involve setting 
back a virtual clock without any recomputation, e.g. a 
rollback from ~ to a finite time. 
The latter numbered 
from about 39,000 to 51,000. As can be readily seen, the 
number of rollbacks generally increases with the num- 
ber of processors used. 
Combining this with the results 
of Figure 8 indicates that achieving more speedup re- 
quires more rollbacks, contrary to what one might ex- 
pect at first thought. This is consistent with the theo- 
retical observation that rollbacks generally do not occur 
in those portions of the execution that are the current 
bottleneck, i.e. are farthest behind in simulation time. 
The single fastest run (24 processors) did not have an 
unusually low number of rollbacks. 
One of the early performance questions about Time 
Warp was the amount of overhead caused by negative 
messages. Figure 10 shows that across all of the runs of 
COMMO* the maximum number of antimessages 
transmitted was slightly more than 29,272 (in the run 
with 26 processors). Each annihilated a positive mess- 
age. Since 116,461 messages of all kinds were transmit- 
ted but were not annihilated, the total message traffic in 
that run was 175,005 messages. 
Thus, a maximum of 
58,544 out of the 175,005 messages were synchronization 
overhead, or about 33.4% of the total. 
9. Conclusions: 
The Time Warp Operating System now runs reliably on 
the JPL Mark III Hypercube, and is capable of extracting 
at least an order of magnitude of speedup in at least one 
relatively small and irregular simulation. We have 
every reason to believe that much more speedup is 
available in larger models, and that we will be able to 
demonstrate that when we have access to more than 32 
processors. 
Much more empirical work, particularly with addition- 
al and larger benchmarks being built now, is necessary 
before we will fully understand the dynamics of the 
Time Warp mechanism. Among the important 
questions not yet addressed are: 
(a) How does Time Warp's performance degrade as 
memory gets tight? 
(b) How much additional performance gain is pos- 
sible from dynamic load management? 
(c) How should the key tuning parameters 
(frequency of state saving, frequency of GVT 
calculation, etc.) be set? 
(d) Where are there opportunities for hardware 
support to reduce overhead and allow for reduced 
granularity? 
92 
(e) How should Time Warp be reimplemented to 
take full advantage of shared memory architectures? 
(f) What tools and environments should be built to 
support distributed simulation? 
These are questions we will be investigating in the next 
years. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was funded by the U.S. Army Model Im- 
provement Program (AMIP) Management Office 
(AMMO), NASA contract NAS7-918, Task Order 
RE-182, Amendment No. 239, ATZL-CAN-DO. 
The authors would like to thank Jack Fanselow and 
Dave Curkendall of JPL and Geoffrey Fox of Caltech for 
their longstanding cooperation with this project, and 
for lending Mark III time for making the measure- 
ments reported here. We thank Col. Kenneth Wier- 
sema and the Army Model Improvement Program for 
consistent sponsorship over three years. We also wish 
to acknowledge the contributions of Orna Berry, Anat 
Gafni, and Andrej Witkowski to the theory of Time 
Warp, and of Henry Sowizral as the co-inventor of the 
Time Warp mechanism. 
References 
[Berry 86] Berry, Orna, "Performance Evaluation of the 
Time Warp Distributed Simulation Mechan- 
ism", Ph.D. Dissertation, Dept. of Computer 
Science, University of Southern California, May 
1986 
[Chandy 81] Chandy, K.M., and Misra, Jayadev, 
"Asynchronous distributed simulation via a se- 
quence of parallel computations", Communica- 
tions of the ACM, Vol. 24, No. 4, April 1981 
[Fox, 85] Fox, Geoffrey, "Use of the Caltech Hypercube", 
IEEE Software, Vol. 2, p. 73, July 1985 
[Gafni 85] Gafni, Anat, "Space Management and Can- 
cellation Mechanisms for Time Warp", Ph.D. 
Dissertation, Dept. of Computer Science, 
University of Southern California, TR-85-341, 
December 1985 
[Jefferson 85] Jefferson, David, "Virtual Time", ACM 
Transactions on Programming Languages and 
Systems, Vol. 7, No. 3, July 1985 
[Jefferson 82] Jefferson, David and Sowizral, Henry, 
"Fast Concurrent Simulation Using the Time 
Warp Mechanism, Part I: Local Control", Rand 
Note N-1906AF, the Rand Corporation, Santa 
Monica, California, Dec. 1982 
[Joyce 87] Joyce, J., Lomow, G.A., Slind, K., Unger, B.W., 
"Monitoring Distributed Systems", ACM 
Transactions on Computer Systems, Vol. 5, No. 
2, May 1987 
[Lamport 78] Lamport, Leslie, "Time, clocks and the or- 
dering of events in a distributed system", 
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 21, No. 7, 
July 1978 
[Li 87] Li, X., Unger, B. W., "Languages for Distributed 
Simulation", Proceedings of the Conference on 
Simulation and AI, Simulation Series, Vol 18, 
No. 3, January 1987 
[Misra 86] Misra, Jayadev, "Distributed Discrete Event 
Simulation", Computing Surveys, Vol 18, No. 1, 
March 1986 
[Peterson 85] Peterson, J.C., J. Tuazon, D. Lieberman, M. 
Pinel, "Caltech/JPL Hypercube Concurrent Pro- 
cessor", Proceedings of 1985 International Con- 
ference on Parallel Processing, St. Charles, Ill., 
Aug. 1985 
[Reynolds 82] Reynolds, Paul, "A Shared Resource Al- 
gorithm for Distributed Simulation", Proceed- 
ings of the 9th International Symposium on 
Computer Architecture, Austin, Texas, IEEE, 
New York 
[West 87] West, D., Lomow, G., Unger, B.W., "Optim- 
izing Time Warp Using the Semantics of Ab- 
stract Data Types", Proceedings of the Conference 
on Simulation and AI ,Simulation Series, Vol 18, 
No. 3, January 1987 
[Xiao 86] Xiao, Z., Unger, B.W., Cleary, J., Lomow, G., Li, 
X., Slind, K., "Jade Virtual Time Implementation 
Manual", Research Report No. 86/242/16, Dept. 
of Computer Science, University of Calgary, Cal- 
gary, Alberta 
93 
