Viewpoints Research Institute, 1209 Grand Central Avenue, Glendale, CA 91201   t: (818) 332-3001  f: (818) 244-9761 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Children Learning by Doing 
Squeak Etoys on the OLPC XO 
 
 
Alan Kay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a 
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Squeak Etoys on the 
OLPC XO 
Children Learning 
By Doing 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
2
© Viewpoints Research Institute, April 2007 
1209 Grand Central Ave 
Glendale, California 91201 
This document is a first draft of a summary of Etoys on the One Laptop Per 
Child XO computer. It will undergo many changes in the next few months. 
The first official edition is expected by August 2007. 
Children Learning By Doing – Etoys on the OLPC XO  
Was written by Alan Kay, and is made from a variety of previous View-
points Research Institute writings adapted for the XO, plus new material 
done especially for this book. 
Hal Abelson 
Bill Atkinson 
Bobby Blatt 
Andy diSessa 
Mary Laycock 
Julia Nishijima 
Mitchel Resnick 
Julaine Salem 
Brian Silverman 
Cynthia Solomon 
Mike Travers 
 
 
Other research colleagues, in 
addition to the Board of Ad-
visors, whose 
ideas 
ad-
vanced the Etoys design: 
Kazuhiro Abe 
Bob Arning 
B.J. Allen-Conn 
Diego GomezDeck 
Bert Freudenberg 
Dan Ingalls 
Alan Kay 
Ted Kaehler 
John Maloney 
Yoshiki Ohshima 
Andreas Raab 
Michael Rueger 
Kim Rose 
Lex Spoon 
Scott Wallace 
Takashi Yamamiya 
 
 
Some of the researchers 
who directly contributed 
to and built major parts 
of Etoys: 
President 
Alan Kay 
 
Executive Director 
Kimberly Rose 
 
Board of Advisors 
John Perry Barlow 
Gordon Bell 
Jerome Bruner 
Vint Cerf 
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi 
Richard Dawkins 
Betty Edwards 
Doug Engelbart 
Bran Ferren 
Gerhard Fischer 
Tim Gallwey 
Adele Goldberg 
Danny Hillis 
Quincy Jones 
Leonard Kleinrock 
Geraldine Laybourne 
Paul MacCready 
Marvin Minsky 
Ike Nassi 
Nicholas Negroponte 
Doreen Nelson 
David P. Reed 
Mitchel Resnick 
Paul Saffo 
Larry Smarr 
Elliot Soloway 
 
Advisor Emeritus 
Seymour Papert 
 
Advisors Etherius 
Douglas Adams 
Neil Postman 
Frank Thomas 
 
 
A non-profit public-benefit 501(c)3 organization devoted to 
children’s education and systems research. All of our results 
are free and open source. 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
3
 
 
Dedications, Preface, Table of Contents. . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
 
Etoys is: 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
A Worldwide, Multilingual, Authoring and Learning Environment . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
 “Like LOGO” with Costumes 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
“Like Starlogo” At All Scales . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
“Like Hypercard”, Presentations, Desktop & Web Publishing, Multimedia . 
. 
. 
. 
“Like Squeak Smalltalk”, Multiplatform, etc. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
 
Examples: Detailed Table Of Contents . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
 
Educational Examples . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
 
Multimedia Examples . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
 
Squeak Smalltalk 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
 
Acknowledgements . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
 
References 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
Dedications 
 
Jerome Bruner: True learning is “fig-
uring out how to use what you already 
know in order to go beyond what you 
already think.” 
This document is an early draft of an introductory book about Etoys on the OLPC laptop for teachers and 
parents.  It is planned to be completed this summer in time for XO experiments around the world. 
We are putting out this unfinished draft to help provide context for the OLPC “Countries Meeting” on April 
25th 2007 in Cambridge, Mass.  
Though incomplete, we have attempted to leave most of the unfinished parts at the end, and provide a coher-
ent a narrative as possible. To be added are many more examples, more discussion of curriculum and ap-
proach to math and science learning, and quite a bit more about the kinds of media authoring and collabora-
tion that can be done in Etoys. 
Table Of Contents 
 
Seymour Papert: “Should the computer pro-
gram the kid, or should the kid program the 
computer?” 
Preface 
3 
 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
 
11 
 
34 
 
45 
 
xx 
 
xx 
 
xx 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
4
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
“Like-LOGO”: 
Scripting that is 
also mathematics, 
turtle as a vector, 
“Like Squeak Smalltalk”: 
Everything is a dynamic object, mul-
timedia, multiplatform, etc. 
“Like-Starlogo”: 
Massively parallel 
objects 
“Like-Hypercard”: 
WYSIWYG Page ori-
ented UI & Media author-
ing for presentations, web 
content, etc. 
Squeak Etoys is a multimedia authoring system especially aimed at helping chil-
dren learn powerful ideas by constructing them. It was inspired by LOGO, Small-
talk, Hypercard, and Starlogo and presents a unified style, user-interface, media 
and scripting environment for making things from computer stuff. 
It is free and open source, and can be downloaded for many platforms from 
http://squeakland.org . 
This summary presents the main kinds of media, authoring and styles of learning 
that most children will do on the One Laptop Per Child XO computer. We will 
first give a few examples from the main areas of interest to provide a gist of what 
Etoys is all about, and then provide more detail and examples in each of the areas. 
 
Squeak Etoys in Nepalese village 
Etoys & Squeak on the OLPC XO 
Aimed at a wide variety of users and levels of use 
In use by many children and adults around the world 
Good for constructivist learning and teaching 
Multilingual 
Self contained and runs on many platforms 
Both standalone and web-based 
Integrated multimedia 
Collaborative 
Made from many integrated media objects 
Authorable at all levels from end-user to expert 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
5
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Etoys is a Worldwide Authoring & Learning Environment 
 
 
 
Etoys is  
“Like Logo” – but with costumes, multimedia, etc. 
“Like Starlogo” – but at all levels of scale 
“Like Hypercard and Powerpoint” – but simpler and richer 
“Like Smalltalk” – it is Squeak Smalltalk underneath 
“Like itself” – it has special properties that are unique 
Just “how like” will be shown on the next few pages. 
 
Etoys was first tested with children in 1997, and has since spread 
around the world to be used by many children in cultural and lan-
guage environments. Etoys is multilingual and has been success-
fully used in USA, Europe, South America, Japan, Korea, India, 
Nepal, and elsewhere. 
The multilingualization is dynamic: languages can be switched on 
the fly (this can be illuminating for children) and there is a “kit” 
that aids the introduction of a new language.  
Etoys is also “ecumenical”: it runs on more than 20 platforms bit-
identically including all of the standard ones, many PDAs and 
SmartPhones, and on the OLPC XO machine. 
 
Current Languages include: 
English, French, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Japanese, Chinese, 
Korean, Swahili 
 
Languages in progress include: 
Arabic 
Greek 
Thai 
 
The main website http://www.squeakland.org contains downloads, 
tutorials, example content, access to other web sites, essays, and 
books, including “Powerful Ideas in the Classroom”, an introduc-
tion to Etoys for 4-5-6 grade teachers.  
There are two international conferences each year that are centered 
on Etoys and similar environments: IEEE C5 conference (usually 
in Jan) and SqueakFest (usually in Aug). 
 
 
 
Below are Logo-like scripts in different 
languages to move the car in a circle . 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
6
 
A project that nine, ten and eleven year old children all over the world love is to 
design and make a car they would like to learn how to drive.  They first draw 
their car (and often put big off-road tires on them like this).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
So far this is just a picture. But then they can look “inside” their drawing to see 
its properties (for example where the car is located and heading) and behaviors 
(the ability to go forward in the direction it is heading, or change its heading by 
turning. These behaviors can be pulled out and dropped on the “world” to make 
a script – without the need for typing – which can be set “ticking” by clicking on 
the clock. The car starts moving in accordance with the script. 
 
 
 
 
 
If we drop the car’s pen on the world, it will leave a track (in this case a circle), 
and we see that this is Papert’s LOGO turtle in disguise – a turtle with a “cos-
tume” and easy ways to view, script and control it. 
 
Etoys “viewer” for the car 
 
 
A typical Etoys script 
 
Etoys is “Like LOGO”: But With Universal Objects & Costumes 
In Etoys we can choose or now to show the object’s name in a script (to not 
show it is classical Logo style). So we can make a script that will draw a line of 
some length and turn a corner. Then we can invoke this script to make many 
kinds of geometric figures: 
 
 
 
 
In fact, it is easy to make a Logo in Etoys, and it can take advantage of the “no 
keyboard input” feature. We can just draw a turtle, as we did with the car. 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
7
 
 
 
 
 
 The Beauty and Importance of Complex Systems 
Lots of interesting things come in bunches which exhibit emergent group behavior, such as: 
Electrons (current flow, etc.) 
Atoms and molecules (gases, liquids, solids) 
Cells 
Populations of animals and plants 
Etoys can handle many 10’s of 1000s of objects at many frames per second, and this is 
enough to allow excellent models of the important properties of these systems to be made. 
The continuity of scripting between large and small allows children to explore very com-
plex systems by just scripting the behavior of one item and making many copies. For exam-
ple, if we make lots of little dots, we can explore the behavior of contagious processes, such 
as rumors and disease. Here the scripts are very simple, and cause a dot to change color 
when it collides with an “infected” dot. The size of the arena for collisions determines the 
delays between collisions, and allows us to explore matters of life and death, such as really 
understanding the characteristics of epidemics: fast deadly ones like typhoid which are very 
noticeable, and slow deadly ones such as AIDS (which is deadly in part because the onset 
of an AIDS epidemic is not dramatic). A poor understanding of slow deadly epidemics in 
many parts of the world is one of the main causes of the AIDS disaster. 
People have to reach beyond their common sense into the “uncommon sense” of models for 
disasters in order to help their imagination spur them to early action. Because of this new 
way to “understand and argue”, true “computer literacy” (which involves being able to read 
and write dynamic simulations of ideas, especially in terms of systems of related entities, 
themselves also portrayed as systems) will eventually create an even larger change in how 
humans think about ideas than the printing press and classical mathematics and science. 
 
… to making a simulation of ants gath-
ering food,and leaving a diffusing trail 
of pheromones to guide other ants. 
Etoys is “Like Starlogo”: But At All Scales & With Etoys Scripting 
 
… to explore simple interactions 
like collisions, disease, etc., and 
… 
 
 
… then make many thousands of 
them to explore more complex 
systems from gases to epidemics 
Simple Aquarium Ecology; female and male 
fish, and plankton 
 
From scripting one object, 
we can make lots of them 
… 
 
2000 “gas particles” supporting a 
moveable piston 
 
… them to do picture processing (in 
this case, a blur filter), but can also be 
handled in more interesting ways … 
Here each pixel is told to move 
forward a distance that is 5% its 
own location relative to the center. 
 
Squeak Etoys allows an enormous number of objects to be run simultaneously (inspired by 
Starlogo) that are scripted using the same conventions used with the larger media objects. This 
allows children to think through complex parts of a project – such as an ant or salmon follow-
ing a scent gradient – in the large with a few large ants or fish, and then to use what has been 
discovered with a population of thousands of particle animals. 
Here each of the 10,000 pixels in 
this picture is like an “ant”, a parti-
cle that can be scripted. We can get 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
8
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
“Desktop Publishing” is not a separate application but simply an organization of 
desired objects to look like a high-quality printed page. Any old or new objects 
can be simply dragged to become part of this “document”. Here we see an article 
written for Scientific American by the author being organized, with possible 
images for the article on the right 
. 
 
An Etoys Project/Desktop running as a browser plugin showing 
Sam’s “FaceBall” animation. Full WYSIWYG authoring is always 
available. 
 
Sorting the thumbnails of a few of the hundreds of project/desktops 
made by this user 
 
Movie player can play MPEG and JPEG Movies 
 
MP3 and other sound format player 
 
An Etoys project used as a “slide” in a presentation, but unlike 
Powerpoint, all the objects and authoring are “on” and can be dynami-
cally invoked and changed. 
Etoys is “Like Hypercard”: But With Presentations, Desktop & Web Publishing, etc. 
Media authoring style is hypercard-like and WYSIWYG 
(without modes) 
Bring together graphical objects and organize them on a 
page 
All objects can be scripted (using same scripting as chil-
dren use). 
All creations can be saved, published to the web, etc. 
No need for special presentation media (such as ppt) 
All authoring is alive on the web even in a browser 
Real-time collaboration with VOIP and screen-sharing 
More details later on in this document (pages pp-qq). 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
9
 
 
 
 
 
 
Etoys is “Like Squeak Smalltalk”: In Fact, It Is 
In fact, underneath the Etoys user interface is Squeak Smalltalk, a full featured 
comprehensive all-levels programming environment whose earlier versions at 
Xerox PARC in the 70s included the inventions of dynamic object-oriented 
programming and graphical user interfaces. 
This means that the OLPC has a programming and media environment roughly 
equivalent to Java, but much smaller, simpler and self-contained. 
Squeak is free and open source. 
Squeak itself is a complete computer system from the end-users and user inter-
face to the hardware of the underlying machine, and each level of the system 
can be dynamically examined and authored. For most young users and their 
teachers this is not an important consideration because they will only be using 
the Etoys environment level. But, especially for high school and college age 
students, the ability to dynamically examine and experiment with all levels of 
the system allows Squeak to serve as a “living laboratory” of computer science 
and software engineering, including: operating system principles, graphics and 
sound synthesis, user-interface and media design, etc. Though quite complete, 
Squeak is very small: only about 200,000 lines of code for everything, includ-
ing its own “operating system”, graphics and sound, internet sockets, file sys-
tem, user-interface, applications, and Etoys itself. The lower levels are written 
in the high level object oriented language and the system is set up to transport 
itself to run “bit-identically” on new platforms in a day or so. 
There are a number of open source communities built around Smalltalk, and 
several around Squeak. http://www.squeak.org is the main site for deep sys-
tems work in Squeak.  
An extensive new collaborative 3D environment called Croquet can be found 
at http://www.opencroquet.org . 
The educational work with children and much work with children can be 
found at http://www.squeakland.org . 
There are also sites for server-side uses of Squeak, including for wikis, devel-
opment for browser client-side apps, etc. 
 
 
 
A Squeak Smalltalk systems browser showing how mixed mode arithmentic is defined in Smalltalk. Here we see the method that computes how a fraction (rational 
number) can be raised to an integer power. Smalltalk is completely defined in itself and the entire system is “alive” and available at all times for perusal, changes, 
experiments, adding new features, or to do major subsystems. 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
10
 
 
 
Educational Examples 
 
Math and Science 
 
Primer: Forward and turn 
Variables 
Random 
Feedback (follow path) 
Simple Animation 
 
Increase By 
Speed & Acceleration 
Increase-By for vectors 
 
Particles: Diffusion 
 
Animation: Animations, Movies 
Sound Synthesis 
 
Costumes: Logic 
 
Measuring Bike Wheel 
 
Gravity: Galilean Gravity 
Lunar Lander 
Gas and Piston 
Getting To Algebra 
 
Inertia 
Off the Cliff 
Shoot the Alien 
SpaceWar: Inertia and vectors 
Orbits: 
Springs 
 
Particles: Gravity 
Piston and gas 
Vacuum Cleaner 
Buoyancy, Brownian Motion 
 
Feedback: Follow the path 
Salmon 
Particles: Ants 
 
Ecologies: 
Epidemic 
Fish and plankton (other predator/prey) 
 
Variation & Test: Weasel
Media Examples 
 
Universal Objects 
Media Objects 
Text, fonts, flow, etc. 
Shapes, Arrows, etc. 
Balloon Help 
Sound and Video Recorders 
Event Theater Recorder 
Movie and MP3 Players 
MIDI 
Sonogram 
World Stethoscope 
Robots 
 
Presentations: books and projects (TNs) 
 
DTP 
Active Essay: Weasel 
 
Collaboration 
Sharing Interactions w/ desktop and VOIP 
Email 
Chat, Drag & Drop 
NetMorphs 
 
Browser 
 
3D Croquet 
 
Squeak Media 
Pier 
Seaside 
Swiki 
… 
 
Examples Table Of Contents 
Many examples are yet to be included, but enough are here to provide a gist of how we use 
Etoys to help children learn mathematics and science, and to make many kinds of computer con-
structions using the media tools in Etoys. 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
11
Educational Examples 
Here are selected examples of the Etoys content we use to help children learn “power-
ful ideas” in math and science. They are organized roughly by age, but occasionally 
will show younger children using a computer tool made for them by older children (as 
in the “Function Machine” for 1st graders made for them by 4th or 5th graders). 
Most of the examples (and most of our worldwide experience) has been with children 
in the 4th through 6th grades, but a number of schools (especially in Japan) have done 
extensive classroom work with 2nd and 3rd graders, and others (in Canada and in parts 
of the US) have concentrated on 7th and 8th grades. 
The standard starter book for most children and adults is “Powerful Ideas in the Class-
room” by teacher B-J Allen-Conn and Kim Rose (Executive Director of Viewpoints 
Research). We will not attempt to replace that book here, but will draw several of our 
examples from it in a more summarized form. 
Here we present, not a curriculum, but instead a gist of what a K-8 (or beyond) cur-
riculum in math and science might be like if aided by the authoring by students of 
their own dynamic simulations of ideas. 
The Balinese were once asked why they had no word for “art” – they said “but every-
thing we do is art!” Similarly, pretty much everything children do is art: they make not 
just to have and for pleasure, but to learn and understand. 
Mathematics is the Art of “careful reasoning about how representations of ideas can be 
related to other representations of ideas”. Bertrand Russell famously said, “math is just 
p implies q”, but this is like defining Music as “various ways to make noise over 
time”! We humans, and especially children, above all things are alive: we learn best 
by experiencing being alive while trying to understand. As Goethe put it: “Gray is all 
Theory, But Green grows the Golden Tree of Life!” 
So it is the Romance, Beauty and Emotional Satisfaction that we have to bring home 
to children. It is along these dimensions that we should help them travel. 
Science is one of the Arts of “making the invisible more visible” – not just things our 
senses can’t detect, but also to make visible the causes of the phenomena in the uni-
verse we live in. Where Mathematics and other representations of ideas in our minds 
can be quite arbitrary – they are all essentially stories, where the mathematical stories 
strive to be consistent – and thus may have nothing to do with our universe even if we 
love the story, Science tries to find ways to relate “what’s out there” to the representa-
tions our minds and inventions limit us to. 
Mathematics can stand on its own as an art form – like other stories it just needs to 
follow its own esthetics – but when it is used within Science it acts as a kind of map-
ping language for territories that can’t be seen directly. The pocket globes in the 1780s 
showed what the Earth must look like from space as a result of the first round of care-
ful geometric(literally earth-measuring) surveys and inferences from those surveys – 
this was math being used to map investigations of “what’s out there”. It is easy to see 
that the “map is not what is being mapped”, both in kind and in detail. However, since 
we can only think in terms of our own  representations, we often can get fooled (even 
scientists) when we mistake things in language for the things “out there”. 
Einstein recommended that “thought experiments” and mathematical formulations 
should often be done before the observations because the math provides a language to 
think in and make careful guesses with. We can see this is a sword with two edges: the 
other edge is that doing lots of math beforehand can prejudge what is investigated if 
the “math story” is particularly compelling. 
In any case, the most important parts of science for children are those that involve 
direction investigations with the fewest stories. Part of the skills of science are to be 
able to avoid being ruled by “story thinking” and, given how strongly we are set up by 
Nature to think in terms of stories, this requires a lot of practice! 
 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
12
Young Children and Mathematics 
It’s a cliché that “children are surprising” but we were hardly prepared for what 6 year-
olds can really do when in a rich educational environment. This, and many other en-
counters like this one, changed our clichéd perceptions of what children can and cannot 
do. The most important principle in early children’s learning is to try to find out what 
they can do, and what representations of ideas work best for them. 
Their teacher, Julia Nishijima, whom we met at one of the schools we worked with 15 
years ago, was a little unusual in that she was a natural mathematician. 
We don’t think that she had studied math formally or had actually had ever taken a 
calculus course.  But she was like a talented jazz musician who has never taken formal 
lessons.  She really understood the music of mathematics.   
She had a natural mathematical outlook on the world and here’s one of the most inter-
esting projects we saw in her classroom.  She had the children pick a shape that they 
liked, and the idea was to, using just those shapes, make the next larger forms that had 
the same shape.   
Here are diamonds, squares, triangles. Trapezoids are kind of challenging, you have to 
turn them around to get them to fit.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One of the things that this teacher did with her students was to get them to reflect on 
their creations.  She treated math as a kind of a science to get the children to create 
structures - mathematical structures - and then analyze them.  Here’s what 6 year old 
Lauren wrote down that she had noticed. 
They cut out cardboard shapes to make a project for their parents. Lauren noticed that it 
took one tile to make the first one, the total number of tiles was one.  It took three more 
tiles to make the next shape, and the total number of files was four. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
And it took five more tiles to make the next one.  So pretty soon she saw “Oh yeah, 
these are just the odd numbers, differing by two each time, I add two each time and I’ll 
get the next one of these”.   
And the sum of these is the square numbers, up to at least 6 times 6 here (she wasn’t 
quite sure about seven times seven). 
She had discovered two very interesting progressions that all the mathematicians and 
scientists in the audience will recognize. 
Then the teacher had the kids all bring their projects up to the front of the room and put 
 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
13
them on the floor so they could all look at them, and the kids were absolutely amazed 
because all of the progressions were exactly the same!   
Every child had filled out a table that looked like this and it meant that the growth laws 
for all of these were exactly the same and the children had discovered a great generali-
zation about growth.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The mathematicians and scientists who are reading this will recognize that the odd 
numbers are produced as a first order differential relationship that gives a smooth, uni-
form progression – in the computer mathematics that we use, this is expressed as doing 
over and over with increase-by: 
Doing over-and-over: Odds increase-by 2  
And the Total number of tiles is produced by a second order (because it uses the results 
of a first order relationship) differential relationship: 
Doing over-and-over: Totals increase-by Odds 
The idea of increase-by is easy for everyone, because it is just putting things (or adding 
things) into a pile of things. Now what’s wonderful about this is that these sequences 
the first graders discovered can be used to represent a lot of classical science, including 
uniform growth and constant acceleration.   
And since these are made only out of addition (because they’re computed incremen-
tally), it occurred to Seymour Papert and others that young children should be able to 
deal with this kind of math – especially as it applies to the physical world – much more 
powerfully than the standard kind of calculation that they are subjected to in schools: 
and this turns out to be the case.  Later we’ll see that the circle drawn by a Logo turtle 
is a first order doing over-and-over and increase-by where the “numbers” are like ar-
rows that have both length (size) and a direction. 
Over the years, a number of researchers have looked deeper into “what children can 
do”, and found that the reality is quite different than most adults, and especially formal 
schools, suppose. The important “catch” as pointed out by Montessori, Piaget, and oth-
ers is that children simply do not think the same way throughout their lives: they have 
particular styles of thinking in different parts of development and can learn very pow-
erful ideas if they are put in a suitable form – or they can suffer terribly if forced to 
learn ideas in a form that their minds are not yet ready for. Most especially, the school 
approaches of: (a) knowledge is a fluid that can be poured in the child’s ear by a 
teacher, and (b) that children are defective adults who need to be fixed, are both 
doomed to failure both during application, but also often failure in later life as well. 
Following are a number of examples of what children can do when put in a rich envi-
ronment that caters to the ways their minds work. And just as Papert suggested in the 
1960s, the computer can be shaped into one of the most compelling and powerful edu-
cational environments in human history. This shaping is still ongoing, but enough ex-
perience has been gained to make strong arguments for very different forms of educa-
tion in the future. 
 
 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
14
Mathematics For Children 
Mathematics is basically “careful thinking about how one collection of representations 
could imply another collection of representations” – or, as Bertrand Russell famously 
put it, “math is just p implies q”. But this is like describing Music as “various ways to 
make noise over time”! As Goethe remarked: “Gray is all Theory, But Green grows the 
Golden Tree of Life!” 
Both Music and Mathematics are Art Forms that have much Romance, Beauty and 
Emotional Satisfaction as their main reasons for being. It is along these dimensions that 
we should help learners travel. 
So, for almost everybody, especially children, what we really want to do is to put learn-
ers in an environment in which mathematics is the way interesting and beautiful things 
get done and thought about, and where the special character of mathematics is gradually 
revealed. 
Another idea that underlies mathematics is the notion of taking things apart (analysis) 
and putting them together (synthesis). From this we easily get the ideas of quantity and 
counting and we start to get interested in the idea of numbers and how they can be taken 
apart and put together. If we take the number “8” as an example, then we quickly see 
that “the idea of eight” is very different from the many ways we can represent “the idea 
of eight”. So we have numeral forms (names for numbers) such as: 8, VIII, etc. And we 
have various analogous forms, such as ||||||||, talleys, groupings by 5s, lengths, etc. 
Since we are interested in helping children learn to think about how to take numbers 
apart and put them together, we would like to choose representations for numbers that 
encourage powerful thinking. We can see that the official Arabic form of “8” is not a 
very good representation for this. It is compact, but it is for already expert numerate 
thinkers. Why is this? Because “8” has no simple “take apart” properties. We can split it 
into two “o” s  or a forwards 3 and a backwards 3, but neither helps us think about “8”. 
On the other hand, the simple talley |||||||| does have nice “take apart” properties. We 
can easily separate it into all the whole number sums and products that make it up. 
 |  |||||||    ||  ||||||    |||  |||||    ||||  ||||     |||||  |||     ||||||  ||     ||||||| |  and so forth. 
 ||||     ||  || 
 ||||     ||  ||    etc. 
So, we strongly recommend that children be started with such analogical representa-
tions for numbers, and that these be used for thinking with, even after we start to label 
them with standard “numeral names”. Quite a bit of the difficulties most people have 
with mathematics (and especially with numbers) arises because standard schooling is 
in a rush to get children into the adult conventions (even if this rush causes them to 
loose mathematics for the rest of their life). 
An even better representation for a number is a length of material that can be com-
pared to other lengths, cut in pieces and put back together anyway we want. So we 
could think of strands of plasticine that can be cut anywhere and joined any way. 
A more durable version of the plasticine is a ruler, which indeed uses lengths as anal-
gous to numbers. If we have two rulers we can make a universal adding machine for 
all kinds of numbers, including fractions. Below: 2 7/8 + 1 5/8 = 4  .  
 
 
 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
15
 
This way of thinking about numbers is not only simple and useful, it is very much like 
the way scientists think of numbers. 
For example, suppose we think of lengths as getting larger as increasing in a direction 
that moves towards the right. We think of “addition” as placing one length to the right 
of another. The combined length is the sum of the addition. And we can find out what 
it is by measuring it with another length. So it is natural to think of subtraction as join-
ing one length with another that is aimed in the opposite direction. The resulting 
length can be similarly be measured by another length.  
We can combine these two ideas by putting an arrow on our lengths to indicate which 
way they are pointing. Then we can see that “subtraction” is just “addition”, if “addi-
tion” means join the tail of our second number to the arrow of the first number and 
then measure to the arrow of the second number to get the result. This seems almost 
ridiculously simple, but it is very powerful! It is visual and geometric, and it allows us 
to do a lot of complex sums (including fractions) without having to learn the “base 10 
positional notation algorithms” that use up so much of most children’s time and spirit. 
Another powerful use of this representation is that it works not just in one dimension 
(of “regular numbers”) but it also works in two dimensions, 3D, and even any number 
of Ds. We will take this use up later on in this book, but for now let’s think about how 
we would calculate a plane P traveling at 400 miles an hour heading N but flying in a 
200 mile an hour wind W that is heading W.  The distance is just P+W.  
We can make a simple Etoy to see what happens by moving N at rate 4 and having the 
wind blow W at rate -2 over and over. 
 
The plane is heading N (so is pointing up) but is being blown to 
the W The moment by moment path is thus a diagonal
This is a very useful way to think about numbers – as directed lengths (arrows) and 
addition. And this is one of the main ways we would like children to think about num-
bers: because it is simple, powerful, and because this is one of the main ways that sci-
ence thinks of numbers (numbers that are used in this way are called “vectors”). 
Another powerful idea is to describe change as incremental in time and/or extent. For 
example, the more complicated description of the total number of tiles as squares of 
the step number in the growth of shapes project by the 6 year olds could be replaced 
with the much simpler idea that the change of the amount of new tiles that had to be 
added was always just 2. A turtle circle is the sum of a series of incremental vectors. 
This is called a “differential model” and the written down forms of these models are 
called “differential relationships”, and are the heart and soul of the calculus. Histori-
cally, most of them have been evaluated using algebra, but they can also be done as 
simple incremental sums, and this is just what computers are really good at. The great 
benefit here is that this way of thinking, which is so central to much of science, can 
now be learned by young children long before then can get fluent in algebra. We will 
include many examples of how the children are able to find and use these.  
P 400 miles in 
one hour 
W 200 miles 
in one hour 
 
P + W  
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
16
Mathematical Reasoning 
We characterized mathematics as “careful thinking about how representations of ideas 
could imply other representations of ideas”, and that the most important process in 
helping anyone learn how to do mathematical thinking is to put them in many situa-
tions in which they can use how they think right now in a more careful way.  
For example, what is a really good representation to  help children think about the 
Pythagorean Theorem? 
 
 
This? 
 
 
 
Or This? 
The rule of thumb here is to find many ideas and representations for them that allow 
“beginners to act as intermediates”, that is, for them to immediately start doing the 
actual activity in some real form. This builds both skill and confidence, and both of 
these are what is needed to happily forge through more subtle and complex ideas. 
Below left is Euclid’s proof of the Pythagorean Theorem for high school geometry 
students. It’s elegant and subtle, it casts light on other areas of geometry, but it is not a 
suitable first proof for most young minds.  
Below right is a very different kind of proof: perhaps the original one by Pythagoras. 
We have seen many elementary-age children actually find this proof by playing with 
triangle and square shapes. Show the arrangement, surround the C square with 3 more 
triangles to make a larger square, copy the larger square, remove the C square, rotate 
the two triangles, note there is room for the A and B squares, move them, and Bingo! 
This proof has a visceral approach and feel, a powerful simplicity that is perfect for 
beginners’ minds and provides a solid foundation for later more abstract and subtle 
looks at the idea.  
The way calculus looks at many ideas is so powerful and so important that we want to 
start children learning to thing along these lines much earlier in their lives. So we have 
made a form of real calculus that is thinkable by young minds and that the computer 
brings alive in many delightful ways. 
We will show this approach mostly in examples that follow, but it is based on the 
kinds of arithmetical and mathematical reasoning that we have seen very young chil-
dren do in 1st grade (and even younger in the wonderful kindergartens of Reggio 
Emilia). The basic idea is that many relationships of change can be characterized by 
simple accumulative additions, sometimes cascaded. These generate all the smooth 
ramps and parabolic relationships that can represent many of the findings of science. 
This insight is also what got Babbage started thinking about making machines that 
could compute. 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
17
 A Few Examples For Young Children 
Young children get a lot of their best learning from direct contact and manipulation of 
things in the physical world. For many reasons, television is one of the worst mediums 
we can put in a child’s world. Thinking of it as an unlocked cabinet full of loaded guns 
and deadly poisons is a little simplistic, but does suggest that it should not be available 
to children, or at least should be locked up. 
On the other hand, we want to have books in the children’s world, and we would like to 
do as much as possible to motivate and help children to read. 
The computer is a little trickier, in part because it can easily imitate television and TV-
like media, but it can also imitate books (and, even better, dynamic books). 
So a healthy balance is called for between direct contact with objects and the indirect 
contact with symbolic objects that books and computers provide. 
One of the general rules of thumb for 21st century children is that we want to help them 
escape from the very simple perception of the world that their senses (including their 
“commonsense”) provides them. When adults go on walks with children, they should 
always carry an inexpensive magnifying glass and telescope. The children will easily 
get used to the idea that there are always things in their environment that their unaided 
senses are missing. In other words, “the world is not as it seems”, and this is the modern 
version of “open sesame!” that leads to science. 
An Example From Nature: Camouflage 
Camouflage is found everywhere in nature, as is the tendency for many animals to stop 
still when alarmed. A fun project for a young child is to make a camouflage project and 
see a plausible explanation of why animals “freeze” when threatened. 
First, let’s paint some grass, and then paint a grasshopper using the same shade of 
green. 
If we put the grasshopper in the grass, we see right away why its green color might 
help it escape from birds and other predators that might want to eat it. (If a creature 
like a grasshopper lived in a desert environment, what color might we expect it to be?) 
Now let’s write the simplest of scripts for the grasshopper to get it to move sideways 
in the left-right direction (the official name for this direction is x). We see that this is 
the same as the rule the children found for steadily increasing the size of something: 
All of a sudden we can see where the grasshopper is, and so can most other animals 
(too bad this document isn’t dynamic!). Now we have a little insight into why animal 
vision is almost always better at detecting motion than in seeing fine details – and 
also, why animals might want to keep still when threatened. 
 
 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
18
Illusions 
Illusions furnish many examples of “the world is not as it seems”, and many of them are 
quite startling when done dynamically using the computer. And, some of them can most 
easily be made using the computer. 
Contrast Illusions 
When we look at a scene, we think we are seeing the lights and shades and colors accu-
rately, but in fact, both our lower level and higher level mental mechanisms are refor-
mulating what our retina senses. For example, the apparent brightness of a gray tone is 
quite conditioned by the brightness of the background around it. We can show this both 
statically and dynamically. Let’s get out a rectangle from the Supplies Bin and color it.  
We make a square from it and color it a neutral gray, and then copy it so we have two 
of them. Then we make a larger square, color it black, and then copy it and color the 
copy white. 
Then we drop all of these into a playfield rectangle (because it is a little self-contained 
world and is set up to “capture” objects dropped on it). We organize the rectangle so it 
looks like: 
 
We can already see that the right hand rectangle on the white background looks darker 
than the copied rectangle with the same gray color looks on the black background. 
This is called the “Mach Illusion”, and it serves to help animals to see things that are 
almost the same color (because it makes the difference seem more different). 
But we can also do a dynamic version that seems to change colors, and also “proves” 
that the two squares are the same color. We write a script that is a lot like the grass-
hopper script but we include a “bounce” tile that will bounce off the walls and make a 
sound (the teacher’s favorite sound is the one called “silence”). 
 
 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
19
We can make a dynamic version of this illusion in Etoys, and also learn something 
about angles, negative numbers, and how much convergence is required to manifest 
the illusion. We get out a rectangle, make it high and skinny, and then copy it. 
Illusions That Teach 
The “railroad tracks” illusion is one of serveral that supposedly only work with human 
beings that have been raised in a constructed environment (this is still somewhat con-
troversial) but perhaps the widespread use of the OLPC XO will help answer some of 
these questions. 
The basic idea is that the same sized object placed on a picture of railroad tracks will 
look larger when placed higher where the tracks appear narrower. The mental calcula-
tion is that things of a certain visual angle in a context that whispers “farther away” are 
perceived to be larger. Here are two rectangles placed on a picture of railroad tracks. 
We want to write a script that will make one of the rectangles rotate in the opposite 
direction when the other one is turned. 
So, over and over again, whatever we rotate the left rectangle to, the right rectangle 
will be rotated to the opposite angle. 
 
 
 
We see that the “enlarge effect” is similar to that in the picture of the railroad tracks, 
and that there is very little effect when the Etoy “tracks” are rotated outwards. 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
20
 
To Drive And Steer The Car (Learning About Naming & Variables) 
To drive the car, the children find that changing the number after car turn by will 
change its direction. 
 
Then they draw a steering wheel (the very same kind of object as the car, but with a 
different costume) and see that if they could put steer’s heading right after car turn 
by … this might allow the steering wheel to influence the car. 
They can pick up steer’s heading (the name for the heading numbers that the steer-
ing wheel is putting out) and drop it into the script. Now they can steer the car with the 
wheel! 
The children have just learned what a variable is and how it works. Our experience 
indicates that they learn it deeply from just this one example. 
 
They quickly find that it is hard to control the car. They need to introduce a “gear” 
into the wheel’s connection to the car. They can get the needed advice from a teacher, 
parent, friend, or from a child thousands of miles away via the mentoring interface 
over the Internet. They open the expression in the script, and divide the numbers com-
ing out of the steering wheel by 3. This scaling makes turns of the steering wheel have 
less influence. They have just learned what divide (and multiply) are really good for. 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
21
 
The Powerful Idea of Feedback 
Sometimes we have enough information to make a foolproof plan. But most of the 
time things don’t go quite as expected, (even with our “foolproof” plans), and we wind 
up having to find new information, make new corrections, sometimes new plans. 
All animals and other mechanisms have limited abilities to gather information and 
very little ability to extrapolate into the future. For example, the simplest bacteria can 
be hurt or killed by too much acidity (or too little). They have evolved molecular ma-
chines that can help them detect when some dangerous substances are starting to affect 
them, and the ones that swim exhibit a tumbling behavior that radically (and ran-
domly) changes the direction in which they are swimming. If things are “good” they 
don’t tumble, if “bad” then they tumble again. 
This general strategy of sensing “good” and “bad” and doing something that might 
make things better is pervasive in biology, and is now in many of the mechanical and 
electrical machines made by humans. 
A fun activity for children is to be challenged to find their way around the outside of 
one of their school buildings blindfolded and just by touch. The simplest strategy 
works, follow the wall, and always turn in the same direction when it is lost. 
We can get our cars to do that by painting a different color to be used as a “touch sen-
sor” and writing a script that looks like: 
Then we challenge the children to make a car and a road that will get the 
car to go down the center of the road instead of the outside. There are 
many solutions for this. Here is a nice one from two 11 year old girls 
who worked well together. 
They figured out that if they made curbs on the road of two different 
colors then there would be only three cases: when the sensor is on the 
center, or one of the two sides. Their car, road and script look like: 
 
 
 
 
 
We can see that this is a better script than the one we showed them. They 
decided that their robot car would only go forward when it is in the mid-
dle. This means that it can safely negotiate any turn (the example can’t). 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
22
Jenni’s Big Race, … err, Pig Race 
Then we turned the kids loose to think up a project all by themselves. Jenny liked to in-
troduce her slant on things whenever possible (her cars we done as pencils with wheels), 
and she decided that it would be really fun to make a pig race.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Here is her narrative as she explained her project for the Squeakers DVD. 
Here we go for the annual pig race. It looks like it's a rough time today. The pink pig 
crashing into the wall.  
(I also have a watcher here that tells me what speed they're going.) 
Oh and the blue ;pig's coming in the lead. I have my own pig. I named it Jackson. And 
usually it loses, But, oh look the black pig is catching up, leaving the white pig in the dirt! 
She wanted a real track for her pigs and needed to figure out how to keep each pig in its 
lane. She had a wonderful idea that the nostrils of her pigs would be perfect as sensors to 
tell when it was trying to escape its lane!  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jenni, Age 11 
 
The start of the Pig Race 
The race. How does Jenny get the pigs to 
stay in their lanes? 
Watchers showing the speed of the 
different pigs 
Jackson Pig Winning 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
23
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reflections on Speed 
Quite a bit of doing is “just doing”, so it is a good idea to also reflect on what just hap-
pened. One way to do this is to have the objects leave trails that show what they were 
doing over time. 
If the speed is constant then the trail of dots is evenly spaced, showing that the same 
distance was traveled in each little tick of time 
 
If we increase the speed each tick of the clock, we’ll get a pattern that looks like the 
second picture. This is the visual pattern for uniform acceleration 
It’s fun to try using random in two dimensions. Here we can move a car forward ran-
domly and turn it randomly. If we put the pen down, we get a series of “Drunkard’s 
Walks”.  
One way to look at this is that a little bit of randomness 
will cause a lot of territory to be visited given enough time 
and it changes the probability of collisions quite a bit (it is 
still low, but now “more possible”). 
So we might guess that a random walk in a script that is 
using the principles of feedback could accomplish surpris-
ing things. 
 
If we make the speed be random each time (in this case between 0 and 40), we will get 
an irregular pattern of distance traveled for each tick 
 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
24
Animations 
Now let’s look at the simple animations done by children. In most 
productivity media systems animation is a built-in and opaque 
feature, but in Etoys it is something that is actually constructed by 
the children because there are many powerful ideas associated 
with animation-like processes. 
 
To do animations we need to use a variety of costumes that can be 
changed via a simple script. For example, let’s make a few draw-
ings of a worm and put them in a holder. If we look in the car’s 
viewer we find 
                                car look like dot 
and drag it out to start a script.  
 
 
 
 
We want it to look like one of the drawings in the holder so we 
look in the holder’s viewer and find 
                                Holder’s player at cursor 
We drop it on “dot” to get: 
 
 
 
 
We click on the (!) to try this script and we see that the car’s cos-
tume is changed to a worm.  
 
 
 
But further clicks won’t cause a further change because we ha-
ven’t moved the cursor. To do this we look in the Holder’s viewer 
again, find the cursor change line  
and drag this into the script. 
 
 
 
 
Finally, we change the <- to “increase by” by clicking on it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
because we want to make the cursor move to each succeeding 
position in the Holder on each tick of the clock (the Holder will 
wrap around these numbers when we get to the end). We set it 
ticking and we get a nice worm animation. 
 
We can make more worm pictures and drop them into the holder 
(even while it is running) to get a smoother animation look.. 
 
 
Holder with several draw-
ings of a worm 
     
 
Car made by a child 
 
This viewer category contains properties and 
behaviors that deal with an object’s appearance. 
 
 
 
This viewer category contains properties and 
behaviors what an object is carrying. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
25
 Sound Synthesis is “Just Animation” with Increase-by 
The Etoys Sound Recorder will capture a sound and automatically put it in the Sound 
Library where it can be played as a sound effect by an object. 
But we can also look at this sound. It is held by Etoys as many tiny rectangles in a 
holder that works the same way as the animation holder: there is a cursor, it can be posi-
tioned, etc. 
These holders are long. The tiny rectangles are not very wide but there may be as many 
as 8000 of them for each second of recorded sound! The height of the tiny rectangle is 
how far the sensor in the microphone was moved when being hit by air molecules (think 
of this sensor as being like a piston being hit with a shockwave of particles). We will 
look more at soundwaves later. For now, we can think of them as being made from little 
shockwaves of bunched and sparse particles moving outwards from the sound source. 
 If we could waggle the loudspeaker in our computer according to the heights of the rec-
tangles in order, we should be able to hear the sound played back! 
Etoys has a little speaker object that is hooked to the physical speaker in the computer. 
If we move its cone, the real speaker cone will move in the same way. 
This gives us a way to think about making a sound synthesizer – we just have to animate 
the speaker according to the rectangles in order in the holder. This is very similar to the 
animations we’ve just done. Our script looks like: 
But when we run the script we can’t hear anything. Why is this? It is because the Etoy 
scripts are set to run at normal animation speeds of several ticks to 30 ticks per second. 
But the sound fluctuations go much faster. There is a control in each script to set how 
many times the script should be run for each regular tick. We will go from “1 script fir-
ing per tick” to “10,000 script firings per tick” (really fast). 
This works! Now, let’s try some of the 
same tricks that we used for animation. 
Let’s set the speed number to 2 (this will 
pick every other rectangle, and will thus 
get through the holder of rectangles twice 
as fast). What does this sound like? 
Now let’s try some fractional numbers. 
How about 1.5? How about 1.3? Now we 
can see that there is a “speed number” for 
each pitch at which we want to play our 
sample. A commercial synthesizer works 
exactly the same way. 
We can make a little keyboard from buttons that will feed in their pitch number and play 
the sample. 
 We see again why increase by is a powerful idea! 
Now, what do you suppose would happen if we used the two stages of increase by that 
produce acceleration? (Answer: we would get what is called “frequency modulation” 
sound synthesis – another technique that is regularly used by commercial synthesizers.) 
 
 
 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
26
Making A Circuits Simulator Using Costumes 
Up to this point we have been using costumes for various kinds of movement and animations. But we can 
also use them to indicate the state (on or off, etc.) of the parts of a simulation. For example, if we wanted to 
do a circuit simulator that has sources of current, simulated wires, bulbs, and switching components, it would 
be nice to show what they are doing by changing their appearance. 
For example, let’s use a yellow color to indicate “current” or, more accurately in this project, “signal”. We 
can make a yellow square as a “source” of this signal. And we can draw a segment of a wire that can propa-
gate the signal. Since the signal can be there or not, we can draw two costumes, one with the wire holding the 
signal and glowing yellow, and one with the wire without the signal, showing black. We’ll put a red connec-
tor at one end of the wire that can sense whether a signal is being passed to it. Now we want to give dynamic 
behavior to the wire. This is a very simple script that uses the same “color sees” test that we used for the path 
following project. If our red dot can see the yellow signal, then we will switch our costume to the yellow 
“have signal” or “on” costume. It we can’t see the yellow signal, then we will switch our costume to the 
black “no signal” or “off” costume. 
 
We can copy a bunch of these wires (or better yet, we can put one in the Supply Bin, which will make an unlim-
ited number of copies). If we line them up and touch one end with our yellow rectangle we can see the signal 
moving down the wires! If we make a loop of the wires, the signal will stay on indefinitely. (In the real world 
this would only happen if the wires were a superconductor or had some hidden properties, such as a signal 
strength restorer.)  
 
Now we can think about making some “switchable switches” that can sense the signal and do various things 
with it. For example, one of the simplest “switchable switches” will sense a signal and turn it into “no signal”, 
and sense “no signal” and turn it into “signal”. It is called an “inverter”. Again, we draw two costumes, one for 
“on” and one for “off”, but the logic is exactly the opposite of the wire. We can use this to make a ticking clock 
signal by feeding its results back into itself. Notice that the delay made by the propagation of the signal avoids 
any paradox and simply switches in on and off in order. We could call this a NOT, because it negates its input. 
At this point it will be fun to make some output gadgets that can respond to the signal. A light is just a wire that 
is shaped like a light bulb. Let’s also make a loudspeaker that will play a sound if it detects a signal. This will 
look and act like: 
Now we can make some “switchable switches” that can compare signals. For example, we would like one that 
will only respond with “on” if both of its inputs are “on”. Otherwise, it will respond with “off”. This is called an 
AND switch. Switchable switches are sometimes called “gates” (because they “gate” the signal one way or an-
other) so we can also call this an AND gate. 
And, let’s make one that will only be off if both the inputs are off. We can see that this is a kind of OR, in that 
“A OR B” will be “on” if “A is on” or if “B is on” or if they are “both on”. This is called an “inclusive OR”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
 
27
Actually, we only need NOT and AND (or NOT and OR) to make all the possible tests and responses. And an 
entire computer can be made just from combinations of these two simple “bricks” plus the “mortar” of the wires 
to hold them together. This is pretty amazing (and also profound)! 
 
More to come here this summer … 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
28 
Physical Science: Looking More Carefully At The Outside World 
Up to this point our examples have been essentially mathematical, in that they are dealing with computer repre-
sentations of relationships of ideas. These ideas can be similar to the real world (the models of speed and accel-
eration), or different from the real world (the car in the speed and acceleration examples was supported by noth-
ing, but didn’t fall because there is no “gravity” in the computer world unless we model it). Sometimes we can 
make up a story that is similar to the real world, and even has a guess that works out. But for most of human 
history, the guesses about the physical world have been very far from the mark  
The physical sciences started in earnest when people started to do careful observations and measurements of the 
physical world, first to do accurate mapping for navigation, exploration and trade, and then to look more closely 
at more and more phenomena with better instruments and technique.  
 
What is the circumference of a bike tire? 
Another good example of "high-noticing low-cost" is the measuring of the circumference of the bicycle tire 
project for 5th graders. Much of the philosophical gold in science is to be found in this noticing activity. The 
students used different materials and got different answers, but were quite sure that there was an exact answer in 
centimeters (partly because schooling encourages them to get exact rather than real answers).  
One of the teachers also thought this because on the side of the tire it said it was 20" in diameter. The teacher 
"knew" that the circumference was pi * diameter, that "pi is 3.14", and "inches times 2.54 converts to 'centime-
ters' ", etc., and multiplied it out to get the "exact circumference" of the tire = 159.512 cm. We suggested that 
they measure the diameter and they found it was actually more like 19 and 3/4" (it was uninflated)! This was a 
shock, since they were all set up to believe pretty much anything that was written down, and the idea of doing 
an independent test on something written down had not occurred to them.  
That led to questions of inflating to different pressures, etc. But still most thought that there was an exact cir-
cumference. Then one of us contacted the tire manufacturer (who happened to be Korean) and there were many 
interesting and entertaining exchanges of email until an engineer was found who wrote back that "We don't ac-
tually know the circumference or diameter of the tire. We extrude them and cut them to a length that is 159.6 
cm ± 1 millimeter tolerance!”  
This really shocked and impressed the children -- the maker of the tire doesn't even know its diameter or cir-
cumference! -- and it got them thinking much more powerful thoughts. Maybe you can't measure things exactly. 
Aren't there "atoms" down there? Don't they jiggle? Aren't atoms made of stuff that jiggles? And so forth. The 
analogy to "how long is a shoreline?" is a good one. The answer is partly due to the scale and tolerance of 
measurement. As Mandelbrot and others interested in fractals have shown, the length of a mathematical shore-
line can be infinite, and physics shows us that the physical measurement could be "almost" as long (that is very 
long).  
There are many ways to make use of the powerful idea of "tolerance". For example, when the children do their 
gravity project and come up with a model for what gravity does to objects near the surface of the earth, (see the 
next project) it is very important for them to realize that they can only measure to within one pixel on their 
computer screens and that they can also make little slips. A totally literal take on the measurements can cause 
them to miss seeing that uniform acceleration is what's going on. So they need to be tolerant of very small er-
rors. On the other hand, they need to be quite vigilant about discrepancies that are outside of typical measuring 
errors. Historically, it was important for Galileo not to be able to measure really accurately how the balls rolled 
down the inclined plane, and for Newton not to know what the planet Mercury's orbit actually does when 
looked at closely.  
 
What is the length of a shore line? 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
29 
Children Discover, Measure, and Mathematically Model Galilean Gravity 
A nice “real science” example for 11 year olds is to investigate what happens when we 
drop objects of different weights. 
The children think that the heavier weight will fall faster. And they think that a stop-
watch will tell them what is going on.  
But it is hard to tell when the weight is released, and just when it hits. 
In every class, you’ll usually find one “Galileo child”.  In this class it was a little girl 
who realized: well, you don’t really need the stop watches, just drop the heavy one 
and the light one and listen to see if they hit at the same time. This was the same in-
sight that Galileo had 400 years ago, and apparently did not occur to any adult, (in-
cluding the very smart Greeks) for our previous 80,000 years on this planet! 
To really understand in more detail what is going on with gravity near the surface of 
the Earth, we can use a video camera to catch the dynamics of the dropping weight. 
We can see the position of the ball frame by frame, 1/30th of a second apart. To make 
this easier to see we can just pull out every fifth frame and put them side by side: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Another good thing to do is to take each frame and paint out the non-essential parts and 
then stack them. When the children do this, most of them will immediately say “Accel-
leration!” because they recognize that the vertical spacing pattern is the same as the 
horizontal one they played with using their cars several months before. 
But, what kind of acceleration? We need to measure. 
Some children will measure directly on the spread frames, while others will prefer to 
measure the stacked frames.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The translucent rectangles help because the bottom of the balls can be seen more ac-
curately, The height of a rectangle measures the speed of the ball at that time (speed is 
the distance traveled in a unit of time, in this case about 1/5th of a second). 
When we stack up the rectangles we can see that the difference in speed is repre-
sented by the little strips that are exposed, and the height of each of these strips ap-
pears to be the same!  
 
The “Galileo Girl” explains a 
simple way to see if different 
weights fall at the same or 
different speeds. 
 
         
 
The stacked up 
frames that reveal the 
acceleration pattern 
 
 
 
Dropping objects 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
30 
 
 
 
These measurements reveal that the acceleration appears pretty constant, and they 
made such scripts for their car months ago. Most quickly realize that since the ball is 
going vertically that they have to write the script so that it is the vertical speed that is 
increased and the vertical position y that is changed. They paint a small round shape 
to be the simulated ball, and write the script: 
 
 
 
 
 
Now, how to show that this is a good model for what they have observed? 11 year old 
Tyrone decided to do as he did with his car months before: to leave a dot copy behind 
to show that the path of his simulated ball hit the very same positions as the real ball 
in the video. 
Here is what he had to say when explaining what he did and how he did it for the 
Squeakers video: 
And to make sure that I was doing it just right, I got a magnifier which would help me 
figure out if I had it - if the size was just right.  
 
After I'd done that I would go and click on the little basic category button and then a 
little menu would pop up and one of the categories would be Geometry, so I clicked 
on that. 
 
And here it has many things that have to do with the size and shape of the rectangle. 
So I would see what the height is… I kept going along the process until I had them all 
lined up with their height. 
 
 I subtracted the smaller one's height from the bigger one to see if there was a kind of 
pattern anywhere that could help me out. And my best guess worked: so in order to 
show that it was working, I decided to make – to leave – a dot copy (so that it would 
show that the ball was going at the exact right speed. And acceleration. )  
An investigative work of beauty by an 11 year old!  
By the way, in the United States about 70 percent of the college kids who are taught 
about gravity near the surface of the Earth fail to understand it.  It’s not because the 
college kids are somehow stupider than the fifth graders, it’s because the context and 
the mathematical approach most college kids are given to learn these ideas are not 
well suited to the ways they can think.   
This subject has been extensively studied with college students in US: 70% (including 
science majors) fail to understand this Galilean model of gravity near the surface of the 
Earth. The projects developed in Squeak use a different and simpler kind of incre-
mental mathematics that allows very young children to understand some of the key 
ideas in calculus. We have found that more than 90% of 5th graders not only understand 
“Galilean gravity” but are able to derive the mathematical “formulas” (actually 2nd or-
der differential equations) using this alternative mathematics, and author a simulation 
that matches up very well with the experimental data. 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
31 
 
 
Lunar Lander Game 
Now that the children have “captured gravity”, they can use it to explore other physical 
situations and to make games. If the ball is repainted into a spaceship, and a moon is 
made that can be landed on, it is pretty easy for a 12-year old (and most 11 year olds) 
to make the classic game “Lunar Lander”. 
If we just let the gravity script run, it will move the ship downwards (in the negative 
direction) with more and more negative speed. If it hits the landing plate on the moon’s 
surface while it is moving too fast, the ship should crash. We paint a crash picture and 
write a script to cause the crash. 
If gravity is a “speed eater” (where what “eats speed” is the downward pointing accel-
eration -2), then we can think of the rocket’s motor as a “speed maker” (which imparts 
a positive upwards acceleration). In test after test, the universe appears to always add 
such accelerations, and so we can too. We write a script to add in positive acceleration 
to the rocket’s speed. To control this we’ll get a joystick from the supplies bin and 
hook up the updown axis to supply the acceleration. 
Our standard “acceleration imparting change of motion” script doesn’t care about how 
many influences there are on the rocket. Whatever the acceleration is (positive or nega-
tive) it will simply increase the speed for each tick. If the speed is negative and the accel-
eration is positive but smaller, then the ship will still fall (do you see why?). If the accel-
eration stays positive then the ship’s speed will eventually become positive (do you see 
why?) and the ship will start rising. 
It would be nice to see the rocket blast when its motor is running, and this is easy to do. 
We paint a rocket blast flame and embed it into the rocket. We can position the flame so it 
appears to come from the rocket engine. The flame will now travel with the rocket. (Try 
it.) Now we can test to see if the joystick updown output is greater than zero. If so, we 
will show the flame by saying flame show. If the joystick updown is zero, we will hide 
the flame by saying flame hide. 
 
 
 
 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
32 
Spaceships And Inertia 
We can use the idea of inertia to come up with how a physical body (like a spaceship) 
will behave in space. 
The nifty thing here is that the very same two-line “acceleration to velocity to change 
of motion” script will work unchanged – this is because vectors are a way to repre-
sent numbers that are independent of a coordinate system and rotations. This, and 
because vectors can be represented visually by decomposable arrows that are very 
intuitive for young children, is why teaching numbers as vectors is a very strong 
pedagogical strategy. 
The only new thing we need to think about is how change of motion is done when the 
spaceship is moving in one direction, but oriented in a different direction, and fires 
its motors. 
Each Etoy object is secretly a vector, so we just have to paint a red dot for accelera-
tion and a blue one for velocity, and put them in a playfield object (this is like a little 
page that holds things and also is a kind of separate space or universe for the objects. 
We tell the playfields to orient to the center and now the location of the colored dots 
is also their vector value. The change of motion parts of the move script are exactly 
what we’ve been using for all of our accelerated motion simulations 
 
As in the Lunar Lander project, we will use the joystick to control the spaceship’s 
engine (by the updown direction), but we now will want to use the leftRight direction 
to turn the ship. 
 
Of course, there is rotational inertia, so this is too simple, since the ship will quit 
rotating as soon as the leftRight output of the joystick is zero. However, we can 
use this because modern day spaceships act on this control just this way: they 
use a combination of steering jets, gyroscopes, and computers to allow the pilots 
to simply steer the orientation of their vehicle. 
Now we need to deal with the very common case that the ship will be moving in 
one direction and oriented in another, and we then fire the engines. The diagram 
for this looks like: 
 
 
We can see that the size (distance) of the new acceleration vector is gotten from 
the how the motor affects the ship – so we can just use joystick’s upDown for 
this. Now we need to set the direction (theta) of the acceleration vector, and we 
can take this from the ship’s own heading (because the motor is aimed in the 
same direction as the ship). 
Putting all of these together gives us the following very simple (and very pretty) 
script. 
 
Making a vector for 
acceleration. 
 
… and another 
vector for velocity 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
33 
 
This project works nicely when the ships are placed against a star-filled background obtained from the Internet. 
This works nicely! Now we can add some pleasant details. We can use the same logic 
for the flame as we did in Lunar Lander. 
Now we can package all of this up in a nice “control panel” (using a playfield to hold 
everything). We add buttons to pause the ship, start the ship (move it from the dock 
to the universe it will fly in), and to bring the ship back to its dock. This panel looks 
like: 
 
Playfields have another nice property. As we mentioned, they are like a little private 
universe for holding things – and they also remember all the relationships that objects 
have with each other. So, if we copy a playfield, we will get a copy of all the relation-
ships. In this case, we get a new spaceship, vel, acc, and controls. We can repaint this 
in a different color, and now two people can play this game! 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
34 
Newtonian Orbits 
This is a difficult project to do “scientifically” because it is not easy to directly meas-
ure gravity as an “inverse square of distance” force in “child’s scale” on the surface of 
the Earth. The children are able to get a “pretty much constant” acceleration from their 
movie of balls dropping about 14 feet from the top of their school building.  This is 
Galileo’s result also. This is because the difference in force due to distance from the 
top of the building to the ground is about 1 part in one million! 
However, children can do a mathematical exploration that is based on a reasonable 
premise derived from an analogy to the way light disperses from a glowing body. 
 
We can directly measure the intensity of light from a glowing body, and we discover 
that it acts as though light is emitted in straight-line “rays” that spread out from the 
surface. This means that the “number” of rays passing through an area at a distance d 
will have to pass through 4 times that area at double the distance (2d) and thus the in-
tensity of the rays is . We can say that “the intensity of light is inversely proportional 
to the square of the distance”. What if we try the idea that gravity might also be emit-
ted in a similar way? 
 
The simulated Earth in orbit around the simulated Sun. The images of the Earth’s accel-
eration, velocity and position were all captured in the same instant. We can see from the 
velocity that the Earth is slowing down as it moves farther away from the Sun, and we 
can see from the acceleration that it is getting much smaller. 
 
We make up the  magnitude (called distance in Etoys) of the acceleration vector from 
the gravStrength of the Sun scaled by the inverse square of the distance. The direction 
(called theta) in Etoys of this vector is the same as the Earth but pointing at the Sun. 
From here it’s just “increase-by” in 2D. This is why “numbers as vectors” is so nice! 
 
Earth’s acceleration 
vector over time mag-
nified by 1000 
 
The initial conditions for this orbit 
 
 
Earth’s velocity vector over 
time magnified by 50. Notice 
that it is a displace circle. This 
is not easy to prove! 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
35 
Lots Of Things Are Springy! 
One of the problems with classical science is that it reused common words – like know, 
theory, force, etc. – for very new ideas. New words should have been chosen. For exam-
ple, for most children and adults, the word “force” is a very confusing term for some-
thing that only influences a change of motion. 
In Science, the weight of an object is thought of as a “force” in the direction of the 
source of gravity. But if we place a weight on a sturdy table so that it moves no further, 
most people do not think of the table exerting an upwards force that balances the down-
ward force of the weight. 
If we try a table made from a flimsy wood, like balsa, we will see the table bend until it 
either breaks or is able to exert a balancing upwards force. 
If we try this on a paper table, it will simply collapse down to the floor which exerts the 
upwards force. 
 
 
 
 
And, if we watch carefully, we can see that the balsa wood table will move up and down 
when the weight is placed on it, as though it were a kind of spring (which it is). 
Beams have the same characteristics. And all these are examples of “springy things”.  
Now we can use the ideas about acceleration and speed we learned from the falling 
weight. But the acceleration is not constant now because it is proportional to the stretch 
of the spring. What can we do? 
What is really nice here is that we can get the computer to compute very small little 
movements in which we can pretend the acceleration is constant. Then we can measure 
the stretch of the spring and do this again. This gives us a very simple but good model of 
the spring, and is a great example of how easy it is for young children to learn the ideas 
of calculus with the environment of a computer. 
If we look at a spring with a weight hung on it we can measure how much it stretches 
until it is able to balance the force. 
If we put on twice the weight most springs will stretch very close to twice as much. This 
gives us a way to simply describe the force of the spring: it is proportional to the length 
it is stretched. 
 
We simply paint a spring-shaped object and look in its geometry category. We find a 
property called Spring’s length which is the vertical size of our spring picture. We are 
measuring the stretch of the spring so we need to make a new property called Spring’s 
normalLength to remember this.  
Our accelerated movement mathematics is: 
          Spring’s speed increase by Spring’s accel 
          Spring’s length increase by Spring’s speed 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
36 
 
To plot what the spring does, we turn on its pen and move it sideways 
There are two influences on the acceleration. The weight on the spring is always going 
to be accelerated downwards by gravity regardless of whatever else is going on (this is 
like the ball) so we can just pick a constant number for this: let’s say 4. And, moment by 
moment, there will be another acceleration exerted by how much the spring is stretched 
at that point. We can get the stretch by subtracting the current length from the normal 
length: 
          Spring’s stretch <- Spring’s normalLength – Spring’s length 
We need to scale this down so it will act like a regular spring. Scaling to 5% will work 
well. 
          Spring’s stretch multiply by 0.05 
Now we can get the total acceleration by adding the two “forces” together. 
          Spring’s accel <- Spring’s stretch + 4 
And we can calculate the movement for this short time tick using our normal math: 
          Spring’s speed increase by Spring’s accel 
          Spring’s length increase by Spring’s speed 
Our thought process can be put directly into the spring’s movement script: 
 
 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
37 
The Beauty And Importance Of Complex Systems 
 
Just “one little dot”. One infected person with an infec-
tious incurable disease (the little red dot in the lower right 
corner) in the general  population of 1000 people will 
eventually cause everyone to become infected. 
 
If the disease is deadly then eventually there won’t be 
enough health people to do anything about the infection. 
If the incubation period is long, then the population might 
not notice in time. 
 
All will be infected if there is no cure. If the disease is 
deadly then all will eventually die. Human brains are not 
good at dealing with slow disasters. We need simulations 
to help us think about important things. 
 
This very simple script can deal with any size popula-
tion. It controls the bigger village shown on the right. 
Etoys can make many thousands of copies of objects and their behaviors 
and rund them all at once. Because of this we can explore very complex 
systems by just scripting the behavior of one item and making many cop-
ies of it. 
For example, if we make lots of little dots, we can explore the behavior of 
contagious processes, such as rumors and disease. Here the scripts are 
very simple, and cause a dot to change color when it collides with an “in-
fected” dot. 
 
We just make a blue dot as a “non infected” villager and 
create as many copies as we want, then make the last 
one a red infected one. The green rectangle is their 
“village” 
 
The simplest of scripts just moves the villagers 
around and tests to see if there is a contact 
with an infected person. If so, the villager 
becomes infected (the color is changed to red). 
The size of the arena for collisions determines the delays between colli-
sions, and allows us to explore matters of life and death, such as really un-
derstanding the characteristics of epidemics: fast deadly ones like typhoid 
which are very noticeable, and slow deadly ones such as AIDS (which is 
deadly in part because the onset of an AIDS epidemic is not dramatic).  
A poor understanding of slow deadly epidemics in many parts of the world 
is one of the main causes of the AIDS disaster. People have to reach beyond 
their common sense into the “uncommon sense” of models for disasters in 
order to help their imagination spur them to early action. The computer will 
eventually create an even larger change in how humans think about ideas 
than the printing press. 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
38 
 
 
 
A Major Project: An Aquarium Ecology 
The Vivarium Project was one of our large multiyear (7 years) investigations with elementary aged children. The 
Vivarium’s vehicle was ecologies of various kinds (including human ecologies) and the project was aimed at better 
understanding of how to help children learn about systems, model them, and think in terms of complex systems. 
Since animals need to eat other living entities in order to survive, there are a very large number of situations in which 
a balance is achieved between “eaters” and “the eaten” – and this often occurs as a chain of such dependencies. 
Here is a project that is simple by ecological standards – but requires the children to do a lot of thinking and modeling 
to make it: fish and plankton in an aquarium. 
Here we see female fish (with blue boundaries), male fish (green), plankton (the larger red dots), and 
plankton “residue” (plankton that has been eaten). 
The fish are motivated by their nervous system to try do a number of things at 
once: to move around, to eat, to mate, to get old etc. We can make a script that 
“fires off impulses” to do the various actions: 
 
 
Decisions are constantly being made by the fish’s simulated nervous system. 
Here is the “maybe eat?” script: 
Both the plankton and the fish swim randomly about, and the children are eas-
ily able to come up with this behavior, (which is so pervasive that it is found 
everywhere in the animal kingdom (and in much smaller particles thanks to the 
kinetic motion of heat and collisions between them). 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
39 
Looking At (and Smelling) The Outside World 
Here is a project that is “not quite science, but suggestive”, and is part of a larger set of experiments to start 
plausible thinking about the very small. We ask the children to bring “really smelly stuff” from home – per-
fume, ammonia, (hopefully not stuff that should go down the toilet), etc. We close all the windows of the class-
room (or go to the auditorium if there is one) and ask the children to raise their hands when they can smell 
something. (This is best done first with a few bottles that have nothing smelly in them, to get the children to 
relax and not try to blindly please the teacher.) 
If there is no air moving in the room, a really smelly substance opened at one end of the room will first be 
smelled by the children closest to it, and we should see a spreading wave of hands going up. This should open 
questions and discussions about what is going on, and ways to explain it. 
   Children in a room with smelly 
stuff 
A third experiment can be done with water and sugar each filling half of equal sized containers. We put both of 
them on the scales to see what they weigh. We ask them to think about what might happen to both the volume 
and the weight if we combine the sugar and the water. Most of the children will decide that the total weight 
should be the same, and the volume should double 
With the water still on the scales, we pour the sugar into the water and put its container back on the scales. 
We’d like the children to notice and realize that the weight of the containers, sugar and water is still the same. 
But to their great surprise, the combined volume is not double the single volumes but a little less. 
A second experiment can be done with fans to create wind. One ploy could be to have some students stand on 
the other side of the door to the room, open the door, and see if they can smell the substance. Then children in 
the room can use big hand fans to try to move the air in the room out. The students outside should quickly de-
tect a lot more smell and feel “wind”. 
Fans 
Reactions 
Putting sugar in the water 
container 
The volume is less than the 
sum, but the weight stays 
the same! 
Reacting to the smelly stuff 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
40 
A fourth experiment can be done with a little food dye, a clear bowl containing water, and the camera on the 
XO. We drop a little food dye into the bowl, watch what happens, and also capture the experience with the 
camera. We can play back the sequence to see what is happening. And we can also play back five minutes at 60 
times real-time to see if that provides more insight. 
One theory that covers all four experiments is that when you divide substances finely enough, you get individ-
ual particles that allow things to fit in between. This is “suggestive” but isn’t yet science. We can make it more 
suggestive (but still not “science”) by making a computer model. 
Etoys can have hundreds and even thousands of objects all dynamically behaving the same way. We can make a 
“room” or a “bowl” by using particles of one color (let’s say 2000 gray ones) to represent one of the substances. 
And we can use another color (say 500 green ones) for the new substance to be introduced. In all cases, some-
how the perfume or dye particles (if indeed made out of particles) moved and dispersed. One guess would be 
that the particles are already moving around randomly and we are just seeing (or smelling) the movement. 
We just made a single Etoys object do a random walk. We can use this directly to move the particles and see 
what happens. 
The theory that most of our sensible matter is made from tiny particles in motion is too important to “just tell 
the children” as though it is a religious fact. Even though it is very difficult to lay the basis for the particle the-
ory (as it indeed was for scientists 100 years ago), every effort has to be made to make these conclusions as 
truly scientific as possible. We will take this up again further on in this summary when we talk about chemistry. 
 
It looks a lot like the bowl of water and dye. But this is not yet what science would call a theory (the official 
scientific term is conjecture). In this case we can’t see what is actually “down at the bottom” and whether or not 
it is particles or continuous or something quite different is beyond our ability to observe. In cases like these (and 
most of science is this way), we have to gather a lot of evidence from many different cases to make the conjec-
ture plausible enough to eventually be judged a real theory.  
Only 120 years ago, matter as made up from particles was still controversial amongst the top scientists in the 
world, and it was only 100 years ago that enough evidence and good enough models were gathered to convince 
the scientific world that matter can be subdivided into particles. (In fact, shortly thereafter, in the 1920s, the 
quantum conjectures started to become real theories, and these have evidence and mathematics showing parti-
cles of matter at smaller scales have some of the properties of radiation.)  
Today, it’s not quite clear what is going on at subatomic scales, but at the level of the matter we most easily 
perceive – solids, liquids, gases – we can safely act as though these are made from particles. 
 
 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
41 
Piston Supported By A Gas 
What if we take our particle diffusion model that just moves particles around ran-
domly and, instead of confining the particles in a box, we let the top of the box be a 
piston that has a weight on it. If we shoot a small marble at a big one, the larger one 
will only move a little. If we shoot a bigger marble, then the big one will move more. 
So, we can take as a reasonable guess that each time a small particle hits the piston it 
will impart just a little acceleration upwards (like the rocket motor but really tiny) 
and meanwhile gravity will be dragging down the weighted piston. 
Gravity will be exerting a downwards pull on the little particles as well, but we will 
assume they are so energetic that this has no noticeable effect. “Kedama” is the Japa-
nese word for “lots of mess”, so it is a good name for this chaotic system! 
 
The crux of this simulation is that enough particles are hitting the piston on average 
per a short duration of time to impart a “pretty continuous” upwards acceleration on 
the piston. The downwards acceleration from the weight of the piston will try to move 
the piston downwards. The further down the piston moves, the higher the probability 
that more particles will hit it. At some point, if the weight is not too heavy, the down-
wards and upwards accelerations will “pretty much balance” and we just see small 
fluctuations in the level of the piston. 
Now we can do some experiments. For example, we can mark the level of the piston 
as it is balanced by 1000 particles. Then we can reduce the number of particles to 500 
and see what happens. The piston goes to a level that is about half the height (and this 
makes some sense because we have reduced the probability of collisions between the 
particles and the piston by 50%. 
Now let’s suddenly put in 2000 total particles. We get an explosion! As the piston 
settles back we see shock waves as bunches of particles bounce back and forth. Even-
tually, we get a result we should have anticipated: the piston gets balanced at about 
twice the height it had with 1000 particles and 4 times that with 500 particles. 
We can also change the weight of the piston. What do you think will happen if we 
double the weight of the piston? 
These are mathematical experiments, but they provide a lot of insight for how to set 
up the classic Boyle’s Law experiments in the physical world. 
 
 
 
 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
42 
In our simulation we’ll avoid the dramatic leaping backwards up the waterfalls, and 
concentrate on how the salmon might be able to guide itself by smelling a particular 
chemical from its spawning ground and being able to remember just the concentration of 
the last sniff it took. 
To model the water with the chemical in it, we’ll use a gradient of color, where the 
darker the color, the more concentrated is the chemical. Etoys lets us sense not just the 
color under an object, but also the brightness. So, for this simulation, less brightness 
means “getting closer”. 
Following Chemical Signals 
This project is in two parts. First, we model typical animal behavior that is used to 
follow chemical signals in the environment by being able to sense the relative con-
centration of the chemical and to be able to remember a past smell and concentration 
well enough to decide to keep going or to try a different path. 
We’ll pick a salmon swimming upstream to lay its eggs in the same part of the river 
in which it was born. 
 
 
 
 
This is the classic strategy used in most ani-
mals from bacteria on up to make progress with 
incomplete information from the environment.  
1: keep moving 
2: if things aren’t better, do something random 
3: remember last information from environment. 
 
 
 
 
 
Below we see the salmon has successfully found the darkest corner, and to the right we 
see the path it took. The script under the path is a “turtle” following the salmon’s posi-
tion and drawing a trail in a different playfield. The holder and script under the “river” 
animate the salmon’s body to wriggle as a fish does. 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
43 
Ants use their ability to sense and follow gradients to communicate with each other: 
they lay scent trails to mark paths to help other ants find “interesting things” (usually 
food). Ants are a kind of “swarm animal” and often act like a larger organism whose 
“cells” can independently sense, think and do. 
 
Massively Parallel Particle System can handle tens of thousands of 
moving and background particles. This is a simulation of ants gathering 
food,and leaving a diffusing trail of pheromones to guide other ants. 
 
 
This is the “master” script that fires off all the rest of the scripts for each 
ant. It is very simple. 
 
 
Massively Parallel Particle System can handle tens of thousands of 
moving and background particles. This is a simulation of ants gathering 
food,and leaving a diffusing trail of pheromones to guide other ants. 
 
If the ant has not found food, it just wanders around looking for food or 
for a pheromone trail left by other ants. Scientists are pretty sure that 
most food is found when the randomly stumbles into it. 
 
If the ant has found food it will plot a course back to its nest and level a 
pheromone trail of diffusing evaporating odor. The diffusion is done 
similarly to the dye in the goldfish bowl. 
 
The wander script is our classic random walk that we’ve used for so 
many kinds of investigations. 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
44 
Etoys was also inspired by the invention of 
Desktop Publishing at Xerox PARC and by the 
subsequent very nice approach to end-user 
authoring in Hypercard. 
The picture to the right is direct output from an 
Etoy project (on an OLPC display screen) of 
the next page in this document (done in Micro-
soft Word). The OLPC display has very high 
resolution – so the details are crisp – but has a 
small size – basically like a paperback book 
(4.5” by 6”), rather than an 8.5” by 11” sheet of 
paper. This means that we have to be careful of 
the visual angle especially of the font sizes 
when developing for the OLPC XO. 
To be able to develop anywhere, Etoys has a 
high quality display zoom that allows any sized 
window (including 4.5” by 6” OLPC sized 
windows) to be used. The developer can de-
velop in any size that is convenient and can 
move back and forth if, for example, both a 
large screen and small screen layout is the goal. 
All Development Can Be Done on the OLPC 
A very important point, to be made again, is 
that the Etoys system is complete and includes 
all of its development tools in its small foot-
print on the OLPC machine. Any child, and 
parent, any teacher, any curriculum developer 
can develop at all levels (including the underly-
ing powerful Squeak Smalltalk base) on the 
OLPC XO. 
Media Authoring In Etoys 
 
 
Full screen mode on a PC display (we don’t want to see 
MS Windows and do wish to use the entire display. This 
is the way Etoys is usually used on other platforms, 
including the OLPC 
 
“OLPC Mode” in a 6” by 6” scaled window in “e-book” portrait for-
mat on a PC display. 
 
“OLPC Mode” in a 6” by 6” scaled window in “presentation” land-
scape format on a PC display. 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
The Etoys Desktop World 
The Squeak project/desktop is where things are made, and 
the end-user can have any number of them. They also act as 
“pages” for documents, presentations and the web. The pages 
are sortable by hand and by script, and each sorted sequence 
can be named and used – this allows many different presenta-
tions and “books” to be made up from the same materials. 
 
For example, Powerpoint is basically a collection of sorted 
pages that can have a few object types on those pages cou-
pled with a page turning mechanism and some visual transi-
tions, we can readily see that the integrated Squeak scheme is 
more powerful, comprehensive and much simpler. 
 
The User Interface Ideas Are Few and Simple 
We are used to modeless editing of text, but most applica-
tions have an “editing mode” and a “presentation mode”. 
Within these are “button modes”, “background-foreground 
modes”, etc. Squeak eliminates virtually all of these. For ex-
ample, all editing can be done at any time in full-screen and 
even while running as a plug-in in a browser. The way ob-
jects are selected allows even event-sensitive objects like 
buttons to be manipulated even while they are “live”. 
 
Balloon Help Is Always Active  
Balloon Help is usually disabled in today’s systems because 
it is so intrusive. We have found that a 1.5 second delay pro-
vides a nice balance. A confident and knowledgeable user 
will never see it, but it is always active and provides consid-
erable aid to beginners. The user can edit the balloon help to 
add helpful notes for themselves and others. 
 
The Halo of Handles 
Every object will show the same “halo of handles” that allow 
efficient invocation of the most used manipulations, such as: 
rotation, scaling, copying, etc. It is possible to choose a filter 
to limit which ones show up for beginners (but we have 
found that all beginners have no trouble at all with the full 
suite of handles right from the beginning). 
 
The Handles Are Also Squeak Etoys Objects 
(Everything is.) This means that end-users have the option of 
customizing everything in the system. Most of the time this 
will not be done, but e.g. for young children, a teacher may 
wish to add more extensive notes to the existing balloon help, 
or make the handles appear quicker. Squeak has “fences” that 
warn about changes and entering more complex territories, 
but the end-users can still have the option to explore. 
 
The standard handles for 
every object in Squeak 
 
Balloon help is everywhere 
but unobtrusive and delayed 
 
What some of the handles do 
 
A Handle is a Squeak 
object and you can get 
its handles 
 
 
This allows access to the properties 
of the Handle, so an end-user can add 
a note to the balloon help for addi-
tional aid 
Media Authoring In Etoys 
Painting a car on the desktop 
 
Getting the paintbox from the Etoys Desktop Menu 
 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
46 
 Objects Are “The Same” But May Wear Different Costumes 
We’ve just seen that all objects will show the same control 
handles, but the similarities between them go much deeper. 
Each object’s visible appearance is a costume that it wears 
(and can change), but underneath the objects are the same. 
(This is very much like the actors in a play. They have differ-
ent roles, look different on the stage – they may even be play-
ing a tree – but underneath they are all human beings, with all 
the similar properties that humans share.) 
 
Objects Reveal Their Properties and Behaviors the Same Way 
Clicking on the 
viewer handle will bring up the object’s 
viewer, which shows all of the object’s properties and behav-
iors organized into categories. Every object is “the same”: is 
graphical, can carry other objects, can be scripted, has a pen, 
etc., so most of each viewer is exactly the same from object 
to object. 
 
The Car Painting and Car Viewer Are Both Costumes For Car 
And the end-user can make more for any object. 
 
All Objects Are Scripted The Same Way 
Scripts are made by dragging out tiles onto the desktop, and 
then dragging tiles into the script. Syntax is always correct. 
 
 
 
 
 
Object viewer with some of the standard categories of 
properties and behaviors 
 
The menu of the stan-
dard categories 
 
 
Tiles dragged from the viewer and dropped on the desktop … 
 
… make a script 
 
The green “destination marker” shows up when tiles 
are dragged over a script. 
 
 
The script can be started “ticking” by clicking on the 
clock 
 
The tiles fly into the destination when dropped. 
     
 
The car will move in a circle when the script 
ticks. If we have made “pen down” (in the “pen 
use” category) true, then the car will leave a 
trace as it moves. 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
47 
 
 
 
 
 
The result is that the scriptor will move in a 
circle and leave a pen trail of its own 
 
Because the script is a standard Squeak Etoys object, 
we can get its handles, and its viewer … 
 
 
We should guess correctly that we can do the same thing for 
any Squeak object, including a category in a viewer! 
 
Or a movie even while it is playing! 
 
… and write the same script we wrote for the car 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
48 
Movies and Videos Are Just “Animations” 
Movies are represented (and abstracted) in Etoys as Anima-
tions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What’s missing? Movies usually have hundreds to thousands 
of frames, each of which has lots of pixels. These frames are 
usually held as a file on the hard drive and are brought into 
the player application. Squeak Etoys provides automatic 
services for relating contents of files to Etoy objects, and also 
to compress and decompress pictures.  
 
“Books” and Presentations Are Just “Animations” 
Squeak “Book” (multipage documents that are like a Hyper-
card stack) and Squeak Presentations (like powerpoint but 
more flexible) are the very same kind of structure. The 
“pages” can be any object (including a whole project),  
 
 
 
 
 
and turning is done by a script that looks like: 
 
 
 
 
We will take a deeper look at how media is manipulated and 
made in subsequent “Media Examples”.  
 
 
 
Project “page” is shown full screen. All the authoring facilities are avail-
able, this is a live project, not just an image. 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
49 
 Here are examples of an “Active Essay” about the powers of agitation, testing, and just a little memory when things are 
going well or badly. We use this as part of the lead up to the Theory of Evolution to show that small amounts of memory 
coupled with sensing can change “astronomically improbable” processes into “pretty darn probable” ones. 
 
One of the early pages in the essay is our old friend the salmon and its swim up-
stream, but now included as a dynamic example in this longer explanation. 
 
Richard Dawkins used the improbability of zillions of monkeys typing by chance 
to illustrate that many people think most processes are totally random. 
 
Instead of just “telling them what’s so” or making claims, we can show them how 
to build their own simulation of a seemingly improbable task. 
 
One of the simple subprojects is to make a sentence jumbler that will randomize 
the letters in a string of characters. 
 
Here’s the payoff page. Quite surprisingly, the tiniest amount of retention of de-
sired characteristics changes the problem from one that would take longer than 
the age of the unverse to do into one that our little Etoys simulation can do in a 
few thousand iterations (a minute or so on the OLPC)! 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft – Rough Draft 
50 
 That’s it for this round. Much more to come this summer. We hope this helps you to 
get a feel for Etoys simulations and media – and, that you can see why the children like 
to make things in Etoys. 
VPRI Research Note RN-2007-006-a
