P.
e
it;r47-?
!fr. -1'.
ram-
and
ideas
The real value of-computers
is in helping us understand
the powerful ideas
that force us to change
our ways of thinking
-B7
L.T
PHOTOGRAPH BY AARON GOODMAN
few years ago, researchers from the Na-
tional Science Foundation (NSF) de-
I
cided to visit a Harvard commencement
,.
and ask questions of the graduating se-
:.
niors and some of the faculty:Me ques-
tions had to do with simple, observable
scientific phenomenawhat causes the
seasons, for example, or the phases of the moon. Of the 23
graduating Harvard seniors, 21 had serious misconceptions
about both the seasons and the phases of the moon. NSF re-
,
searchers made a video of this little experiment and used it to
show how common scientific misconceptions are, even
,r
among educated people.
int
When I first saw this video, I kept waiting for the re-
searchers to ask what, to me, was the obvious next question.
They never did, so I tried the same experiment with a group
of graduate students at UCLA. I went through the same rou-
tine questions, and I got roughly the same results: About 95
percent had serious misconceptions about the seasons and
the phases of the moon. Most of them thought the seasons
were the result of the earth's elliptical orbitwhen we're
closer to the sun, they said, it's summer, and when we're far-
thest away, it's winter.
But then I asked the question that NSF hadn't asked:
"When it's summer in North America, what season it is in
South America and Australia?" Everyone knew the answer
was winter. Then I just waited while it slowly dawned on them
that the change in seasons could not possibly be caused by a
change in distance from the sun. (In fact, the earth's tilt on its
axis causes the seasons.)
The same thing happened with phases of the moon. Most
of the people thought the phases of the moon were caused
somehow by the earth getting in the way between the sun and
''.*--
.
.
'N.
.S.;
Opimona
necessarily reflect-postai&
.
,
.
.
.....
ft. 6.4.......1
.
sr,
.
--,... do
...0,:i
4
-
- . 7,!--rsa-_-.4,4.165.21:6S-Jes..../ -'
16 JULY 1997
'=2"::-. - - .. .. , _ -
.-
s.
e -
..
-
Alan Kay rs a Disney Fellow and vice president of research at Walt
Disney Imagineering in Glendale, Calif
:3 7
THE AMERICAN SCHOOL BOARD JOURNAL
the moon. That, of course, is what happens
in an eclipse of the moon. (The phases of the
moon have to do with the relation of the sun,
earth, and moon: depending on where the
moon is in its orbit, one sees more or less of
its illuminated half.) So I asked the graduate
students, "Well, have you ever seen the sun
and the moon in the sky at the same time?"
And of course, they all had. and there was
another pause while they came to the realiza-
tion that their theory didn't stand up.
What this little experiment shows is not a
crisis in science education. In fact, this is not
a science problem at all so much as it is a
problem about thinking processes. All of
these people knew something that contra-
dicted the theory they were forming, but
they couldn't get at that knowledge because
it was in a different compartment, as it were.
We all have many private universes inside
our heads, and one of the biggest problems
humans have faced over time is our inability
to connect these separate universes of
knowiedge into a coherent whole. It is an es-
pecially challenging problem now, with the
rush to "technologize" education. If we don't
find ways to help people learn to make con-
nections. all the school technology we're
pouring money into will wind up as no more
than vocational training, with no real educa-
tion attached.
The power of stories
One way of looking at the problem is to
use an image created by Arthur Koestler, a
great novelist who became a cognitive scien-
tist toward the end of his life. What usually
happens when we're trying to think about
things, he said, is that we tend to stay within
a certain belief structure. Imagine that belief
structure as a level plane. We could move
vertically in our thoughts, but in fact, there
are powerful forces that keep us focused on
the task at hand, focused on the ideas we've
already had and on the way we learn those
ideas. Every time a vertical thought breaks
out of the plane, it usually is quashed.
But every once in a while when we're re-
laxed and out of the normal context of
"work"maybe in the shower, maybe just
back from jogging, maybe dreaming just be-
fore dawnsuddenly one of those vertical
thoughts breaks through, and we see that
what we had been thinking about could be
looked at in a completely different way.
Koestler calls this bisociation: educators
call it nonspecific transfer. Educators know it
is extremely difficult to teach children some-
thing in such a way that they will be able to
apply it in a domain that is analogous to but
not the same as the domain in which they
learned it. Children are quite good at finding
an analogy if you tell them one exists. but
T14r. AMFRTC A NJ gm-Inn!. ROAR') Jot riv.:
most of them have no inner mechanism that
causes them to look for similarities and
analogies, to jump out of the plane when
they're thinking about something and make
a connection across planes.
That presupposes other planes to connect
to. of course. In other words, you have to
have lots of different kinds of knowledge
learned in lots of different kinds of ways in
order to have something to make analogies
to and cross-connections to (which is one
reason general education, as opposed to vo-
cational training, is so important). And you
have to learn to make cross-connections, be-
cause it doesn't seem to be built in naturally
to the way humans think about the world.
Instead, as the NSF experiment shows,
kids are learning science and most other
subjects the way peopie learn proverbs: It
doesn't matter if one contradicts another so
long as it explains the phenomenon at hand.
If you come home from a trip and your signif-
icant other is glad to see you. the explanation
is. "Absence makes the heart grow fonder."
But if you come home and your significant
other is not particularly happy to see you, the
explanation is, "Out of sight, out of mind."
Oral societies want to rationalize what is
happening right now, and they do it with a lit-
tle story called a proverb. When one proverb
contradicts another, it doesn't matterjust as
it doesn't matter that the movie you liked last
night contradicts the movie you liked last
week. The important thing about stories is
how good they are right now. Stories happen
in the here and now; they create their own
environment. Even when they purport to be
about general knowledge, what really matters
is how well they satisfy the listener.
Most of us, including scientists, learn best
through stories. We are wired to learn this
way because, for hundreds of thousands of
years. the most important ideas of our cul-
ture have been passed along through stories.
In fact, cognitive psychologists know we are
predisposed to judge a statement as being
more true if it rhymes.
Other ways of thinking
Over the last thousand years, however,
other ways of thinking have been invented.
One is mathematics. Although other ancient
cultures had ways of numbering things and
thinking about patterns, it was the Greeks
who took an unfocused, unstructured disci-
pline and turned it into a separate way of
thinking. One of the MOSE important things
about the Greek invention of mathematics
was that it was not simply about demonstra-
tion: It also involved contradiction and argu-
ment.
More recently, beginning in the 17th cen-
tury, a third way of thinking evolved in sci-
38
WE ALL
HAVE MANY
PRIVATE
UNIVERSES
INSIDE OUR
HEADS. THE
PROBLEM
IS OUR
INABILITY TO
CONNECT
THEM INTO A
COHERENT
WHOLE.
JULY 1997 17
ence and politics, one that can be called eco-
logical thinking or systems-level thinking.
Our country was built on these new
ways of thought. Consider Thomas Paine's
pamphlet "Common Sense," a 40-page rea-
soned argument against monarchy that ex-
emplifies the mathematical way of think-
ing. "Common Sense" had a pivotal place
in the creation of our country: Instead of
letting the king be law, Paine said, let us
make the law be king. Paine's pamphlet
changed people's minds about most of
what they believed about government.
paving the way for yet a new way of think-
ing and creating an environment in which
the U.S. Constitution could be written.
The Constitution is not a story: It is a recipe or systems
description for a complicated mechanism. an ecoiogy with
millions of not completely agreeable partsthe citizens
that will work for hundreds of years without breaking. One
of the great breakthroughs in human thought was to realize
that it is better to let people live as much as possible accord-
ing to their own dictates. Instead of writing iaws or ruies
about how people should live, it is better to include in the
systems description a mechanism for resolving disputes and
misfits between different parts of the system.
As this example suggests, many of the most important
things that constitute the fabric of our civilization have noth-
ing to do with the story form. Modern science is not a story.
American politics is not a story. It did not arise from
rhetoric (though politicians want to revert to rhetoric); in-
stead, it arose from an attempt to build a rational system
that would work in spite of misfits.
These are very hard ideas, and that is why they were in-
ventions.
Writing was an invention. Our species learns how to talk
spontaneouslythat's wired into usbut many cultures have
never had a writing system. Printing was an invention. Math-
ematics was an invention. Democratic concepts such as fair-
ness and justice, which we think of as the cornerstones of our
civilization, were inventions. Every one of them is hard to
learn, or they would not have had to be invented.
We can learn many things as children in a village culture.
We can learn how to live our lives successfully. We can learn
what the culture believes. We can learn how to hunt and
fish and farm. We can learn a lot of things simply by watch-
ing others. But school was invented so people could learn
the hard things, the things we don't learn naturally. School
was invented so we could learn the created things that actu-
ally require us to change what's inside our heads, to learn
what Seymour Papert calls powerful ideas.
And if that's the case, we should be thinking about tech-
nology as more than an aid to education. We should be
thinking about something much stronger than that. Let me
suggest a couple of ideas.
Triangles and bacteria
At the dawn of the invention of mathematics. Pythagoras
and his followers found an interesting relationship by look-
ing at a right triangle surrounded by the squares of its
sides: If you draw three more triangles around the C
square, it is easy to rearrange them so you can fit the A
square and the B square and the four triangles into that
0
GEOMETRIC PROOF OF THE
PYTHAGOREAN THEOREM
Diagram by Emily Mann. an eighth-aracer
at Mark Twain Middle School.
Fairfax County. Va.
larger square. That is, the sum of the
areas of the squares drawn on the two
legs is equal to the area of the square
drawn on the hypotenuse. (See the fig-
ure.) This beautiful proof is what is called
a preliterate proofa highly satisfying,
easy to understand demonstration, and
definitely the proof children should be ex-
posed to.
But shortly thereafter, someone used
Pythagoras' theorem to come up with the
astounding fact that no matter what sys-
tem of measurement you use for the
sides. that system of measurement will
not measure the hypotenuse of some tri-
angles exactly. In mathematical terms, we
would say that there is no fraction n/rn that will give you
the exact length of the hypotenuse. This is not a proof that
can be demonstrated; this proof must be done by contradic-
tion and by argument.
It is said that the person who first came up with this proof
was drowned because he had completely overturned the
contemporary concept of rational thought. The Greeks did
not go beyond "rational" numbersthat is, numbers that
can be expressed as the ratio of two integersand this
proof introduced irrational numbers. (A stronger proof
shows that if the square root of a number is not an inte-
gerthe square root of 4 is 2, the square root of 9 is 3, but
the square root of 6 or 7 or 8 is not an integerthen it is
also not a fraction, and that is true for all numbers.) You
might think that with all the fractions that exist between
each integer, you would be able to find the fractional num-
ber for, say, the square root of 6, but you simply cannot.
This branch of Greek mathematics, then, went a short
way and ran into an intractable problem. That, I believe, is
one reason the Greeks went on to become more interested
in geometry than in algebra. They might have drowned the
person who devised this proof, but they weren't able to
drown the idea.
Now. iet's turn from mathematics to biology. Consider a
single bacterium like the millions we have inside us. The
bacterium contains about a hundred gigabytes of informa-
tion processing, about the equivalent of 50,000 desktop
computers of a few years ago. Now consider that this bac-
terium is only about 1/500th the size of the cells that make
up our body tissue, so within each cell is the equivalent of
about 25 million desktop computersabout one-quarter of
all the computers on the Internet. And we have between 10
trillion and 100 trillion of these cells in our bodies
The real shocker is that not a single atom in your body
has been there for longer than seven years. In fact, about 90
percent of the atoms in your body are recycled every couple
of weeks. For example, no red blood cells that are in your
body now are more than 100 days old. As biological organ-
isms, we are simply patterns that organize energy and mat-
ter into forms that look like us. We give off energy and mat-
ter so that the organizational pattern that is us moves along
through time and space, but none of the atoms or the en-
ergy that we had seven years ago go with us. Millions of
cells in our body are dying every day, but billions of things
are going more right than wrong, and that's why we are
able to exist longer.
3
jThese new ways of thinking are not just interesting from
the scientific standpoint: they also have to do with under-
standing how complicated organizations, such as compa-
nies, countries, and school districts, operate. Science and
math, in other words, are not just about the seasons of the
year and the Pythagorean Theorem. They are about some-
thing much more interesting and much more important.
and that is how we think about the world. As Danish physi-
cist Niels Bohr put it. "Science is not there to tell us about
the world; science is there to tell us about how we can talk
about the world."
The uses of technology
So what, after all, are computers good for? First come
a class of uses I call red herrings. For example, comput-
ers can imitate in a nicer way old structures for repre-
senting things, like paper, which gives us word pro-
cessors. And with spreadsheets, computers can
carry out the kinds of calculations we've done in ac-
counting systems over the last several hundred
years. Computers can also be connected in net-
works, giving us the equivalent of libraries.
All of these uses. I believe, represent a desire
on the part of a future-shocked public to see a
new technology only as a better version of an
old one. This happens all the time: Thomas
A. Edison invented the motion picture cam-
era in 1895, but it took 20 years before any-
body realized you could move the camera
while you were diming or that you could
cut and splice the film and create mon-
Pt/
tages.
The same thing was true with print-
ing. In the early years of the printing
press, the Catholic Church did not
think to suppress it because it
seemed to be doing a good job of
automating what the monks had
been toiling for many years to
doproducing religious texts.
But within 50 to 75 years, the church
was under attack by ideas spread through the
printed word. First came Erasmus and Martin Luther.
then Copernicus, Galileo, Kepler, Hobbes, and Newton. All
of a sudden the entire world was different. The Catholic
Church was no longer a temporal power; nationalism arose,
and something even more striking than nationalism began
to emerge: the urge toward different forms of government
constructed on arguments transmitted by the press.
As we look into the future of education, we should bear
two things strongly in mind. First, the computer will not al-
ways be used as it is used today, which is as a paper imita-
tor. At some point in the future, everything we're trying to
teach kids about computing today in most schools will be
totally obsolete. lit fact, I think it's obsolete right now, be-
cause the urge to computerize schools is 99 percent voca-
tional and only 1 percent educational. How else can we ex-
plain such graduation requirements as being able to use a
word processor or a spreadsheet?
Think about what literacy actually is. Literacy begins
with ideas, and literature evolved as a way of communicat-
ing those ideas. Computer literacy, by extension. cannot
possibly be about learning how to put a disk in a machine.
and it cannot possibly be about learning a spreadsheet.
Computers are really for helping us understand systems
that are too complicated to think about in classical ways,
such as political systems or the AIDS epidemic. They are
really for letting children buildmodels of complicated ideas
and understand these powerful ideas in a direct way at a
much earlier age than they would have without the aid of
the computer.
About 30 years ago, when we were first starting to think
about how computers and education might go to-
gether, we noticed that students were not
learning calculus very well. Tradi-
tionally, calculus is taught in
high school in a classical
form that relies on alge-
bra. We computer people
knew there was a direct
way of teaching the powerful
ideas of calculus to fifth-
graders by using Seymour Pa-
pert's Logo Turtle program.
but schools weren't using this
approach. Despite many com-
pelling presentations and demon-
strations of Logo, elementary
school teachers had little or no idea
what calculus was or how to go about
teaching real mathematics to children
in a way that illuminates how we think
about mathematics and how mathemat-
ics relates to the real world.
These are important issuesnot be-
cause we want children necessarily to be-
h rift410Sr
0
Vito
tit
4100.,
Iv lift
kifr
t#46
rift
4010ive
S owic4t,
chve
rigs.
come mathematicians or scientists, but be-
cause clear thinkers understand that they
cannot know everything, that they must scaf-
ltik
fold knowledge in many different ways to put it
Artrw.
Off
*.
in a representational form that can be transmit-
ted to others. And the computer can help do that.
With computers. children can play with and un-
derstand complicated structures at a young age.
It won't happen immediately, though. Over the
next few years, the urge for access will dominate ev-
erything else in school technology. The push to con-
nect schools to the information highway is taking prece-
dence over the question of content. Most of the important
ideas in our civilization are not on the Internet yet, but they
are already available in free public libraries. The haves and
have-nots during these coming years will not be the people
who do or do not have access to the Internet. The real gap
will be between those who are discerning about the infor-
mation they access and those who are notbetween those
who use technology to help them understand powerful
ideas and those who do not.
If all we do is connect schools to the Internet without
considering the kinds of thinking processes students need
!ti order to learn from the information they access, we are
fooling ourselves. All the technology we put in schools is no
more than the emperor's new clothes unless we attend to
the content we want children to learn with the technology
and the kinds of thinking we want them to be capable of at
various ages. After all. the most powerful weapon we have
for exploring this new future is the one between our ears
providing it's loaded.
4 0
nn. in
