Viewpoints Research Institute, 1209 Grand Central Avenue, Glendale, CA 91201   t: (818) 332-3001  f: (818) 244-9761 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Real Computer Revolution Hasn’t 
Happened Yet 
 
 
Alan Kay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Remarks on being awarded an honorary degree from the University of Pisa in Italy (June 15, 2007) ] 
 
VPRI Memo M-2007-007-a 
The Real Computer Revolution Hasn’t Happened Yet
by Alan Kay
32 years ago in 1975 I was one of several lucky Americans who were invited to Pisa to 
help celebrate 20 years of computer science in Italy. I presented a paper on the first fruits 
of our attempts to invent personal computing at Xerox PARC. Over the years I some-
how lost that paper but, Professor Attardi, who was more organized than I, was able to 
locate his copy and it has been republished as part of our ceremonies today. It is tempt-
ing in this talk to go through that paper and see how this past work influenced today. 
But I would much rather talk about future possibilities, and so I wrote a few historical 
notes to provide some context for the 1975 paper, and now can try to discuss some of 
the more important, and mostly hidden, gifts that personal computing networked to-
gether around the world can bring to humanity.
One connection to the past is that the researchers who invented today’s fundamental 
technologies of personal computers, bit-mapped screens, overlapping window, icon and 
pointing interfaces, object-oriented programming, laser printing, the Ethernet, and the 
Internet, were motivated by the highest transformational achievements of the printing 
press. Simply put, the press in the 15th century was first thought to be a less expensive 
automation of hand written documents, but by the 17th century its several special prop-
erties had gradually changed the way important ideas were thought about to the extent 
that most of the important ideas that followed and the way they were thought about 
had not even existed when the press was invented. The two most important ideas were 
the inventions of science and of new ways to organize politics in society (which, in sev-
eral important cases, were themselves extensions of the scientific outlook).
These changes in thought also changed what “literacy” meant, because literacy is not 
just being able to read and write, but to fluently deal with the kinds of ideas important 
enough to write about and discuss. One of the special properties of the press was its 
ability to absolutely replicate the corrected galley of an author, and this allowed a very 
different form of argumentation to arise. One way to look at the real printing revolu-
tion in the 17th and 18th centuries is in the co-evolution in what was argued about and 
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 1 -
how the argumentation was done. Increasingly, it was about how the real world was set 
up, both physically and psychologically, and the argumentation was done more and 
more by using and extending mathematics, and by trying to shape natural language into 
more logically connected and less story-like forms.
One of the realizations we had about computers in the 60s was that they give rise to 
new and more powerful forms of arguments about many important issuses via dynamic 
simulations. That is, instead of making the fairly dry claims that can be stated in prose 
and mathematical equations, the computer could carry out the implications of the claims 
to provide a better sense of whether the claims constituted a worthwhile model of re-
ality. And, if the general literacy of the future could include the writing of these new 
kinds of claims and not just the consumption (reading) of them, then we would have 
something like the next 500 year invention after the printing press that could very likely 
change human thought for the better.
These were very ambitious aspirations indeed! The time from the invention of the press 
to the big changes in the 17th century was about 150 years, and this meant that the 
revolution in larger society happened because children gradually grew up with the dif-
ferent outlook of being able to think, argue, learn, and communicate in terms of the 
crisply written word in gradually more connected forms. Our idea about this came from 
a visit in 1968 with Seymour Papert, a mathematician who had invented the LOGO 
programming language for children and was starting to show that there were certain 
forms of advanced mathematics that when presented in a dynamic computer form were 
perfectly matched with the way children could think.
As McLuhan had pointed out in the 50s, when a new medium comes along it is first 
rejected on the grounds of “too strange and different”, but then is often gradually ac-
cepted if it can take on old familiar content. Years (even centuries) later, the big surprise 
comes if the medium’s hidden properties cause changes in the way people think and it 
is revealed as a wolf in sheep’s clothing. These changes are sometimes beneficial (I think 
the printing press was, though the Catholic Church would probably disagree), and 
sometimes not (I think television is a disaster, though most marketing people would 
disagree).
So we had a sense that the personal computer’s ability to imitate other media (and in-
expensively via Moore’s Law) would both help it to become established in society, and 
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 2 -
that this would also make if very difficult for most people to understand what it actu-
ally was. Our thought was: but if we can get the children to learn the real thing then 
in a few generations the big change will happen. 32 years later the technologies that 
our research community invented are in general use by more than a billion people, and 
we have gradually learned how to teach children the real thing. But it looks as though 
the actual revolution will take longer than our optimism suggested, largely because 
the commercial and educational interests in the old media and modes of thought have 
frozen personal computing pretty much at the “imitation of paper, recordings, film and 
TV” level.
Meanwhile, what the computer can really do – both in terms of simulation and argu-
mentation – has been taken up by the scientific, mathematical, engineering and design 
disciplines. And those interested in Papert’s visions for changing the nature of children’s 
thought for the better, by helping them learn “powerful ideas” via actually constructing 
them, have made quite a bit of progress over the last 3 decades. There is now much to 
say, show and teach about “what children can do”.
The shame of the computer vendors – both hardware and software – is that no commer-
cial intellectual amplifier for children has been made. All of the machines and software 
tools are primarily aimed at business, and to some extent for the home. This is a gross 
ignorance of the needs of the world of the most disastrous kind. It’s the new ideas and 
ways of thinking that the children of the world need – a children’s computer is impera-
tive because this is now the best way to help children learn these new ideas – and is also 
much less expensive than paper for books and other conventional media.
Two years ago several members of the 60s research community that invented personal 
computing decided to create an extremely inexpensive personal laptop computer – a 
Dynabook – for all the children of the world. This initiative – called One Laptop Per 
Child – was started by Nicholas Negroponte and involves researchers old and new, in-
cluding Seymour Papert, our research institute, and many other interested and commit-
ted designers, all aimed at bypassing the huge gaps created by commercial interests.
This community has always been willing to design and build whatever is needed, regard-
less of whether vendors have the tools and materials or not. The Alto at Xerox PARC 
is a good case in point. All the hardware and all the software were done at PARC and 
the little assembly line that was set up eventually built about 2000 of these first modern 
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 3 -
personal computers. Today, most laptops are built in Taiwan or mainland China, and 
different brand names (such as HP, Dell, Sony, and Macintosh) may all be built by the 
very same offshore manufacturer. So, if you want to make your own laptop, just put a 
design together, get some orders for a million or so, and get on a plane to Taiwan! The 
OLPC goal is to make a very inexpensive machine that can furnish full function, so it is 
interesting to see where the money you pay for your laptop is allocated.
For example, about 50% of the price of a standard 
laptop is in sales, marketing, distribution, and profit. 
OLPC is a non-profit and sells directly to countries. 
Another 25% of the price is from commercial soft-
ware, much of it from Microsoft. But there is a world-
side open source and free software community that is 
equivalent in many respects, especially for web and 
educational environments. The expensive items that remain include a disk drive and 
the display. But the Flash memory used in cameras and memory sticks can be less ex-
pensive than the least expensive disk drive (and is much more robust because it is solid 
state). The display is a special problem, because cost is not the only issue. A display for 
the 3rd world must require much less power and has to be visible in direct sunlight with 
the backlight turned off. OLPC researcher Mary Lou Jepson solved the display problem 
brilliantly by inventing a new kind of flat-screen display which has higher resolution 
than regular displays (200 pixels/inch), 1/7th the power, and 1/3rd the cost.
The result is a computer that currently costs $170, can hold hundreds of books (many 
of them dynamic), at a cost of about 20 cents per book, and maintains an automatic 
mesh internetwork with other laptops. This computer was pooh-poohed by the hard-
ware and software vendors, but they have now started to make similar inexpensive offer-
ings themselves (e.g. Intel now has a “$400 laptop”, and Microsoft recently announced 
that they would sell their software to the 3rd world for a few dollars). It would be nice 
to say that they have now seen the light, but it is more likely that they now simply feel 
threatened, and are responding.
One of the nice properties of doing this with a non-profit organization is that as costs of 
materials go down and manufacturing is made less expensive, all of the cost savings will 
simply be passed along to the children. Also, the first phase of this project is being done 
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 4 -
in just a little over two years, so many of the customizations of materials that could be 
done are set for the next phase. It is quite possible to make a $50 laptop or even less if 
all the available technologies and manufacturing techniques were brought to bear.
Of course, the hardware part of this project is only a small part, even though it is chal-
lenging to make a full featured “$100 laptop”. There is also system software, end-user 
authoring environments, educational content, various kinds of packaging and docu-
mentation, and, most importantly, the mentors that are needed to help the children 
learn the powerful ideas.
I’ll come back to this critical part of the educational ecology. For now, let’s note that 
– for mathematics and science in the 1st and 2nd worlds, the percentage of elementary 
school teachers and parents who really know math and science is much too small for 
most children to be guided over the threshold. In the 3rd world the percentage of knowl-
edgeable mentors is vanishingly small.
This leads to a frustrating impasse. As I will demonstrate in a minute, it is now known 
how to help 10 and 11 year old children become very fluent in powerful forms of 
calculus and other advanced mathematical thinking. But no child has ever invented 
calculus! The wonderful nature of modern knowledge, aided by writing and teaching, is 
that many ideas which require a genius to invent (in the case of calculus: two geniuses) 
can be learned by a much wider and less especially talented population. But it is very 
difficult to invent in a vacuum, even for a genius. (Imagine being born with a 500 IQ 
in 10,000 BC. Not a lot is going to happen! Even Leonardo couldn’t invent an engine 
for any of his vehicles. He was plenty smart enough but he lived in the wrong time and 
thus didn’t know enough.)
If children have learned how to read, then they can bypass adults to some extent – both 
in home and in school – by going to a library and learning from reading. There are 
many such cases, and it is likely that a fair amount of the printing revolution gradu-
ally happened that way. But it is much more difficult for a child to learn how to read 
without the assistance (or at least the cooperation of adults), and again we see the criti-
cal importance of mentoring. When Andrew Carnegie set up thousands of free public 
libraries in the US, each one of them had a special room where the librarians taught 
reading to whomever wished to learn!
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 5 -
Of course, children can learn many things without special mentoring just by experi-
mentation, and by sharing knowledge amongst themselves. But we don’t know of any 
examples where this includes the great inventions of humanity such as deductive math-
ematics and mathematically based empirical sciences. To use an analogy: what if we 
were to make an inexpensive piano and put it in every classroom? The children would 
certainly learn to do something with it by themselves – it could be fun, it could have 
really expressive elements, it would certainly be a kind of music. But it would quite 
miss what has been invented in music over centuries by great musicians. This would 
be a shame with regard to music – but for science and mathematics it would be a disaster. 
The special processes and outlook in the latter (particularly in science) are so critical and 
so hidden that it is crippling not to be taught them as “skills which allow the art”. As 
Ed Wilson has pointed out, our genetic makeup for social interests, motivations, com-
munication, and invention, is essentially what humans were in the Pleistocene. Much 
of what we call modern civilization is made from inventions such as agriculture, writing 
and reading, math and science, governance based on equal rights, etc. These were hard 
to invent, and are best learned via guides.
So, we simply have to find ways to solve the mentoring problem, not just for the 3rd 
world, but for the 1st and 2nd worlds also. We can easily make 5 million of the OLPC 
laptops this Fall, but we couldn’t produce 1000 new teachers with the required knowl-
edge and skills for any amount of money (in part because it takes years for human 
beings to learn and practice what they need to know). This is one of the reasons that 
education lags science, technology and other advances in ideas so badly.
It is sometimes shocking to see what even very young children are able to do when 
they are in a good environment for learning. The most important principles in early 
children’s learning are to try to find out what they can do, what representations of ideas 
work best for them, and what kind of social environment triggers their built-in urges to 
get competent in the world they live in.
First grade teacher Julia Nishijima, whom we met at one of the schools we worked with 
15 years ago, was a little unusual in that she was a natural mathematician.
We don’t think that she had studied math formally or had actually had ever taken a 
calculus course.  But she was like a talented jazz musician who has never taken formal 
lessons.  She really understood the music of mathematics.  
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 6 -
She had a natural mathematical outlook on the world and here’s one of the most 
interesting projects we saw in her classroom.  She had the children pick a shape that 
they liked, and the idea was to, using just those shapes, make the next larger forms that 
had the same shape.  
Here are diamonds, squares, triangles and trapezoids.
Julia next got her stu-
dents to reflect on their 
creations.  She treated 
math as a kind of a science to get the chil-
dren to create structures with interesting mathematical properties 
and then analyze them.  Six year old Lauren noticed that it took 
one tile to make the first one, the total number of tiles was one. 
It took three more tiles to make the next shape, and the total 
number of files was four.
And it took five more tiles to make the next one.  So pretty soon she saw “Oh yeah, 
these are just the odd numbers, differing by two each time, I add two each time and I’ll 
get the next one of these”.  
And the sum of these is the square numbers, up to at least 6 times 6 
here (she wasn’t quite sure about seven times seven).
Lauren had discovered two very interesting progressions that all the 
mathematicians and scientists in the audience will recognize.
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 7 -
Then the teacher had the kids all bring their projects up to the front of the room and 
put them on the floor so they could all look at them, and the kids were absolutely 
amazed because all of the progressions were exactly the same!  
Every child had filled out a table that looked like Lauren’s and it meant that the growth 
laws for all of these were exactly the same and the children had discovered a great gen-
eralization about growth.
The mathematicians and scientists who are reading this will recognize that the odd 
numbers are produced as a first order differential relationship that gives a smooth, uni-
form progression – in the computer mathematics that we use, this is expressed as doing 
over and over with increase-by:
Doing over-and-over: Odds increase-by 2 
And the Total number of tiles is produced by a second order (because it uses the results 
of a first order relationship) differential relationship:
Doing over-and-over: Totals increase-by Odds
The idea of increase-by is easy for everyone, because it is just putting things (that is, 
adding things) into a pile of things. 
Mathematics is really “careful thinking about how representations of ideas could imply 
other representations of ideas”, and the most important process in helping anyone learn 
how to do mathematical thinking is to put them in many situations in which they can 
use how they think right now in a more careful way. We can see that the children were 
able to find a very nice way to think about two kinds of growth and change.  “Increase-
by” is very powerful idea because many of the changes in the physical world can be 
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 8 -
modeled by one or two “increase by”s, and it is a representation that children can readily 
understand.
Now, what would be a really good representation to help children think about the Py-
thagorean Theorem?
Below left is Euclid’s proof of the Pythagorean Theorem for high school geometry stu-
dents. It’s elegant and subtle, it casts light on other areas of geometry, but it is not a 
suitable first proof for most young minds. 
Below right is a very different kind of proof: perhaps the original one by Pythagoras. 
We have seen many elementary-age children actually find this proof by playing with 
triangle and square shapes. Show the arrangement, surround the C square with 3 more 
triangles to make a larger square, copy the larger square, remove the C square, rotate the 
two triangles, note there is room for the A and B squares, move them, and Bingo! This 
proof has a visceral approach and feel, a powerful simplicity that is perfect for beginners’ 
minds and provides a solid foundation for later more abstract and subtle looks at the 
idea. 
The rule of thumb here is to find ideas and representations that allow “beginners to act 
as intermediates”, that is, for learners to immediately start doing the actual activity in 
some real form. 
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 9 -
The way calculus looks at many ideas is so powerful and so important that we want to 
start children learning to think along these lines much earlier in their lives. So we have 
made a form of real calculus that is thinkable by young minds and that the computer 
brings alive in many delightful ways.
A project that nine, ten and eleven year old children all over the world love is to design 
and make a car they would like to learn how to drive.  They first draw their car (and 
often put big off-road tires on them like this). 
So far this is just a picture. But then they can look “inside” their drawing to see its 
properties (for example where the car is located and heading) and behaviors (the ability 
to go forward in the direction it is heading, or change its heading by turning). These 
behaviors can be pulled out and dropped on the “world” to make a script – without the 
need for typing – which can be set “ticking” by clicking on the clock. The car starts mov-
ing in accordance with the script.
If we drop the car’s pen on the world, it will leave a track (in this case a circle), and we 
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 10 -
see that this is Papert’s logo turtle in disguise – a turtle with a “costume” and easy ways 
to view, script and control it.
To drive the car, the children find that changing the number after car turn by will 
change its direction.
Then they draw a steering wheel (the very same kind of object as the car, but with a dif-
ferent costume) and see that if they could put steer’s heading right after car turn by … 
this might allow the steering wheel to influence the car.
They can pick up steer’s heading (the name for the heading numbers that the steering 
wheel is putting out) and drop it into the script. Now they can steer the car with the 
wheel!
The children have just learned what a variable is and how it works. Our experience in-
dicates that they learn it deeply from just this one example.
They quickly find that it is hard to control the car. They need to introduce a “gear” into 
the wheel’s connection to the car. They can get the needed advice from a teacher, par-
ent, friend, or from a child thousands of miles away via the mentoring interface over 
the Internet. They open the expression in the script, and divide the numbers coming 
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 11 -
out of the steering wheel by 3. This scaling makes turns of the steering wheel have less 
influence. They have just learned what divide (and multiply) are really good for.
Quite a bit of doing is “just doing”, so it is a good idea to also reflect on what just hap-
pened. One way to do this is to have the objects leave trails that show what they were 
doing over time.
If the speed is constant then the trail of dots is evenly spaced, showing that the same 
distance was traveled in each little tick of time.   
If we increase the speed each tick of the clock, we’ll get a pattern that looks like the 
second picture. This is the visual pattern for uniform acceleration.
If we make the speed be random each time (in this case between 0 and 40), we will get 
an irregular pattern of distance traveled for each tick
It’s fun to try using random in two dimensions. Here we can move a car forward ran-
domly and turn it randomly. If we put the pen down, we get a series of “Drunkard’s 
Walks”. 
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 12 -
One way to look at this is that a little bit of ran-
domness will cause a lot of territory to be visited 
given enough time and it changes the probability of 
collisions quite a bit (it is still low, but now “more 
possible”).
So we might guess that a random walk in a script 
that is using the principles of feedback could ac-
complish surprising things.
Up to this point our examples have been essen-
tially mathematical, in that they are dealing with 
computer representations of relationships of ideas. 
These ideas can be similar to the real world (the models of speed and acceleration), or 
different from the real world (the car in the speed and acceleration examples was sup-
ported by nothing, but didn’t fall because there is no “gravity” in the computer world 
unless we model it). Sometimes we can make up a story that is similar to the real world, 
and even has a guess that works out. But for most of human history, the guesses about 
the physical world have been very far from the mark.
The physical sciences began in earnest when people started to do careful observations 
and measurements of the physical world, first to do accurate mapping for navigation, 
exploration and trade, and then to look more closely at more and more phenomena 
with better instruments and technique. 
Another good example of “high-noticing low-cost” is the measuring of the circumfer-
ence of the bicycle tire project for 5th graders. Much of the philosophical gold in sci-
ence is to be found in this noticing activity. The students used different materials and 
got different answers, but were quite sure that there was an exact answer in centimeters 
(partly because schooling requires them to get exact rather than real answers).
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 13 -
One of the teachers also thought this because on the side of the tire it said it was 20 
inches in diameter. The teacher “knew” that the circumference was pi * diameter, that 
“pi is 3.14”, and “inches times 2.54 converts to ‘centimeters’ “, etc., and multiplied it 
out to get the “exact circumference” of the tire = 159.512 cm. We suggested that they 
measure the diameter and they found it was actually more like 19 ¾ inches (it was un-
inflated)! This was a shock, since they were all set up to believe pretty much anything 
that was written down, and the idea of doing an independent test on something written 
down had not occurred to them. 
That led to questions of inflating to different pressures, etc. But still most thought that 
there was an exact circumference. Then one of us contacted the tire manufacturer (who 
happened to be Korean) and there were many interesting and entertaining exchanges 
of email until an engineer was found who wrote back that “We don’t actually know the 
circumference or diameter of the tire. We extrude them and cut them to a length that is 
159.6 cm ± 1 millimeter tolerance!” 
This really shocked and impressed the children – the maker of the tire doesn’t even 
know its diameter or circumference! – and it got them thinking much more powerful 
thoughts. Maybe you can’t measure things exactly. Aren’t there “atoms” down there? 
Don’t they jiggle? Aren’t atoms made of stuff that jiggles? And so forth. The analogy to 
“how long is a shoreline?” is a good one. The answer is partly due to the scale and toler-
ance of measurement. As Mandelbrot and others interested in fractals have shown, the 
length of a mathematical shoreline can be infinite, and physics shows us that the physi-
cal measurement could be “almost” as long (that is very long). 
There are many ways to make use of the powerful idea of “tolerance”. For example, 
when the children do their gravity project and come up with a model for what gravity 
does to objects near the surface of the earth, (see the next project) it is very important 
for them to realize that they can only measure to within one pixel on their computer 
screens and that they can also make little slips. A totally literal take on the measure-
ments can cause them to miss seeing that uniform acceleration is what’s going on. So 
they need to be tolerant of very small errors. On the other hand, they need to be quite 
vigilant about discrepancies that are outside of typical measuring errors. Historically, 
it was important for Galileo not to be able to measure really accurately how the balls 
rolled down the inclined plane, and for Newton not to know what the planet Mercury’s 
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 14 -
orbit actually does when looked at closely. 
Children Discover, Measure, and Mathematically Model Galilean Gravity
A nice “real science” example for 11 year olds is to investigate what happens when we 
drop objects of different weights.
The children think that the heavier weight will fall faster. And they 
think that a stopwatch will tell them what is going on. 
But it is hard to tell when the weight is released, and just when it 
hits.
In every class, you’ll usually find one “Galileo child”.  In this class 
it was a little girl who realized: well, you don’t really need the stop 
watches, just drop the heavy one and the light one and listen to see if 
they hit at the same time. This was the same insight that Galileo had 
400 years ago, and apparently did not occur to any adult, (including 
the very smart Greeks) for our previous 80,000 years on this planet!
To really understand in more detail what is going on with gravity 
near the surface of the Earth, we can use a video camera to catch the dynamics of the 
dropping weight.
We can see the position of the ball frame by frame, 1/30th of a second apart. To make 
this easier to see we can just pull out every fifth frame and put them side by side:
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 15 -
Another good thing to do is to take each frame and paint out the non-essential parts 
and then stack them. When the children do this, most of them will immediately say 
“Acceleration!” because they recognize that the vertical spacing pattern is the same as the 
horizontal one they played with using their cars several months before.
But, what kind of acceleration? We need to measure.
Some children will measure directly on the spread frames, while others will prefer to 
measure the stacked frames.              
The translucent rectangles help because the bottom of the balls can be seen more ac-
curately. The height of a rectangle measures the speed of the ball at that time (speed is 
the distance traveled in a unit of time, in this case about 1/5th of a second).
When we stack up the rectangles we can see that the difference in speed is represented 
by the little strips that are exposed, and the height of each of these strips appears to be 
the same! 
These measurements reveal that the acceleration appears pretty constant, and the chil-
dren made such scripts for their car months ago. Most quickly realize that since the ball 
is going vertically that they have to write the script so that it is the vertical speed that 
is increased and the vertical position y that is changed. They paint a small round shape 
to be the simulated ball, and write the script:
Now, how to show that this is a good model for what they have observed? 11 year old 
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 16 -
Tyrone decided to do as he did with his car months before: to 
leave a dot copy behind to show that the path of his simulated 
ball hit the very same positions as the real ball in the video.
Here is what he had to say when explaining what he did and 
how he did it:
And to make sure that I was doing it just right, I got a magnifier 
which would help me figure out if I had it - if the size was just 
right. 
After I’d done that I would go and click on the little basic category 
button and then a little menu would pop up and one of the cat-
egories would be Geometry, so I clicked on that.
And here it has many things that have to do with the size and shape of the rectangle. So I 
would see what the height is… I kept going along the process until I had them all lined up 
with their height.
I subtracted the smaller one’s height from the bigger one to see if there was a kind of pattern 
anywhere that could help me out. And my best guess worked: so in order to show that it was 
working, I decided to make – to leave – a dot copy (so that it would show that the ball was 
going at the exact right speed. And acceleration. ) 
An investigative work of beauty by an 11 year old! 
In the United States, about 70 percent of the college kids who are taught about gravity 
near the surface of the Earth fail to understand it.  It’s not because the college kids are 
somehow stupider than the fifth graders, it’s because the context and the mathematical 
approach most college kids are given to learn these ideas are not well suited to the ways 
they can think.  We have found that more than 90% of 5th graders are able to under-
stand by using this better context and representations for change.
Now that the children have “captured gravity”, they can use it to explore other physical 
situations and to make games. If the ball is repainted into a spaceship, and a moon is 
made that can be landed on, it is pretty easy for a 12-year old (and most 11 year olds) 
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 17 -
to make the classic game “Lunar Lander”. The gravity script is standard and will accel-
erate the ship downwards to crash on the moon. The children can add a rocket motor 
script controlled by the joystick that accelerates the ship upwards. Note that in each case 
ySpeed is being increased on one direction or another.
The children put in some nice frills such as a crash if the spaceship touches the moon 
with its downward speed too high, and to show a flame when the spaceship rocket mo-
tor is on.
A lot of physical phenomena can be modeled by children using “increase-by” includ-
ing: inertia, orbits, springs, etc. But now let’s take a look at a different powerful idea: 
one that allows progress to be made without enough information to make a complete 
plan.
Sometimes we have enough information to make a foolproof plan. But most of the time 
things don’t go quite as expected, (even with our “foolproof” plans), and we wind up 
having to find new information, make new corrections, sometimes new plans.
All animals and other mechanisms have limited abilities to gather information and very 
little ability to extrapolate into the future. For example, the simplest bacteria can be hurt 
or killed by too much acidity (or too little). They have evolved molecular machines that 
can help them detect when some dangerous substances are starting to affect them, and 
the ones that swim exhibit a tumbling behavior that radically (and randomly) changes 
the direction in which they are swimming. If things are “good” they don’t tumble, if 
“bad” then they tumble again.
This general strategy of sensing “good” and “bad” and doing something that might 
make things better is pervasive in biology, and is now in many of the mechanical and 
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 18 -
electrical machines made by humans.
A fun activity for children is to be challenged to find their way around the outside 
of one of their school buildings blindfolded and just by touch. The simplest strategy 
works, follow the wall, and always turn in the same direction when it is lost.
We can get our cars to do that by painting a different color to be used as a “touch sen-
sor” and writing a script that looks like:
Then we challenge the children to make a car and a road 
that will get the car to go down the center of the road 
instead of the outside. There are many solutions for 
this. Here is a nice one from two 11 year old girls who 
worked well together.
They figured out that if they made curbs on the road 
of two different colors then there would be only three cases: when the sensor is on the 
center, or one of the two sides. Their car, road and script look like:
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 19 -
We can see that this is a better script than the one we showed them. They decided that 
their robot car would only go forward when it is in the middle. This means that it can 
safely negotiate any turn (the first example can’t always do this because the turns have 
a constant radius of 5).
Now let’s model typical animal behavior that is used to follow 
chemical signals in the environment by being able to sense the 
relative concentration of the chemical and to be able to remem-
ber a past smell and concentration well enough to decide to keep 
going or to try a different path.
We’ll pick a salmon swimming upstream to lay its eggs in the 
same part of the river in which it was born.
In our model we’ll avoid the dramatic leaping backwards up the waterfalls, and con-
centrate on how the salmon might be able to guide itself by smelling a particular 
chemical from its spawning ground and being able to remember just the concentration 
of the last sniff it took.
To model the water with the chemical in it, we’ll use a gradient of color, where the 
darker the color, the more concentrated is the chemical. Etoys lets us sense not just the 
color under an object, but also the brightness. So, for this simulation, less brightness 
means “getting closer”.
Below we see the salmon has successfully found the darkest corner, and to the right we 
see the path it took. The script under the path is a “turtle” following the salmon’s posi-
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 20 -
tion and drawing a trail in a different playfield. The holder and script under the “river” 
animate the salmon’s body to wriggle as a fish does.
This simple scheme of “try something, test, keep going if OK, do something random 
if not” is found in most living creatures from bacteria on up, and a kind of abstraction 
of it is what makes evolution work.
Although there is a certain kind of uniqueness to each phenomenon in the world, 
most things are best understood by thinking of them as members of species which 
share most of their properties and behaviors. Since computers are very good at copy-
ing things quickly and inexpensively, we can use this to turn a model of an individual 
into one that has many actors in it. For example, we can introduce as many salmon as 
we wish into our model. This means that we can model population ecologies as well 
as individuals.
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 21 -
Ants are a wonderful example of an animal that can be studied and modeled by chil-
dren. They use their ability to sense and follow gradients to communicate with each 
other by laying scent trails to mark paths to help other ants find “interesting things” 
(usually food). Ants are a kind of “swarm animal” and often act like a larger organism 
whose “cells” can independently sense, think and do.
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 22 -
A compelling example of “new powerful argumentation” is how self-authored computer 
simulations can help illuminate a very complex and hard to understand threat – for 
example, slow moving but deadly epidemics such as AIDS – in ways that transcend 
simple claims and assertions. One of the problems with the understanding of AIDS is 
that the incubation period for the virus is as long as five or more years. To normal hu-
man commonsense it appears that “nothing is happening” early on when the most posi-
tive actions can be taken to thwart the contagion. In many traditional societies around 
the world commonsense was heeded, no actions were taken, and the result some years 
later was and continues to be devastating. One of the simplest investigations that can 
be done with an authoring system which can manifest thousands of elements is to make 
a simulated village and try different scenarios with contagion, slow moving incuba-
tion and no cure. In the slow incubation cases they can see that “nothing appears to be 
happening” in the beginning, and yet all eventually die. Because the learners have set 
up the simulations themselves, they have created their own dynamic mathematics and 
modeling of something they care about. They get to choose the initial conditions and 
the emotional impact of the same disastrous endings has a deep effect on their view of 
epidemics. 
There are now thousands of Etoys projects done in their native languages by children 
from many countries of the world, including: USA, Canada, Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, 
France, Germany, Spain, Japan, Korea, China, Nepal, and more. The low-cost OLPC 
laptop and others that it inspires will soon be spreading to millions of children. So, as 
with the advent of the book in the 15th century, the potential for completely changing 
learning – and, as McLuhan pointed out, of changing change itself – in most parts of the 
world has arrived.
We started our research about 40 years ago with the goal to help children – and thus 
humanity – to learn and absorb “science in the large”. We think of science as all the 
processes that can help “make the invisible more visible”. By invisible we mean what 
is invisible to we human beings for all reasons, including not just the usual scientific 
objects of interest that are too small or too far away or emanate in wavelengths we can’t 
perceive, but also ideas and objects that are invisible to us because our mental apparatus 
is not up to thinking about them, or has rejected them (because they “can’t possibly be 
true”), etc.
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 23 -
I include all the “serious arts” whose purpose is to wake us up, to get us to realize that 
what our consciousness presents to us is not reality but a story that may be very far from 
reality, sometimes dangerously far. What science does is not so much to change or fix 
our noisy mental apparatus but rather to add additional processes inside our heads (and 
outside in the society of scientists) to detect our many errors and try to reduce them in 
size and kind. 
As Thomas Jefferson put it: “The moment a person forms a theory, his imagination sees, 
in every object, only the traits that favor that theory”. The larger society of science acts 
as a kind of “superscientist” – and far beyond just “knowing” more than any individual. 
In this superorganism are better, more skeptical debuggers of ideas than most individu-
als have in their own minds. The superorganism has more points of view on how the 
universe might work than any individual, and these are very useful (even if some of 
their motivation might have been less than scientific). So, without needlessly anthro-
pomorphizing science, we are quite justified in saying that “science” is smarter, more 
knowledgeable, has stronger outlooks, and is “a better scientist” than any individual.
A larger society can also act smarter and be less prone to disastrous decisions and need-
lessly aggressive actions than most individuals. And it is the aim of education in demo-
cratic societies, particularly democratic republics whose representatives must be chosen 
by the whole society, to bring all the citizens into the strongest thinking processes, 
conversations and debates that have been invented. Jefferson again: 
I know of no safe repository for the ultimate powers of society but the people 
themselves; and if we think them not enlightened enough to exercise their con-
trol with a wholesome discretion, the remedy is not to take it from them, but to 
increase their discretion by education.
H.G. Wells said that “Civilization is in a race between education and catastrophe”. 
Perhaps “education” is too vague a term here. I would replace it with “a race between 
education of outlook and catastrophe” because it is not knowledge per se that makes the 
biggest difference, but outlook or point of view which provides the context in which ra-
tional thinking actually matches up with the real world in the service of humanity. For 
example, a context in which some human beings were regarded as a kind of non-human 
vermin was allowed to be set up in the 20th century, and since we exterminate vermin 
it was logically decided in this horrendous context to exterminate the human beings in 
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 24 -
question. This has not been at all rare in human history, was done more than once in 
the 20th century, and is happening today. Slavery is another outgrowth of horrendous 
contexts and expediency and is still with us today in many forms.
The first step in science is the startling realization that “the world is not as it seems” and 
many adults have never taken this step but instead take the world as it seems and their 
inner stories as reality with often disastrous consequences. The first step is a big one, 
and is best taken by children (and most who crossed this threshold of awareness did it 
early in their lives). From there, it is another giant step to include ourselves (that is, all 
humans) in the proper objects of study: to try to get past our stories about ourselves to 
understand better “what are we?” and ask “how can our flaws be mitigated?”.
Though the world today is far from peaceful, there are now examples of much larg-
er groups of people living peacefully and prospering for many more generations than 
ever before in history. The enlightenment of some has led to communities of outlook, 
knowledge, wealth, commerce, and energy that help the less enlightened behave bet-
ter. It is not at all a coincidence that the first part of this real revolution in society was 
powered by the printing press. The next revolutions in thought – such as whole systems 
thinking and planning leading to major new changes in outlook – will be powered by 
the real computer revolution – and it could come just in time to win over catastrophe.
VPRI Memo M-2007-007a
- 25 -
