Viewpoints Research Institute, 1209 Grand Central Avenue, Glendale, CA 91201   t: (818) 332-3001  f: (818) 244-9761 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Afterword: What is a Dynabook?
 
 
 
 
Alan Kay
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VPRI Paper for Historical Context 
Commentary on “A Personal Computer For Children Of All Ages”
This essay was recently published 
as an Afterword,  along with  
"A Personal Computer for Children  
of All Ages",  in a Japanese book  
which introduces the Scratch 
programming environment to  
elementary school children in a 
playful manner. 
Get the book at: http://amzn.to/1fUvmA1
 
1 
 
41 years later, while rereading  “A  Personal Computer For Children Of 
All  Ages”, I was struck by how much more context is needed today to 
understand where the ideas came from, why they turned out the way 
they did, and to be able to criticize the ideas then and now. I think the 
best way to approach this is first by a simple technical history, fol-
lowed by more depth on the romantic social and technical idealism of 
my research community.  
In the early 60s JCR Licklider, a psychologist at the Advanced Research 
Projects Agency put forth a great vision: “It  is  the  destiny  of  computers  to  
become interactive intellectual amplifiers for all people pervasively networked 
worldwide”. This ideal and the ARPA funding he provided led to the 
public domain inventions  of  many  of  today’s  most  important  technol-­‐‑
ogies, including computer graphics, artificial intelligence, interactive 
authoring of content and programs, graphical user interfaces, personal 
computing, the Internet, and more. 
One of the earliest inspirations for the vision was the amazing 
Sketchpad system in 1962 by Ivan Sutherland. This was not just the 
invention of interactive computer graphics, but of real-time end-user 
“authoring  of  ideas”  which  were  embodied  in  Sketchpad  as  working  
simulations.  This  was  the  first  real  example  of  Licklider’s  romantic an-
ticipation “In  a  few  years  humans  will  be  able  to  think  as  no  humans  have  
thought  before”1.  
A large scale experiment was the NLS “augmentation  of  human  intellect” 
project headed by Douglas Engelbart. This is mostly remembered to-
day   as   “the   invention   of   the   mouse”,   but   the   research   encompassed  
deep and significant explorations of “personal  computing” itself: what it 
actually could mean to “augment  human intellect”, and to “boost  the  col-­‐‑
lective  IQ  of  groups”. For example, the ability to share all experiences 
remotely with others was a deep feature of the entire system. 
A parallel large scale experiment in human interaction was the GRAIL 
system, the first to really explore stylus and gesture-based computing 
with the high-quality  (even  by  today’s  standards)  invention  of  a  stylus-
and-tablet, and an interactive system for designing and building pro-
grams of complex systems. 
Mathematician Seymour Papert (the co-principal-investigator of the 
MIT AI ARPA project), had a long standing interest in the psychology 
of children—especially  children’s  learning—from his association with 
Jean Piaget in Switzerland. These ideas led in the mid-60s to the inven-
tion of the LOGO programming language and a host of provocative 
experiments  with  “children  coupled  with  programming  to  better  learn  
mathematical  thinking”. 
                                                        
1 Sketchpad was implemented on a gigantic air defense supercomputer the size of a large 
building. Fortunately the funders and researchers were optimistic! 
 
1968-Bill Paxton collaborating with Doug Engelbart 
 
ca1968-Tom Ellis making a flowchart with GRAIL 
 
ca Late 60s-Seymour Papert with children & turtle 
1962-Ivan Sutherland making a dynamic bridge 
 
ca1967-Doug Engelbart and “personal computing” 
Afterword: What Is A Dynabook? 
Commentary	  on	  “A	  Personal	  Computer	  For	  Children	  Of	  All	  Ages” 
by Alan Kay 
VPRI Paper for Historical Context
 
2 
Another large scale experiment, the ARPAnet, was the first packet 
switching and router architecture (1968-9), and it was robust enough to 
serve as the network for the ARPA community as it morphed into the 
Internet we have today. 
An unusual research choice back then was the idea of a “personal  com-­‐‑
puter” for “personal   computing”.   Although   there   were   a   few   small  
“computers  for  individuals”  back  then,  they  were  quite  weak  in  capac-­‐‑
ity and computational power compared to the large  “main-frame”  ma-­‐‑
chines that had to be shared in one way or another—often  by  “batch  
processing”. The LINC in 1962 was a break-through personal comput-
er for bio-medical research technicians who needed real-time respons-
es for data gathering and analysis. 
 Sketchpad, NLS, GRAIL, and other experiments in highly interactive 
computing showed that really good user interface design and response 
dominated the experience, especially for the large range of users in the 
vision. “User interface” is not just about kinds of inputs, outputs and 
screen organizations, but about the notion of service—that is, the de-
sired content of the interactions, and the larger goals of the interactions. 
In  other  words,  we  always  need  to  ask  “What  service model will enable 
our larger visions and goals?”   
In 1966, I was a fresh grad student in the ARPA community, and was 
excited by what had been done so far. So I jumped at the chance to 
work with Ed Cheadle on a desktop computer for engineers called 
“The  FLEX  Machine”: a  highly  interactive  “service partner for engineers 
and other professionals”  that could sit on a desktop and embody some of 
the great ideas from Sketchpad, LINC, GRAIL, NLS, etc. It had multi-
ple windows, an object-oriented user and operating system, etc. 
The next year I visited Seymour Papert, Wally Feurzig, and Cynthia 
Solomon to see the LOGO classroom experience in the Lexington 
schools. This was a revelation! And was much more important to me 
than  the  metaphors  of  “tools”  and  “vehicles”  that  were  central  to  the  
ARPA  way  of  characterizing  its  vision.  This  was  more  like  the  “envi-­‐‑
ronment  of  powerful  epistemology”  of  Montessori, the  “environment  
of  media”  of  McLuhan, and even more striking: it evoked the inven-
tion of the printing press and all that it brought. This was not just 
“augmenting  human  intellect”,  but  the  “early  shaping  of  human  intel-­‐‑
lect”.  This  was  a  “cosmic service idea”.   
On the flight back to Utah I thought about how this service idea should 
be embodied,  and  quickly  decided  that  children  shouldn’t  be  tied  to  a  
desk. Earlier that year  I’d  seen  Donald  Bitzer’s  flat-screen display pro-
totype   (a   1”x1” square of 16x16 pixels), which had brought forth 
thoughts of putting   the   FLEX   Machine’s   transistors   on   the   back   of   a 
notebook-sized display  to  make  a  “notebook computer”.   
“A clear  romantic  vision  has  a  marvelous  ability  to  focus  thought  and  will.” I 
drew a cartoon showing a young girl and boy learning physics via an 
interactive game they programmed themselves and which manifests as 
 
ca1962-Wes Clark and the LINC personal computer 
 
ca1968-The “FLEX Machine” personal computer 
 
1968-The Dynabook cartoon 
 
1968-Don Bitzer’s 16x16 1” square flat screen display 
VPRI Paper for Historical Context
 
3 
a shared resource on their little machines (a la NLS), and connected by 
a wireless network (ARPA was already experimenting with wireless as 
part of the ARPAnet project). I built a cardboard model of this in the 
next few days and experimented with size and weight (one could put 
lead pellets in the hollow model). 
At this first brush, the service model was: facilitate children “learning the 
world by constructing it2” via  an  interactive  graphical  interface  to  an  “object-
oriented-simulation-oriented-LOGO-like-language. 
A few years later at Xerox PARC I wrote “A  Personal  Computer  For  
Children  Of  All  Ages”. This was written mostly to start exploring in 
more depth the desirable services that should be offered. I.e. what should 
a Dynabook enable? And why should it enable it? 
The first context was  “everything that ARPA envisioned for adults but in a 
form that children could also learn and use”.   The   analogy   here   was   to  
normal language learning in which children are not given a special 
“children’s  language”  but  pick  up  speaking,  reading  and  writing  their  
native language directly through subsets of both the content and the 
language. In practice for the Dynabook, this required inventing better 
languages and user interfaces for adults that could also be used for 
children (this is because most of the paraphernalia for adults in those 
days was substandard for all). 3  
One of the best statements of what ARPA thought should be made for 
adults—“The  Computer  As  A  Communications  Device”—was written 
in 1968, the year of the Dynabook idea, by Licklider and Bob Taylor (a 
subsequent ARPA funder and later the founder of Xerox PARC). It is 
available online and can be found and read through the very technolo-
gies invented via the funding of these two visionaries. 
Deeper contexts for the questions came from the social idealism of 
many of the ARPA researchers. For example, Douglas Engelbart once 
said in an interview that, as a young man, he decided: 
- he would focus his career on making the world a better place; 
- any serious effort to make the world better requires some kind of orga-
nized effort 
- harnessing the collective human intellect of all the people contributing to 
effective solutions was key 
- if you could dramatically improve how we do that, you'd be boosting eve-
ry effort on the planet to solve important problems—the sooner the better, 
and 
- computers could be the vehicle for dramatically improving this capability 
Similar sentiments were shared by many in this research community. 
A lot of the drive “make the world better”  was  intertwined  with  issues  
of the American Republic in those times of the Cold War, McCarthy-
ism, assassinations of national figures, collusions and crimes in dealing 
                                                        
2 —Cesare Pavese 
3 This is still unfortunately all too true today 
 
1968-The Dynabook cardboard model 
 
1968-Meeting about bridges (from Licklider & Taylor) 
 
1970 – Four Kent State University students killed by 
National Guard 
VPRI Paper for Historical Context
 
4 
with race, the National Guard shooting and killing college students, an 
undeclared war in which many 10s of 1000s of Americans were killed, 
covert bombings of Cambodia, etc. 
The  Roman  poet  Juvenal’s  quip  about  the  Roman  Republic  “But  who  
will  Guard  the  Guardians?”  was  a  central  question  of  the  60s. 
Thomas Jefferson’s   reply   to   a   similar question about democracy was 
often quoted (sidebar):  
Back then, it was in the context that  “education”  meant  much  more  than  
just competing for jobs, or with the Soviet Union; how well “real  edu-­‐‑
cation”  could  be  accomplished was the very foundation of how well a 
democratic federal republic could carry out its original ideals.  
Jefferson’s  key  idea  was  that   a  general  population  that   has   learned to 
think and has acquired enough knowledge will be able to dynamically 
steer   the   “ship   of   state”   through   the   sometimes   rough waters of the 
future and its controversies (and conversely, that the republic will fail 
if the general population is not sufficiently educated).  
An important part of this vision was that the object of education was 
not to produce a single point of view, but to produce citizens who 
could carry out the processes of reconciling different points of view.  
If most Americans today were  asked  “why  education?”,  it’s  a  safe  bet  
that  most  would  say  “to  help  get  a  good  job”  or  to  “help  make  the  US  
more   competitive   worldwide”   (a   favorite   of   our   recent Presidents). 
Most would not mention the societal goal of growing children into 
adults who   will   be   “enlightened enough to exercise their control with a 
wholesome discretion”  or  to  understand  that  they are  the  “true corrective 
of  abuses  of  …  power”.   
With all its faults, the political system invented by Jefferson and his 
colleagues has been  so  effective  in  making  individual  freedoms  “pos-­‐‑
sible  and  wide”  and creating the wealth to support these ideals, that 
the idea of living within a system ecology that  must  be  “maintained  and  
gardened”  has  almost  been  lost, and the system itself rendered almost 
invisible.  
From this viewpoint, one of the most glaring omissions in my 1972 
paper is lack of mention of Stewart  Brand’s “Whole Earth Catalog”  and  
what the organization behind it stood for. This is despite that I was 
asked in 1971 to choose the initial books for the Xerox PARC library, 
and  my  response  was  to  take  the  PARC  librarian  over  to  the  “Whole  
Earth  Truck  Store”  in  Menlo  Park  and  purchase  every  one  of  the hun-
dreds of books listed in the Whole Earth Catalog. I did this because the 
catalog  proclaimed  itself  as  “Access  To  Tools”,  and  its  selection includ-
ed many of the best books written about a wide variety of systems and 
ecological thinking on large scales, use of tools, ways to think about 
the human condition, the place of technologies—high and low—in 
human life, governance, ways to think about business, and much more. 
It was the cream of both the culture and the counterculture: a center for 
"I know no safe depositary of the 
ultimate powers of the society 
but the people themselves; and if 
we think them not enlightened 
enough to exercise their control 
with a wholesome discretion, the 
remedy is not to take it from 
them, but to inform their discre-
tion by education. This is the true 
corrective of abuses of constitu-
tional power."  
Thomas Jefferson to William 
C. Jarvis, 1820 
 
VPRI Paper for Historical Context
 
5 
helping human beings think deeply about their situation. A great start 
to the library of a research center planning to change the world! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In fact, the Whole Earth Catalog itself was a perfect embodiment in 
paper of what we wanted to carry further in the ARPA community by 
adding the abilities to dynamically explore and construct the kinds of 
ideas contained there, and the new ideas that would come to mind. 
The extension of the  “reflexive  communication”  of  people  with  them-­‐‑
selves augmented by media and literacies seemed to fit perfectly into 
the new ideas for new media and new literacies. 
It would not make any sense to mention the Whole Earth Catalog in 
this essay—it is not easily describable in words—except that most of 
the editions of the WHC are now available online and can be found 
http://www.wholeearth.com/index.php and read through the very 
technologies that it inspired! Take a look at the 1971 version (the year 
before APCFCOAA), which won the National Book Award. 
Another glaring omission to the 1972 paper was no explicit mention of 
new  media  as  “agents  of  change”,  and  most  especially  how  Marshall  
McLuhan4 thought about this. McLuhan pointed out that when we 
                                                        
4 McLuhan’s  ideas  and  influence  are  mentioned  in  “The  Early  History  Of  Smalltalk” 
 
 
Typical double page from the Whole Earth Catalog with some of the books and reviews on “whole systems” (from the online website) 
VPRI Paper for Historical Context
 
6 
learn any skill, it is not done as a simple addition, but produces a 
change  to  one’s  context  for  thinking  as  well  as  one’s  behavior.  As  Neil  
Postman said “Rabbits + Australia is not a sum but a new ecology”.   
This internal ecological change can be qualitative—as with the Austral-
ian ecology—and   this   led   to   McLuhan’s   idea   that   what’s   really   im-­‐‑
portant about tools and media is not what they can do, but what human 
beings become by getting fluent in them. This is what he meant when he 
said  “The medium is the message”.  In  other  words,  tools  and  media  are 
part of what determines our  sense  of  “normal”; big changes can radi-
cally shift an individual’s   and   culture’s   sense of normal. Moreover, 
“normal”  is  not  just  mostly  invisible,  but  for  most  people  and  cultures  
it  is  much  the  same  idea  as  “reality”.  It’s  not  thought  of  as  a  point  of  
view,  but  as  “the  way  things  are”. 
A  deep  consequence  of  “The  medium  is  the  message” is role and iden-
tity change. For example, the printed book changed the answers to the 
questions  “Who  will  learn?”,  “What  will  be  learned?”,  “What  is  a  point  
of   view?”,   “Who   will  interpret   and   talk   to   God?”,   “Who   will   decide  
who  rules?”,  “Who  am  I?”.  And many more. 
The  new  answers  were  “anyone  who  wants  to”,  “many  more  subjects  
than  previously  dreamed  of”,  “not  just  the  view  of  society,  but  of  the  
individual who  reads?”,  “the  people,  not  the  priests”,  “the  people,  not  
the  monarchy  or  aristocracy”,  “someone who  can  learn  to  become”. 
Another deeply important notion is that different media have different 
“carrying   capacities”   for   ideas.   As   McLuhan   said   “You   can   argue  
about a lot of things with stained glass windows, but Democracy is not 
one  of  them”5. One of the media that does facilitate good argumenta-
tion about Democracy is writing-via-printing. And it is very good for 
the kinds of argumentation that form the center of scientific communi-
cation. 
These ideas got us to ask the two analogous interrelated questions: (a) 
“what   is   the   carrying   capacity   for   ideas   of   the   computer?”,   and   (b) 
“what  will  be  the  role  and  identity  changes  brought  by  personal  com-­‐‑
puting and pervasive networking?”.  
(a) The big whammy is that the computer is a metamedium—it can sim-
ulate  any  existing  media  and  also  be  the  basis  of  media  that  can’t  exist  
without the computer. I was particularly drawn to the idea of better 
childhood education with the new possibilities to represent powerful 
ideas that the computer brought would be a strong way to help chil-
dren “grow  up  thinking  much  better  than  most  adults  do  today”.  
(b) We thought that the largest role and identity changes brought by 
computing and pervasive networking should be enfranchising individu-
als to be able to do and think as previously only large organizations 
                                                        
5 Neil Postman pointed out later that television has been the greatest mass teacher of all 
time, yet it is a disaster because it is terrible at teaching what is important for a civiliza-
tion to know, and it is good at teaching retrograde behavioral ideas. 
 
1964-The quintessential McLuhan statement 
VPRI Paper for Historical Context
 
7 
and the hyperwealthy had been able to do. This was not an new 
thought—the printed book started the process, and many parts of the 
industrial revolution e.g. automobiles vs trains, were continuing to 
“open  up  much of what was possible to most of the population”.  Many  
of  these  processes  could  be  seen  as  “disintermediations” (more accu-
rately  “reintermediation”), and we expected that personal computing 
would find many ways to do this in all the processes that involved in-
formation and communication. 
By  shifting  both  “normal”  and  “the  tools  for  learning  and  doing”,  not  
just the answers but the meanings of  the  questions  “Who  am  I?”  and  
“What  can  I  do?”  and  “Who  can  I  learn  to  become”  radically change. 
Once the ideas of “media   as  environment”   and  “new  media   as   rein-
termediators”   are grasped,   the   important   question   is   “Can   we   shape  
“the  message”  of  our new metamedium to create a powerful positive 
force for “civilization”?. 
The inclusion of children begged to be informed by the ideas of Mon-
tessori, Dewey, Piaget, Vygotsky, Bruner, Moore, Papert and other 
great educational thinkers about how children can be helped to take on 
the richest understanding and thinking processes about the world 
around them. At the center of this line of thinking are three main ideas: 
 The great power of human immersion in whole environments that Montes-
sori suggested and  Papert  made  memorable  through  his  “It’s  easier  to  learn  
French  in  France,  so  shouldn’t  we  make  a  MathLand?” 
 Science is a very different and powerful new way of looking at us, the uni-
verse  around  us,  and  what  it  means  “to  find  out”  and  “to  know”.  It  is  a  set  
of  methods/heuristics  for  getting  around  “what’s  poorly  formed  in  our  ge-­‐‑
netic  and  cultural  minds”;  it’s  a  bigger  idea  than  just better ways to under-
stand Nature. 
 The related influence of literacies as a kind of environment for human think-
ing, with use of the computer medium to provide new and more powerful 
extensions of what literacy and representation of ideas have already 
brought to us. 
For example, Maria Montessori stressed that the main business of early 
childhood experience was to take on the strongest epistemologies of 
their time, and that the best way to do this was to embody the power-
ful stances about knowledge and thinking directly in the environments 
of  the  school  and  (if  possible)  the  children’s  homes. To us, the interac-
tive computing to come would be like an environment, so a strong goal 
would be to invent good ones in which the epistemological stances of 
powerful ideas—such as scientific thinking—were embedded so the 
combination formed a new kind of literacy of human beings and the 
dynamic representations of a computer. 
APCFCOAA assumes its readers would be familiar with the general 
ARPA approach to interactive computing6 as  exemplified  in  “end-user”  
systems created a few years previously, such as Sketchpad, JOSS, NLS, 
                                                        
6 This assumption in 1972 was almost certainly quite naïve on the part of the author. 
VPRI Paper for Historical Context
 
8 
GRAIL, etc. (none of which are referenced in the paper). All of these 
allowed real-time access and provided instant response. Each had a 
carefully designed interface that combined ways to interact with some 
form  of  “end-user  programming”. The interface, the ability to program 
(and   the   “simulation/modeling”   stance   of   the   programming   itself), 
provided the basic service model of these systems, and these can be 
regarded  as  the  first  attempts  to  invent  “new  languages  for  new  litera-­‐‑
cies”  for  interactive  personal  computing. 
Part of this context for the Dynabook idea can be understood by look-
ing at the paper “Personal   Dynamic   Media” done a few years later, 
with most of the text and examples drawn from a proposal made to 
NSF7 in   1975.   By   then,   an   “Interim   Dynabook”   had   been   made   at  
PARC8 and many examples and experiments had been done, including 
by a wide range of children both within PARC and at a local school in 
Palo Alto. Most of the experiments were a combination of simulating 
media (some of which could only exist on a computer) combined with 
authoring systems for this media. Even though science learning was 
the big picture, the invention, learning and use of new tools to deal 
with  “process  and  processes”  was the early focus. 
A longer version of this essay would address the tantalizing question 
of  “What  should  the  Dynabook  be  about  if  we  were  to  design  it  with  
what  we’ve  learned  in  the  last  45  years?”  So much more is now known 
about how human beings think and, most especially, make decisions, 
that  the  past  naïve  reliance  on  “automatic  rationalism”  from  learning  
“sciences  and  systems”  doesn’t  hold  up.  Today,  we  would  emphasize  
not just learning to think well in a complex world of many kinds of evi-
dence, cultures and contexts, but being trained to think well under many 
kinds of stress, including those of time, scale, opinions, and almost in-
visible desires that are genetically generated and affect conscious deci-
sion  making.  It  has  often  been  noted  that  “Science  is  better  than  scien-­‐‑
tists”—meaning that the process of science overcomes many individu-
al biases by setting high standards and involving many other scientists 
in the vetting processes. 
Similarly, going back to the ideals and ideas of Jefferson and others, 
we  would  like  “Our  country  (now  our  world)  to  be  better than its citi-
zens”,   and   especially   as   opposed   to   being   “worse   than   its   citizens”.  
And then to bring the individual citizens up to the level of that the ag-
gregate can achieve. This is not a utopian dream—it can be done by 
better understanding of ourselves and our organizations, but in order 
to make it happen, it most especially requires citizens  whose  “discre-­‐‑
tion  has  been  informed  by  education”. 
 
 
                                                        
7 It  was  for  a  major  “transfer”  experiment,  and  NSF  turned  it  down. 
8  …  which with its Smalltalk overlapping windows interface later became the basis for 
the Macintosh 
 
ca. 1973-“Interim Dynabook”-Xerox PARC “Alto”  
VPRI Paper for Historical Context
