Joseph Carl Robnett Licklider (see Figure 1;
Tables 1 and 2) is the well-known ﬁrst director
of the Information Processing Techniques
Office (IPTO) at the Pentagon’s Advanced
Research Projects Agency (ARPA). As Martin
Campbell-Kelly and William Aspray point out
in Computer: A History of the Information
Machine, IPTO support brought time-sharing
into the mainstream of computing because its
budget was the largest of any federal agency’s
for computer research.1,2 Licklider’s strategy was
to divide the IPTO budget among only a hand-
ful of organizations.3 Among the first nine
organizations that the IPTO funded in 1963,
eight were related to time-sharing.4 The fact
that Licklider gave priority to time-sharing sys-
tems is, however, somewhat strange, because
initially time-sharing was not even mentioned
in the 1961 government—or Department of
Defense (DoD)—report that led to the estab-
lishment of the IPTO. Furthermore, even if it
had been mentioned, the early time-sharing
systems could not support human–computer
interaction through graphics, which
was essential for the IPTO’s primary
objective: advancement of command
and control systems. The subsequent
reputation of Licklider as the progen-
itor of graphically oriented, interac-
tive computing, therefore, seems
inappropriate in the context of the
early 1960s.
IPTO’s beginnings
The IPTO was created when the
Kennedy administration pressed for
an improved command and control
system for purposes of US defense.
The Director of Defense Research and
Engineering office thus charged
ARPA, in June 1961, with the respon-
sibility to develop such systems.5
ARPA requested that a study by the Institute for
Defense Analyses (IDA) then be done, con-
cerning digital computer application study, on
the basis of three objectives: 
1. To study command and control problems with
a view toward determining criteria for the
effective application of computers to com-
mand and control.
2. To postulate goals for future DOD growth in
automated command and control capability
and to generate guidelines that will aid future
planners in specifying individual system char-
acteristics. 
3. To delineate problem areas needing accelerat-
ed research.6
The study culminated in a report, Computers
in Command and Control, which was submitted
to ARPA in November 1961.6 In the report, the
ultimate goal for DoD was thought to be an
automated command and control system.
Though the study group found that the current
technical feasibility of using computers was
commonly overrated and “the personnel of the
command must still be the dominant informa-
tion processing elements of the system,”7 the
group listed “several areas of potentially fruit-
ful research and development relevant to com-
mand systems.” These were as follows: 
a. Development of improved techniques in for-
mulation, analysis, and programming.
b. Development of improved procedures and lan-
guages for communication between machines
and their users.
c. Basic research directed toward increasing our
understanding of such complex processes as
pattern perception, concept formation and
recognition, problem solving, learning, and
decision making.
d. Research directed toward improving the
J.C.R. Licklider’s Vision for the IPTO
Chigusa Ishikawa Kita
Kyoto University
The Information Processing Techniques Ofﬁce of the Advanced
Research Projects Agency was founded in 1962 as a step toward
realizing a ﬂexible military command and control system. In setting the
IPTO’s research agenda for funding, its ﬁrst director, J.C.R. Licklider,
emphasized the development of time-sharing systems. This article
looks at how Licklider’s early vision of “a network of thinking centers”
helped set the stage for the IPTO’s most famous project: the Arpanet.
62
IEEE Annals of the History of Computing
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
1058-6180/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEE
Figure 1. J.C.R. Licklider
circa 1960, pictured in the
IRE Transactions of Human
Factors in Electronics. (Photo
courtesy of the IEEE.)
dependability of computers and their
associated hardware.8
In the IDA report, time-sharing was
never mentioned. The likely reason is
because time-sharing systems could
not support, around 1960, the inten-
sive use of a display at the terminals.
Indeed, Wesley Clark, designer of
the advanced TX-2 computer at MIT,
insisted that time-sharing had a seri-
ous limitation when he vainly opposed it in
MIT’s Long Range Computation Study Group in
1960.9 Ironically, Clark had already “clearly
specified in 1954, in a memo entitled ‘The
Multi-Sequence Program Concept,’ exactly how
to write a subroutine capable of simultaneous
execution by many different callers,” and
designed the I/O interrupt system into the TX-2
computer.10 Clark himself implemented the
fundamental technique to allow I/O devices to
share the time of the central processor, which
could be used as the basis of time-sharing sys-
tems. The group headed by Clark at MIT
Lincoln Laboratory, however, used the tech-
nique not for time-sharing but for the advanced
use of I/O devices connected to the TX-2, to
make a computer more “approachable.”11 In
1963, on the TX-2, Ivan Sutherland developed
Sketchpad, a digital drawing system with a light
pen, which Licklider greatly admired.12,13
Strangely enough, although Licklider fully
understood the importance of advanced
human–machine interaction, whenever he had
a choice he always leaned toward time-sharing.
For example, in IPTO’s early days, when Licklider
decided to fund Douglas Engelbert’s group at
Stanford Research Institute, Licklider asked
Engelbert to conduct his human–machine inter-
action research by using the time-sharing system.
Engelbert was puzzled: 
Lick[lider] moved very swiftly. By early 1963 we
had a funded project. But, whereas I had pro-
posed using a local computer and building an
interactive workstation, Lick asked us instead to
connect a display to the System Development
Corporation’s (SDC’s) AN/FSQ-32 computer, on
site in Santa Monica, to do our experimenting
under the Q32’s projected new time-sharing sys-
tem. (Converting the Q32 to be a time-shared
machine was SDC’s IPTO project.) … For various
reasons, not uncommon in pioneering ventures,
that ﬁrst year was very unproductive relative to
the purposes and plan of our project.14
July–September 2003
63
Table 1. Personal history of J.C.R. Licklider (1915–1990), compiled on the basis of information in the
J.C.R. Licklider papers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Archives.
Year
Event
1915
Born on 11 March, St. Louis, Missouri
1937
Earned AB in physics, mathematics, and psychology at Washington University, St. Louis
1938
Earned AM in psychology at Washington University
1942
Earned PhD in psychology at University of Rochester, New York
1942–1946
Became research associate and research fellow in the Harvard Psycho-Acoustic Laboratory
1946–1950
Lectured at Harvard, Dept. of Psychology
1950–1957
Hired at MIT, associate professor in the Dept. of Electrical Engineering, (then in the Dept. of
Economics and Social Science)
1951–1955
Worked at MIT Acoustics Laboratory
1952–1955
Consulted at the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, served as unofﬁcial group leader
1957–1962
Worked at Bolt, Beranek, and Newman (BBN) as vice president and headed the Psycho-
Acoustics, Engineering Psychology, and Information Systems Research depts.
1962–1964
Served at the Advanced Research Projects Agency as director of the IPTO
1964–1967
Served at IBM as consultant to the IBM director of research
1966–1967
Taught at MIT as visiting professor
1967–1970
Served as director of Project MAC
1967–1985
Taught at MIT as professor of electrical engineering, then professor of computer science
1974–1975
Went on leave from MIT, also served a second time as director of ARPA/IPTO
1990
Died, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Table 2. Awards received, and ofﬁces held, by J.C.R. Licklider, compiled on the
basis of information in the J.C.R. Licklider papers at the MIT Archives.
Year
Awards/Ofﬁces
1950
Biennial Award of the Acoustical Society of America
1958
President of the Acoustical Society of America
1961–1962
President of the Society of Engineering Psychologists
1965
Franklin Y. Taylor Award of the Society of Engineering Psychologists
1977–1978
Secretary of Class C of the National Academy of Sciences
Obviously, the Engelbert group’s human–
machine interaction research was slowed down
because of Licklider’s direction. Licklider’s deci-
sion runs counter to his image as a “visionary
of interactive computing,” which one often
ﬁnds in the history of modern computing.15
Licklider explained his rationale, in econom-
ic terms, for favoring time-sharing in his paper
“Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Military Intelligence, and
Command and Control,” which appeared in
1964’s Military Information Systems.16,17 In that
book, which was based on the First Congress on
the Information System Sciences held in
November 1962, he argued that a complex
information system required large programming
tasks and that a large, fast computer based on
the concept of “sensibly simultaneous time shar-
ing” can be economically used to facilitate the
efforts of one programmer.18 This reasoning,
however, was not sufﬁcient to explain his incli-
nation toward time-sharing. Because, as even
Licklider himself had argued in another, 1962
paper on online man–computer communica-
tion, “in critical military systems such as SAGE
[Semi-Automatic Ground Environment], the
economic factor has been less restrictive and the
need for man–computer interaction greater or
more evident.”19 And at that time, already “the
cost of computation is decreasing; it is no longer
wholly uneconomic for a man to think in real
time with a medium-scale computer.”19
Accordingly, the development of time-shar-
ing could be viewed as somewhat inappropriate
for the DoD’s new ofﬁce for command and con-
trol. Licklider succeeded in arguing for the
development of time-sharing ofﬁcially by virtue
of this economic rationale, yet he claimed that
his primary goal for the IPTO was the develop-
ment of interaction between humans and com-
puters. Why would Licklider want to develop
human–computer interaction through time-
sharing? In analyzing the reasons behind this
seemingly contradictory goal, let’s examine the
resources with which Licklider formed the
research agenda for funding the IPTO.20 As will
become evident, time-sharing was important to
Licklider’s primary concern, which he called “a
thinking center.” He had arrived at this concept
earlier, before joining the IPTO.
‘A thinking center’
Back in 1957, Licklider had joined the
acoustic-consulting firm Bolt, Beranek, and
Newman (BBN) in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
to head a group of experimental psychologists
working in acoustics. Although the group
already had analog computers, Licklider asked
Leo Beranek, one of BBN’s founders, to buy a
digital computer, which he did.21 Later, in
1959, Licklider had an opportunity to use the
prototype 
of 
the 
Digital 
Equipment
Corporation (DEC) PDP-1, a state-of-the-art
machine that was designed after Clark’s TX
computers.22 Soon, Licklider and colleagues
such as BBN’s Edward Fredkin and MIT’s John
McCarthy began developing a time-sharing sys-
tem for BBN based on the PDP-1.23
The DEC PDP-1 intrigued BBN because the
computer was “characterized by high speed and
relatively small memory,” and “its low cost
means that it will not ordinarily have to be
shared by a large number of users.” The BBN
time-sharing system was experimental, because
it had initially allowed, by means of teletype-
writers, only two users although that later
increased to five.24 In all likelihood, Licklider
and his colleagues wanted the system not out
of a practical need but to conﬁrm the possibili-
ty of scaling such a technique to a larger system.
In a series of 1961 lectures held to commem-
orate MIT’s 100th birthday,25 Licklider served on
a panel at one of the lectures, at which he dis-
cussed how time-sharing would be beneﬁcial in
making digital computers “approachable” in
universities.26 In another lecture, “Time-Sharing
Computer Systems” by John McCarthy, Licklid-
er’s 1960 “Man–Computer Symbiosis” essay was
introduced as a “recent paper” on “the ideas
concerning time-sharing systems.”27
In that paper, Licklider not only presented a
new concept of a man–machine system for
thinking but he also laid out a research agenda
for the goal, detailing prerequisite elements
such as memory hardware, programming for
memory organization, computer language, and
I/O devices.28 Although the reference to time-
sharing was not central to the paper, it was
clearly presented as the ﬁrst prerequisite, “Speed
Mismatch between Men and Computers”: 
Any present-day large-scale computer is too fast
and too costly for real-time cooperative thinking
with one man. Clearly, for the sake of efﬁciency
and economy, the computer must divide its time
among many users. Time-sharing systems are
currently under active development. There are
even arrangements to keep users from “clobber-
ing” anything but their own personal programs.
It seems reasonable to envision, for a time 10
or 15 years hence, a “thinking center” that will
incorporate the functions of present-day libraries
together with anticipated advances in informa-
tion storage and retrieval and the symbiotic func-
tions suggested earlier in this paper. The picture
readily enlarges itself into a network of such cen-
ters, connected to one another by wide-band
64
IEEE Annals of the History of Computing
J.C.R. Licklider and the IPTO
communication lines and to individual users by
leased-wire services. In such a system, the cost of
the gigantic memories and the sophisticated pro-
grams would be divided by the number of users.29
Licklider dealt with time-sharing as an econom-
ical matter as well as a key technology for intel-
lectual resource sharing, “a thinking center.” He
even mentioned a network of such centers.
At the time of article publication, Licklider was
not only participating in the development of a
time-sharing system, but in the winter of
1960–1961 he had also been leading the BBN
group in researching the libraries of the future.
Both efforts were steps toward a realization of a
thinking center. In the research agenda he laid
out for the BBN research group, he encouraged
the members to investigate the current status of
ﬁve areas: storage and retrieval of information;
memory organization; man–machine communi-
cation; language processing; and artiﬁcial intelli-
gence (AI).30 These were the “information storage
and retrieval and the symbiotic functions” whose
advances were anticipated for realizing a think-
ing center, as he wrote in his 1960 paper.
As for implementation, BBN had launched
a time-sharing service through its subsidiary
company, Telcomp, in 1963, which was a
“leased-wire service” cited by Licklider as the
technology needed to connect a network of
such centers.31 Thus, Licklider had taken steps
to begin realizing his vision of an intellectual
resource-sharing network just at the time he
was selected as the IPTO’s ﬁrst director.
Against such a background, it is under-
standable that he envisioned a network of
time-sharing systems from the very beginning
of IPTO. Licklider showed his enthusiasm by
describing a network in an internal 1963 ARPA
memo, 
sometimes 
referred 
to 
as 
the
“Intergalactic Computer Network memo.” He
addressed the memo, sent to the researchers
that the IPTO funded, to the “Members and
Affiliates of the Intergalactic Computer
Network” in preparation for a meeting on 25
April 1963.4,32 This memo was his modestly
presented agenda of computer research for
funding. In the memo, Licklider explained:
It will possibly turn out, I realize, that only on
rare occasions do most or all of the computers in
the overall system operate together in an inte-
grated network. It seems to me to be interesting
and important, nevertheless, to develop a capa-
bility for integrated network operation.
He then went on: “Let me suppose that I am
sitting at a console that includes cathode-ray-
tube display, light-pen, and typewriter,” and
continued for three of the memo’s eight pages
with a detailed description of hypothetical com-
puter network usage by an experimental psy-
chologist. He laid out his own comprehensive
picture of a thinking center here. Toward the
end of the memo, he noted: “The fact is, as I see
it, that the military greatly needs solutions to
many or most of the problems that will arise if
we tried to make good use of the facilities that
are coming into existence.” Thus, although
there was no explanation of the direct military
need for time-sharing systems or their net-
working, Licklider tried to convince researchers
that the development of time-sharing systems
would subsequently beneﬁt the military.
His consistent concern for a network of
thinking centers was seen even after his
administration of the IPTO had ended. In
Licklider’s only book, Libraries of the Future, the
central concept of a “procognitive system” (see
Figure 2) extended his vision of such a net-
work.33 In the book, he explained that this net-
work consisted of four echelons of subsystems
all based on a time-sharing technique, and he
pointed to IPTO-funded time-sharing systems
at MIT, the Carnegie Institute of Technology,
System Development Corporation, RAND
July–September 2003
65
Figure 2. The procognitive system envisioned by
Licklider. Licklider’s explanation of the ﬁgure:
“The circles and ellipses represent advanced and
specialized computer systems. The squares
represent man–computer interfaces, those of
echelon 4 being stations or consoles for
substantive users of the system. Most of the
connections are switchable telecommunication
lines. Those shown as solid lines represent
connections that might be established at a
particular moment during operation. The dotted
lines are introduced to suggest other connections
that could be established. … Except in echelon 1,
the number of subsystems envisioned for the
projected system is very much greater than the
number shown.” From Libraries of the Future,
1965, p. 41. (Courtesy of the MIT Press.) 
Corporation, and BBN as the best schemata to
think about the third and fourth layers of the
network.34
From these facts, we can see Licklider added
time-sharing to the IPTO agenda to realize his
vision of a network of thinking centers, and he
even placed priority on it. But how would the
picture of a thinking center readily enlarge
itself as a network of such centers?
‘The Truly SAGE System ...’ 
The archived J.C.R. Licklider papers include
an interesting typed 1957 manuscript (con-
taining a number of hand-written corrections):
“The Truly SAGE System or Toward a
Man–Machine System for Thinking.” 35 It
demonstrates that Licklider’s network of think-
ing centers was a transformation of SAGE as an
advanced information network. To understand
its historical meaning, we need to examine
Licklider’s relationship to the 1950s SAGE proj-
ect (see the “About SAGE” sidebar).
Licklider’s relationship with SAGE started in
1951 when, as an associate professor at MIT, he
was chosen to be “a token psychologist”36 in
Project Charles, an MIT project established to
examine the possibility of an improved air
defense system.37 The MIT Lincoln Laboratory
was established in the early 1950s with the pri-
mary mission of developing a national air
defense system. One of the groups was psy-
chology. Although Licklider was officially a
consultant to the psychology group at Lincoln
Laboratory, he worked closely with George
Miller, its group leader, in forming the group
that examined how to detect information from
the analog graphical data obtained from radar.
The group collaborated with electrical engi-
neers on data transmission and with engineers
from Polaroid Corporation on analog graphical
technology, but it had almost no direct con-
nection to the digital computer developments
at MIT Lincoln Laboratory.38 However, Licklider
had “an opportunity with Lincoln Laboratory
to hear of computers and radar sets and com-
munications.”36 As Licklider often mentioned,
his exposure to advanced digital computers at
the laboratory in the late 1950s was a crucial
experience for him in forming a vision of their
advanced usage in the future.39
The principal architect of TX computers at
Lincoln Laboratory, Wesley Clark, recalls intro-
ducing Licklider to one of the computers (in
the quote, “LINC” is the name of the small
computer Clark designed in the early 1960s):
I had simply demonstrated its use and powerful
displays to him, and had expected him to draw
his own conclusions about the great value of
interacting with a computer directly. I had
learned this “on-line” style of operation on
Whirlwind and the Memory Test Computer
(MTC), and I designed the TX-0, the TX-2 and,
of course, the LINC for use in this same, directly
interactive manner. All of these computers had
display scopes, and “interaction” meant making
extensive use of them. Lick[lider] saw how we
did all this and was clearly intrigued. Like many
66
IEEE Annals of the History of Computing
J.C.R. Licklider and the IPTO
About SAGE
The Semi-Automatic Ground Environment (SAGE) was a com-
mand and control network for air defense, designed to coordinate
all air defense components by a digital computer at individual
Direction Centers. It was one of the biggest postwar air defense
projects, officially beginning in 1954.1 Although SAGE as an air
defense system for bombers was already out of date when it
became operational in 1958 because of the Intercontinental
Ballistic Missile (ICBM), it had a great impact on military system
design, computer research, and industry.2 In the context of human
factors in man–machine systems research, SAGE was also one of
the most important achievements. As the name indicates, SAGE
was a semiautomatic system that included human elements, such
as computer operators who helped with SAGE procedures and
commanders who conducted the decision-making process. As
Kenneth Schaffel has written in his book on the history of air
defense, in the early 1950s when the SAGE project was launched,
industrial automation applications were new and military applica-
tions were only dimly perceived.3 But the new air defense system
was intended to be automated, just like other industrial applica-
tions, because manual procedures for transmitting military infor-
mation through telephone and teletype systems lacked speed and
precision. For this reason, computers were crucial. At the same
time, as MIT’s professor George Valley, who headed the Air Defense
System Engineering Committee of the US Air Force Scientific
Advisory Board (1950–1952), noted in his memoir, there was a
controversy between analog and digital usage. The researchers at
MIT chose digital computers because by comparison analog com-
puters had serious limitations.4
References and notes
1. On this point, see for example, S.I. Schwartz, ed., Atomic Audit: The
Costs and Consequences of U.S. Nuclear Weapons since 1940, chapter
4: “Defending against the Bomb,” Brookings Institution Press, 1998.
For the general history of SAGE, see, in particular: Annals of History
of Computing, special issue on SAGE, vol. 5, no. 4, Oct.–Dec. 1983;
G.E. Valley Jr., “How the SAGE Development Began,” Annals of
History of Computing, vol. 7, no. 3, July–Sept. 1985, pp. 196-226; K.
Schaffel, The Emerging Shield: The Air Force and the Evolution of
Continental Air Defense, 1945–1960, Ofﬁce of Air Force History, US
Air Force, Washington, D.C., 1991.
2. See, for example, an excellent historical work on this subject: K.D.
Redmond and T.M. Smith, From Whirlwind to MITRE: The R&D Story
of the SAGE Air Defense Computer, MIT Press, 2000.
3. Schaffel, The Emerging Shield, p. 150.
4. Valley, “How the SAGE Development Began,” pp. 220-221.
other visitors, he understood the enormous value
of using computers directly and thought to emu-
late the way we did things at Lincoln.40
As Clark notes, it was at this time that Licklider
recognized the potential for extensively using
displays.
Around the time that he ﬁrst saw the TX-2,
Licklider also had some interaction in meetings
with Lincoln Laboratory’s communications
techniques group, which conducted research
on pattern recognition and was headed by
Oliver Selfridge.41 Selfridge and G.P. Dinneen
had presented papers on pattern recognition at
the Western Joint Computer Conference in
1955.42 At the same conference session, Clark
also presented a paper on pattern recognition.43
Thus, through his associations with colleagues
at Lincoln Laboratory, we can assume Licklider
acquired knowledge of pattern recognition by
digital computers. With such knowledge of
advanced computing, Licklider even began to
think about an advanced information system
through the scheme of SAGE as a whole.
As Licklider wrote in “The Truly SAGE
System,” the aim of the 1957 paper was “to
suggest a kind of system that seems desirable
and reasonable from a psychological point of
view and not totally unfeasible from a psy-
chologist’s approximation of an engineering
point of view.”44 This paper indicates that
Licklider conceived of an idea for “a network of
thinking centers” through SAGE and added
some new features.45 The title of Licklider’s
manuscript hints that SAGE was not sage
enough for what Licklider envisioned despite
the name, but he did not ﬁercely criticize SAGE.
On the contrary, he maintained his close con-
nection with the Air Force (SAGE’s developers)
in the 1950s and early 1960s.46 Moreover, he
wrote this paper as a National Academy of
Science—Air Research and Development
Command (NAS-ARDC) Special Study paper.
Licklider later acknowledged ARDC as the main
funding source of the “Man–Computer
Symbiosis” paper in 1960.47
The paper contains 10 parts (see Figure 3). In
the ﬁrst part, Licklider wrote that he was con-
cerned with ﬁnding a way to “improve the qual-
ity or efﬁciency of scientiﬁc and technical
thinking.”48 The paper’s framework proposes the
effective use of the computer for a system of net-
worked information centers.49 The ﬁrst four
parts explain the goals of the network and pro-
vide a picture of the system. The next part,
“Steps Toward Realization,” presents the four
steps (which, in his original outline, are listed as
parts but which are actually subparts) needed for
realization and describes each in detail; the last
short part describes the system’s potential.
The use of the system as an information
center is portrayed as a general application of
SAGE. In each center, “there is of course a
large-scale digital computer with a very exten-
sive memory,” and “the centers for related
fields are connected one with another by
telecommunication channels.”50 There are four
modes of communication between man and
machine in the system. First, human operators
can simply speak into microphones. Second,
there is a combination display and control
having a large, ﬂat surface onto which materi-
al is projected and the operators can write with
a pencil or stylus. Third, the operators can put
graphical information (such as curves and
functions) into the computer and relate the
information so introduced to graphical infor-
mation presented by the computer. Fourth, the
operators can use “typing or type-writer—per-
haps one that is also used as a computer-out-
put device.”51 Among these modes, the last
three were achieved on the SAGE consoles, but
Licklider added a new feature of speech recog-
nition that was clearly beyond the 1950s state
of the art. Later, in his “Man–Computer Sym-
biosis” paper (1960), Licklider also described
how “desirable” and “feasible” speech com-
munication between man and machine could
be in section E-3: “Automatic Speech Produc-
tion and Recognition.”28
The proposed computing style in each cen-
ter is online use by multiple users based on a
time-sharing technique:
The computer is operated on a time-sharing basis
by a number of people. The arrangements for dis-
playing information to the people are highly
developed. They include digital-analogue con-
verters, curve plotters, large-screen cathode-ray
tubes, automatic typing or printing machines,
and loudspeakers.51
July–September 2003
67
“The Need”
“The Room for Improvement”
“The System”
“Hypothetical Picture of a System in Operation”
“Steps Toward Realization”
“Study of Creative Thinking”
“Research and Development on Mechanical Data-Processing
Techniques”
“Artiﬁcial Intelligence”
“Development of a Small, Experimental System”
“Variations”
Figure 3. Outline of Licklider’s 1957 paper, “The Truly SAGE System or
Toward a Man–Machine System for Thinking.”
It is notable that he mentioned time-sharing
by multiple people here, because Licklider’s
1957 paper is one of the earliest written records
mentioning time-sharing in this sense.
Although this concept of time-sharing is usual-
ly associated with John McCarthy, who wrote
specifically about it in a 1959 memo at MIT,52
the “Truly SAGE” paper indicates that Licklider
had already used the term in the summer of
1957.53 It was possible for Licklider to have been
exposed to the phrase time-sharing at the SAGE
project, although there it was used to describe
the SAGE program’s cyclic scheduling process.54
As J.A.N. Lee writes in the introduction to the
Annals’ special issue on time-sharing and inter-
active computing, the phrase time-sharing
(sometimes hyphenated or capitalized) was
used as a technical term throughout the mid-
1950s to the mid-1960s with different mean-
ings, and the diversity of its usage even became
controversial in the mid-1960s.55,56 But at least
Licklider’s intention to push its development
was clear in his 1957 paper. For Licklider, time-
sharing was a technique to allow users simulta-
neous multiple access and one that was needed
to share the information stored in the large-
scale computer at a thinking center.
The essential point is that, both in SAGE
and in a network of thinking centers, comput-
ers are networked and used for data processing
and storage, and the computing style is online.
Like SAGE, Licklider’s picture of “a thinking
center” could “readily enlarge itself into a net-
work of such centers.”29
Against ‘artiﬁcial intelligence’ 
As we have seen, Licklider’s network of
thinking centers was inspired by SAGE. But
what about the tendency toward automation
as seen in SAGE?
The title of his 1957 paper35 suggests that
Licklider wanted a truly semiautomatic system
that contained human elements. In the paper
he indicated four categories of humans in the
system: scientists, engineers, and other
“thinkers”; “impedance matchers”; mainte-
nance personnel; and programmers.51 The
impedance matchers were people who helped
the thinkers in operating the equipment.
Historically, most of the research on human
factors in man–machine systems was about
machines and the humans in the last three cat-
egories. Machines needed humans to help their
procedures. 
The SAGE designers tried to realize automa-
tion by gathering information from various
sources and presenting the data as a composite
picture of the air situation as it developed, but
it was in many senses semiautomatic. It need-
ed many operators. In SAGE, there was a tran-
sition from the old type of manual system of
using hand plotting or voice communication
for transferring data to the use of automation.
In 1958, Licklider criticized SAGE’s insufﬁcien-
cy in realizing the level of automation origi-
nally proposed: 
The main experience we have had with a large-
scale man–machine system for situation analysis
and control has been provided by the SAGE sys-
tem. But it does not, either, help much to convey
the conception we have in mind. The SAGE sys-
tem was conceived of originally as being very
largely automatic. The numerous human opera-
tors have been brought into SAGE mainly to
handle tasks that turned out not to be practica-
ble for the computer. It is therefore too much a
matter of men aiding the machine, and not
enough a matter of true man–computer symbio-
sis, to give us a preview of the Air Force informa-
tion-processing and control systems that we
hope will exist in the future. 57
This criticism also appeared in his 1960 paper
generalizing the concept of man–computer sym-
biosis from its speciﬁc application for Air Force
systems.58 Accordingly, Licklider did not deny
the need to automate functions that helped the
procedure of computers and even encouraged it
for future man–machine systems. But in SAGE,
there were thinkers: commanders and weapons
directors. Licklider thought that the most impor-
tant human component in his “truly SAGE sys-
tem” was the thinkers: 
The scientists and engineers combine their cere-
bral data-processing with the facilities of the
machine to constitute a more effective system
than either the human or the mechanical parts
alone could make.59
At that time, there was another general
application of SAGE, this one by IBM: Semi-
Automatic Business Research Environment
(Sabre), the online airplane reservation network
system of American Airlines.60 Sabre was basi-
cally an advanced automation of the preexis-
tent human-operated information network
system.61 All the users of the Sabre system fol-
lowed the same preestablished procedure,
although in a network of thinking centers, users
would apply the information in many different
ways. In this sense, Sabre was a commercial
application that made SAGE simpler and stabler
through “IBM’s mature and well-seasoned
engineering approach derived from its SAGE
68
IEEE Annals of the History of Computing
J.C.R. Licklider and the IPTO
experience.”62 By contrast, a network of think-
ing centers would be more complex and
advanced than SAGE. In Sabre, users were just
like the radar in SAGE that fed a piece of infor-
mation into a preestablished procedure. Sabre
essentially automated the functional equivalent
of the SAGE commander to, in this case, decide
which seat should be reserved or cancelled. But
in a network of thinking centers there would be
many thinkers to input some data and use the
system information in their thinking processes
as the commanders in the SAGE system did.
Furthermore, the thinkers in Licklider’s think-
ing centers could use the whole system simul-
taneously in different ways, whereas SAGE had
a single air-defense procedure. In this sense,
Licklider did not share a tendency toward com-
plete automation that would include the deci-
sion-making process, while Sabre did. In fact,
the direction Sabre took seemed promising at
the time, because AI was expected to be a key
technology for the automation of complex
man–machine systems.63 Licklider did not share
this view; indeed, he employed the phrase
“man–computer symbiosis” to express his
opposition to automation.
Man–computer symbiosis
Well before the term artiﬁcial intelligence was
born, comparisons between a computer and a
human brain had already been made. Even the
usage of the term computer implied a personiﬁ-
cation of a machine, because the old usage
meant humans, not machines. Fittingly, the
popular press often employed expressions such
as “giant brain” or “electronic brain” through-
out the 1950s and 1960s.64
Licklider showed sympathy for research in
this area in the “Artiﬁcial Intelligence” section
in his 1957 manuscript: 
There is little reason to restrict either the man or
the machine to what, at the outset, appears to be
his zone. In fact, the problem of coupling
between the man and the machine would be
greatly simpliﬁed if the machine could be devel-
oped in part in man’s image. It is desirable, there-
fore, to explore the possibilities of the field of
research currently designated by the terms artiﬁ-
cial intelligence and self-organizing automata.
That study and the study of human thinking and
perceiving should be mutually facilitating.65
Licklider did in fact interact with people who
participated in the Dartmouth Summer
Research Project on Artificial Intelligence in
1956, where the phrase “artiﬁcial intelligence,
or AI” seems to have been ofﬁcially used for the
ﬁrst time. For example, Marvin Minsky, one of
the original members of the summer project,
listed Licklider as one of his mentors.66 In the
late 1940s, Minsky was one of the students in
Licklider’s seminar while Licklider was afﬁliat-
ed with the Harvard Psycho-Acoustics Labora-
tory.67 They often built electronic devices
together for experiments on theories of learn-
ing.68 According to Minsky, Licklider built “a
wonderful machine” that “could recognize the
word ‘watermelon’ no matter who said it in no
matter what sentence” in the early 1950s.69 And
when Licklider gave a talk about his psycholog-
ical research on acoustics at the 7th Macy con-
ference on “The Feedback Mechanisms and
Circular Causal Systems in Biological and Social
Systems,” Claude Shannon, who had also been
on the Dartmouth project, was the speaker fol-
lowing Licklider, and they both participated in
discussions together at the meeting.70
Other researchers related to the Dartmouth
project with whose paths Licklider kept cross-
ing included Oliver Selfridge, who had been an
assistant to Norbert Wiener, the well-known
mathematician who authored Cybernetics, and
carried on the research on pattern recognition
at MIT Lincoln Laboratory where Licklider had
spent some time with him. Another partici-
pant, Nathaniel Rochester of IBM, had pro-
grammed a neural network model on the
computer. This work was said to apply Donald
O. Hebb’s The Organization of Behavior (1949),
and the Rochester group was inspired by
Licklider’s talk on Hebb’s theory in 1952.71 In
fact, in the preface to his book, Hebb noted
that Licklider was one of the scholars he was
indebted to “for painstaking and detailed crit-
icism of a large part of the manuscript, improv-
ing both matter and style.”72
In his “Symbiosis” paper, Licklider listed 13
papers on “theorem proving, problem-solving,
chess-playing, and pattern recognizing pro-
grams” as best papers on AI including those by
researchers whom he knew. He continued as
follows:
In fact, it seems worthwhile to avoid arguing
with (other [than the researchers whose papers
he listed]) enthusiasts for artiﬁcial intelligence by
conceding dominance in the distant future of
cerebration to machines alone. There will never-
theless be a fairly long interim during which the
main intellectual advances will be made by men
and computers working together in intimate
association.73
Apparently, Licklider tried to differentiate
his man–machine symbiosis concept from AI
July–September 2003
69
concerning the possibility of fully automating a
man–machine system that included a heuristic
human brain procedure. This point was central
to his 1960 paper.
Licklider published “Man–Computer Sym-
biosis” as the ﬁrst article in the inaugural issue
of the IRE Transactions on Human Factors in Elec-
tronics, which appeared in March 1960. The
journal was one of the newly established peri-
odicals of human factors research at the time.
In the 1950s, a newly emerging research area
involved designing complex systems that
included humans as elements. Such systems
were usually called man–machine systems. The
main man–machine systems were for military
use, but there were also requirements in indus-
tries for “the production of a commodity or the
construction of a facility.”74
A field of specialization concentrating on
solving the problems that occurred between
man and machine had evolved during World
War II, as has been described in the ofﬁcial his-
tory of the Office of Scientific Research and
Development (OSRD).75 The new interdiscipli-
nary area for handling problems involving
“man as a system component”76 was called by
various names by 1960, such as human factors
in engineering, human engineering, engineer-
ing psychology, biomechanics, applied experi-
mental psychology, and ergonomics, among
others, as mentioned in the preface of
McCormick’s well-known textbook, Human
Engineering.77 As he wrote in this 1957 book,
McCormick noticed there were many who did
not like the term human engineering but he
adopted it because it was the most popular
expression, even though “not adequately
descriptive of the ﬁeld.” In 1957, the American
Psychological Association declared the forma-
tion of the new division of the Society of Engi-
neering Psychologists in an effort to form an
academic area gathering their research results
on the human element in a man–machine
system.78
Licklider was so enthusiastic about the
establishment of the academic field that he
served on the editorial board of another newly
published periodical, Human Factors, in the late
1950s and became the fourth president of the
Society of Engineering Psychologists in
1961.79,80 Thus Licklider’s “Man–Computer
Symbiosis” clearly reﬂected important elements
of the new area of human factors research.
The “Symbiosis” paper suggested that a com-
puter could be an ideal partner for human beings
in “formulative thinking,” which was preferable
to a completely automated man–machine sys-
tem. The paper then provided an agenda for the
research necessary to accomplish the goal of such
interaction between men and computing
machines. At that time, researchers treated
automation as an important objective for
man–machine systems. If such a system were
fully automated, humans would disappear com-
pletely, to be replaced by computers carrying out
all tasks, even intellectual tasks formerly consid-
ered reserved for humans. Man would no longer
be a component of man–machine systems.
Licklider tried to redirect the trend, and to this
end he used the phrase man–computer symbiosis.
There is also an interesting document in the
archived Licklider papers, entitled: “Man–Com-
puter Symbiosis: Part of the Oral Report of the
1958 NAS-ARDC Special Study, Presented on
Behalf of the Committee on the Roles of Men
in Future Air Force Systems, 20-21 November
1958.”81 This seems to be the first paper in
which Licklider used the phrase man–computer
symbiosis. It demonstrates how Licklider
explained the importance of research on
man–computer symbiosis to the Air Force, the
main organization that funded such research.
In his 1958 “Man–Computer Symbiosis”
report, Licklider mentioned another report:
“Report of the Committee on the Roles of Men
in Future Air Force Systems.” He wrote: “Since
there is not time to report on all those topics, I
shall select just one of them—actually one
subtopic—and concentrate on it. We have been
referring to it as man–computer symbiosis.”82
From this, we know that Licklider coined
the phrase man–computer symbiosis in commit-
tee discussions and had been using it at least as
early as the summer of 1958, in the context of
the military application of man–machine sys-
tems in the future.
Licklider started the early 1958 report in the
style of popular science ﬁction: “[T]he President
pressed the golden button. The wheels whirred,
the lights flashed, the display panel came
aglow, and the computer announced: ‘I am
glad that you asked me that question.’” Right
after this humorous beginning, Licklider reject-
ed the image of complete automation through
computers.82 He doubted the adequacy of an
image of self-thinking machines caused by the
popular understandings of AI. At that time, the
phrase man–computer symbiosis was an effective
phrase to call attention to his argument against
full automation: that there be a partnership
between human and computer. He denied the
early realization of complete automation in
“intelligence data processing, mission plan-
ning, battle control and assessment.”83
Licklider argued that it would need 10 to 20
years for “developments in artificial intelli-
70
IEEE Annals of the History of Computing
J.C.R. Licklider and the IPTO
gence to make it possible for machines alone to
do much thinking or problem solving of mili-
tary signiﬁcance.” And he conﬁrmed the need
for research of “man–machine communica-
tion” because there would remain human ele-
ments in man–machine systems in the near
future.84 This estimation was also referred to in
his 1960 paper, where Licklider even men-
tioned that it might take far longer, 500 years,
for the development of applicable AI.73
Once he began to emphasize the impor-
tance of man–computer symbiosis, he had to
defend his research agenda to the funding
source, the Air Force. In 1961, Licklider wrote
“The Cerebral Frontier” as a “draft of a report
to the Basic Research Panel of the Air Force Sci-
entific Advisory Board by the Committee on
Artiﬁcial Intelligences, Bionics, and Man–Com-
puter Symbiosis.”85 The Air Force was con-
cerned with the future of man–machine
systems, and there were at least three agendas
to advance them: AI, bionics, and man–com-
puter symbiosis. In this competitive situation,
he tried to emphasize that his research agenda
was the most practical. Admitting some over-
lap among the three agendas, Licklider recom-
mended the funding of both man–computer
symbiosis and AI, because there were “intelli-
gent and dedicated young research workers,
trained in contributory disciplines and quali-
ﬁed for the task, who are eager to explore and
assimilate the cerebral frontier.” By “young
research workers” he obviously meant Minsky
and McCarthy, and others who had helped his
research on libraries of the future at BBN.
Directing IPTO
When Licklider became the ﬁrst director of
the IPTO, the fundamental military concern
with AI was its possible application for
automating command and control system. In
the 1961 IDA report that spawned IPTO, the
words automated and automation were fre-
quently used, and the report’s authors investi-
gated AI’s potential as a key technology for
automating tasks such as problem solving, self-
modifying or optimizing systems, and decision
making.86 Although different from his agenda
for man–machine systems, the ﬁeld of AI rep-
resented a good opportunity for Licklider, who
had been trying to ﬁnd funding sources for his
“young research workers”—AI was a likely
project for IPTO funding.
However, Licklider carefully avoided prom-
ising an early direct application for automated
command and control systems from this fund-
ing. In his 1964 paper “Artificial Intelligence,
Military Intelligence, and Command and
Control,” Licklider did not say that AI would
be a key for an automated military system, but
that it would “come to grips with some of the
problems that are basic in command and con-
trol.” He reasoned as follows: 
The prospect that research in artificial intelli-
gence may progress in a deﬁnite and substantial
way is favored by the fact that the tool of dynam-
ic representation exists, that it can be developed
greatly beyond its present state, and that research
recognize its value. The prospect that their work
may have practical bearing upon command and
control and military intelligence is favored by
the fact that researchers in artiﬁcial intelligence
are working on problems that happen to be rel-
evant and basic and that the tools they are devel-
oping promise to be useful in military
information processing.87
Among Licklider’s ﬁrst nine funded organi-
zations in 1963, four received budgets for AI:
Allen Newell’s group at Carnegie Institute of
Technology, McCarthy’s group at Stanford, the
Systems Development Corp. for heuristic pro-
gramming and theory of computation, and
Minsky’s group at MIT for recursive functions,
symbolic manipulations, heuristics, and prob-
lem-solving in Project MAC.88 Note that all of
the organizations were working on time-shar-
ing at the same time, and the AI that Licklider
funded was not outside his thinking-center
scheme; rather, it would support his ideas by
potentially improving man–computer interac-
tion by means of a console.
We can conclude that in determining what
the IPTO should fund, Licklider’s inclination
toward developing a network of thinking centers
played a key role in his overall agenda, albeit
unofﬁcially. Licklider instead directed the IPTO
to ofﬁcially fund time-sharing projects (which
could serve as the basis for thinking-center net-
works) and AI (which could improve man–
machine communication required in those net-
works). On one level, Licklider established the
IPTO agenda to fund projects that would fulﬁll
the military’s need for improved command and
control systems, but on another level, he con-
tinued pursuing his personal research agenda for
the network of thinking centers.
IPTO after Licklider’s departure
The direction that Licklider initially set for
the IPTO was strongly affected by his own
research interests. However, as Arthur Norberg
and Judy O’Neill show in Transforming Computer
Technology, important IPTO priorities included
graphics and networking.89 The latter two ini-
July–September 2003
71
tiatives were not yet fixed during Licklider’s
directorship. In recent years, with an
increased focus on how the networks of com-
puters concept originated, historians and
writers tend to refer to Licklider’s role as an
inspiration for the Arpanet, irrespective of
their approach.90
But, in fact, neither
Licklider’s vision for thinking centers nor his
call for an intergalactic computer network
directly formed the IPTO agenda for funding
networking projects, as we’ll see.
Licklider directed the IPTO for two years
(1962–1964). Although his IPTO research prior-
ities initially favored time-sharing over
human–computer interaction, Licklider appre-
ciated the need to fund man–machine interac-
tion research. Because he had high praise for
Ivan Sutherland’s work at MIT on man–machine
communication through graphics, he asked
Sutherland to become the IPTO’s second direc-
tor. As the IDA report had originally explained,
the development of “man–computer communi-
cation” was crucial to the US military’s future
command and control system, so it was logical
for the IPTO to emphasize its importance. 
Through Sutherland, the IPTO became more
focused on the advancement of man–machine
communications, especially in the graphics
area so urgently needed for future military
command and control. During his directorship
(1964–1966), Sutherland set an agenda firmly
establishing computer graphics as a research
focus.91 Consequently, through his research
funding from the IPTO, Larry Roberts—who
had worked in the computer graphics area at
MIT Lincoln Laboratory—began working on
the time-sharing scheme as it related to graph-
ics.92 Roberts wrote about the quality of dis-
plays connected to time-sharing systems in a
1965 paper, “Graphical Communication in a
Time-Sharing Environment”: 
It is generally acknowledged today that display
equipment is a powerful component for facilitat-
ing man–machine communications in computer
systems. The advent of large-scale time-sharing
has made many forms of on-line operation,
which previously were extremely inefﬁcient, eco-
nomically feasible for the first time. This has
resulted in renewed interest in low-cost displays
to improve the ease and speed of interaction.
Although there is considerable agreement on the
value of graphical techniques, there is wide diver-
gence in the approaches to designing display
consoles. This variety reﬂects not only the neces-
sary differences in application requirements but
the limited operating experience of designers as
well. In particular, extensive experience in on-line
graphics on the Lincoln Laboratory TX-2
Computer has demonstrated that the common
tendency to sacriﬁce performance for the sake of
cost reduction is a dangerous one.93
Even in 1965, the conflict between time-
sharing concepts and high-quality man–
machine communications was evident. But
through the effort of Roberts and others the
two research initiatives coexisted to some
extent. In directing the IPTO funding of
Roberts’ research, Sutherland integrated two
previously separate funding priorities: time-
sharing and computer graphics.
Although both Licklider and Sutherland saw
potential in man–computer communication,
Sutherland did not share Licklider’s skepticism
about 
the 
complete 
automation 
of 
a
man–machine system. As the second director
of the IPTO, Sutherland argued:
The future of on-line systems depends a great deal
upon the future of off-line systems. There is a lot
of talk these days about a semi-automated mathe-
matical laboratory in which a mathematician
could prove theorems that he could not prove
without computer assistance. How about having
the computer prove the theorems all by itself?
Suppose the artiﬁcial intelligence people make a
machine which can, in fact, prove new theorems
all by itself. What then becomes of our semi-auto-
mated mathematical laboratory? It’s useless. …
What I am predicting is that today’s interest in sys-
tems in which a man and a machine get together
on-line will be replaced in the distant future by
interest in systems in which a computer gets
directly on-line with the real world, sensing and
interacting with it directly through transducers.
The “real world” with which such systems interact
will include human beings, of course.94
Sutherland dismissed the concept of “sym-
biotic” systems that should be almost, but not
completely, automated. Instead, he tried to
redirect the IPTO funding agenda to support
advanced hardware design projects, inasmuch
as the advanced design of TX-2 had stimulat-
ed him to produce Sketchpad.95,96 In fact, the
support for hardware research was recom-
mended in the original IDA report by which
the IPTO was formed. Although historians
viewed this direction “almost as a digression”
for the IPTO, at the time it was a reasonable
redirection.97
On the matter of a computer network,
Sutherland directed and funded a network
experiment at UCLA, and he “noted time shar-
ing’s effect on the sharing of programs and
72
IEEE Annals of the History of Computing
J.C.R. Licklider and the IPTO
other ﬁles among users of the same system.”98
Around the same time, Sutherland wrote: 
We have only just begun to work with comput-
ers as communication media between people.
Today, by linking remote stations, we can allow
one person to “look over the shoulder” of anoth-
er through a computer. We have yet to combine
the functions of the design system and the
inquiry system. The ability of many people in
widely separated locations to know exactly what
is going on has already proved practical in the
airline reservation system. It must be included in
our computer-assisted design system.99
Clearly, Sutherland had high regard for other
trends outside the IPTO, such as Sabre, and he
described the networking of computers, includ-
ing these attempts, as “communication media
between people.” 
The research agenda for time-sharing sys-
tems earlier set by Licklider now began to gen-
erate some elaborate, large-scale systems
during Sutherland’s directorship. However,
these systems that the IPTO had funded were
complicated and unwieldy and had many
problems.100 Around the same time, relatively
simple time-sharing systems ﬁrst became com-
mercially available outside the IPTO world. As
Norberg and O’Neill point out, “most com-
puter manufacturers had announced and were
working on time-sharing systems by 1965.”100
The business area of time-sharing services in
particular was growing rapidly from the mid-
1960s on.101 As Thomas Hughes notes in
Rescuing Prometheus, this trend—the distribu-
tion of computing power—is analogous to the
evolution of electricity distribution.102 But, at
the same time, time-sharing systems were not
necessarily favored by all computer users.
Small computers, for instance, began to
emerge in the 1960s, and there was a conflict
over which approach companies should take
in choosing computing facilities, as evidenced
in popular magazines such as Computers and
Automation.103
The IPTO acquired its third director in 1966.
At that time, as disadvantages of time-sharing
systems began to be debated publicly, director
Robert Taylor tried to continue funding of
time-sharing. He argued in 1967:
All time-sharing systems give promise of an eco-
nomic advantage gained through one computer
system serving more than one on-line user.
Furthermore, a computer system large enough to
serve a number of simultaneous users provides,
for any one user, more storage, computational
power and convenience than he could expect to
afford on his own stand-alone machine.104
By the same token, he began to emphasize
the merits of a time-sharing system: a commu-
nity of users communicating through comput-
er consoles.105 To pursue this potential, he
initiated the network project that led to the
Arpanet. At that time, computers and telecom-
munications were often discussed together, and
computer networks were constructed by con-
necting the same kind of computers. But Taylor
wanted the project to connect communities to
make the reason for the IPTO’s support of time-
sharing more meaningful, independently from
Licklider’s earlier agenda of a network of think-
ing centers. Consequently, the IPTO wanted a
network experiment between the most geo-
graphically distant organizations it funded:
MIT Lincoln Laboratory (Massachusetts) and
SDC (California), and asked Roberts to take
charge because he was managing TX-2 at
Lincoln.106
According to Roberts, he had been well
aware of Licklider’s enthusiasm for networking
time-sharing systems, but when the IPTO
sought his expertise in 1966, Roberts declined;
he was more interested in computer graphics.
Ultimately, however, Roberts was compelled to
join the IPTO to direct the networking project,
and the IPTO agenda for computer networking
was set in motion at last.107
Roberts’ approach to the network experi-
ment differed from what Licklider had origi-
nally envisioned. Unlike the centralized
time-sharing systems at the heart of Licklider’s
networking concept, the Arpanet was designed
as a distributed network, and Roberts integrat-
ed the former directors’ visions into an agenda
for a resource sharing network.108
We can conclude that the IPTO agenda for
networking was backed by the time-sharing
agenda set by Licklider, though it did not pre-
cisely follow his picture of a network of think-
ing centers. As we know, the Arpanet became a
basis of the backbone of today’s Internet. Of
course, the Internet has been the dynamic force
in integrating multiple separate networks into a
network system, so we cannot point out only
one origin. But we can say that Licklider’s orig-
inal vision of intellectual resource sharing
through a network of online databases stored
in digital computers has been historically real-
ized in today’s Internet.
Acknowledgments
On the revision process, the comments and
advice of the reviewers were helpful in making
July–September 2003
73
this article better, and I am greatly indebted to
Michael S. Mahoney for his kindness in read-
ing, and commenting on, this article.
References and notes
1. M. Campbell-Kelly and W. Aspray, Computer: A
History of the Information Machine, Basic Books,
1996, p. 212.
2. Committee on Innovations in Computing and
Communications: Lessons from History, Comput-
er Science and Telecommunications Board, Com-
mission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and
Applications, National Research Council, Funding
a Revolution: Government Support for Computing
Research, National Academy Press, 1999, p. 56.
3. A.L. Norberg and J.E. O’Neill, Transforming Com-
puter Technology: Information Processing for the
Pentagon, 1962–1986, Johns Hopkins Univ. Press,
1996, pp. 58-59.
4. According to the ARPA internal memo directed to
the organization Licklider funded, from J.C.R. Lick-
lider to members and afﬁliates of the Intergalactic
Computer Network, in J.C.R. Licklider Papers (MC
499), Inst. Archives and Special Collections, Mass.
Inst. of Technology Libraries, Cambridge, Mass.
(hereafter referred to as Licklider Papers at MIT
Libraries), box 7, folder “1963,” the distribution is
for SDC (System Development Corp.); Stanford
Research Inst.; Stanford Univ.; Univ. of California
(Berkeley); Univ. of California (Los Angeles);
Carnegie Inst. of Technology; Information Int’l
Inc.; MIT; Thompson-Ramo-Woolridge. The fact
that the eight organizations were related to time-
sharing was conﬁrmed through Norberg and
O’Neill, Transforming Computing Technology, pp.
102-103 and accompanying references.
5. Norberg and O’Neill, Transforming Computing
Technology, pp. 9-10.
6. Inst. for Defense Analyses, Research and Eng.
Support Division, Computers in Command and
Control, tech. report 61-12, Nov. 1961, p. 1.
7. Ibid., p. 2.
8. Ibid., p. 62.
9. Norberg and O’Neil, Transforming Computer Tech-
nology, pp. 84-85; W. Clark, “The LINC Was Early
and Small,” A History of Personal Workstations, A.
Goldberg, ed., ACM Press, 1988, p. 358.
10. E. Fredkin, “The Time Sharing of Computers,”
Computers and Automation, Nov. 1963, vol. 12,
no. 11. p. 12.
11. I.E. Sutherland, Sketchpad: A Man–Machine Graphi-
cal Communication System, master’s thesis, Dept. of
Electrical Eng., MIT, Jan. 1963, MIT theses, no.
1963-10, chapter 2: “History of Sketchpad,” p. 24.
12. I.E. Sutherland, “Sketchpad: A Man–Machine
Graphical Communication System,” AFIPS Proc.
Spring Joint Computer Conf., Spartan Books, vol.
23, 1963, pp. 329-345.
13. F. Gruenberger, ed., Computer Graphics: Utility/Pro-
duction/Art, Thompson Book Co., 1967, pp. 44-45.
14. D.C. Engelbert, “The Augmented Knowledge
Workshop,” A History of Personal Workstations, A.
Goldberg, ed., ACM Press, 1988, pp. 191-192.
15. See, for example, H. Rheingold, Tools for Thought:
The People and Ideas behind the Next Computer
Revolution, Simon & Schuster, 1985, chapter 7;
Norberg and O’Neill, Transforming Computer
Technology, pp. 26-30; Campbell-Kelly and
Aspray, Computer, pp. 212-215; P.E. Ceruzzi, A
History of Modern Computing, MIT Press, 1998, p.
306. Also see Licklider’s biographical history:
M.M. Waldrop, The Dream Machine: J.C.R. Licklid-
er and the Revolution That Made Computer Person-
al, Viking, 2001.
16. E. Bennet, J. Degan, and J. Spiegel, eds., Military
Information Systems, Frederick A. Praeger, 1964,
preface, p. ix.
17. J.C.R. Licklider, “Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Military
Intelligence, and Command and Control,” Mili-
tary Information Systems, 1964, pp. 118-133.
18. Ibid., pp. 123-124.
19. J.C.R. Licklider and W.E. Clark, “On-Line
Man–Computer Communication,” AFIPS Proc.
1962 Spring Joint Computer Conf., Spartan Books,
vol. 21, May 1962, p. 113.
20. In relation to the term of agenda, see M.S.
Mahoney, “The Structures of Computation,” The
First Computers: History and Architectures, R. Rojas
and U. Hashagen, eds., MIT Press, 2000, pp. 20-
21: “The agenda of a ﬁeld consists of what its
practitioners agree ought to be done, a consen-
sus concerning the problems of the ﬁeld, their
order of importance or priority, the means of
solving them, and perhaps most importantly,
what constitutes a solution.”
21. L. Beranek, “Roots of the Internet: A Personal His-
tory,” The Massachusetts Historical Rev., vol. 2,
2000, pp. 57-59.
22. In 1959, the PDP-1 prototype came to BBN
before its ofﬁcial release. See, for example, “The
Project MAC Interviews,” Annals of the History of
Computing, vol. 14, no. 2, Apr.–June 1992, pp.
16-17. A photo of the prototype can been seen
in G. Bell, J.C. Mudge, and J.E. McNamara, Com-
puter Engineering: A DEC View of Hardware Systems
Design, Digital Press, 1978, p. 135. The inﬂuence
of TX-0 and TX-2 on PDP-1 is described in chap-
ter 6, “The PDP-1 and Other 18-Bit Computers,”
pp. 123-129.
23. L. Beranek, “Roots of the Internet: A Personal His-
tory,” p. 60.
24. J. McCarthy et al., “A Time-Sharing Debugging
System for a Small Computer,” AFIPS Proc. 1963
Spring Joint Computer Conf., Spartan Books, vol.
23, p. 56.
25. M. Greenberger, ed., Computers and the World of
74
IEEE Annals of the History of Computing
J.C.R. Licklider and the IPTO
the Future, MIT Press, 1962, p. vii. Also see, for
example, “The Project MAC Interviews,” Annals
of the History of Computing, vol. 14, no. 2,
Apr.–June 1992, pp. 15-16.
26. Ibid., Greenberger, ed., Computers and the World
of the Future, p. 205. 
27. Ibid., p. 222.
28. J.C.R. Licklider, “Man–Computer Symbiosis,” IRE
Trans. Human Factors in Electronics, vol. 1, no. 1,
Mar. 1960, pp. 4-11.
29. Ibid., p. 7.
30. J.C.R. Licklider, “Agenda for the study of library
problems of the future,” memo, box 6, folder
“1961,” Licklider Papers at MIT Libraries.
31. L. Beranek, “Roots of the Internet: A Personal His-
tory,” pp. 60-61.
32. In Licklider Papers at MIT Libraries, box 7, folder
“1963.” 
33. J.C.R. Licklider, Libraries of the Future, MIT Press,
1965, pp. 39-45.
34. Ibid., p. 42.
35. J.C.R. Licklider, “The Truly Sage System, or
Toward A Man–Machine System for Thinking,”
manuscript, 20 Aug. 1957, box 6, folder “1957,”
Licklider Papers at MIT Libraries.
36. “The Project MAC Interviews,” Annals of the His-
tory of Computing, vol. 14, no. 2, p. 16.
37. MIT Project Charles, “Problems of Air Defense:
Final Report of Project Charles,” MIT, Cambridge,
Mass., 1951, 3 vols. See also, Redmond and
Smith, From Whirlwind to MITRE, pp. 102-108.
38. Group Organization List of MIT Lincoln Laborato-
ry, 1 July 1953; G. Miller, interview by C. Ishikawa
Kita, 9 Oct. 2001, Princeton, N.J.; J.C.R. Licklider,
OH 150, oral history interview by W. Aspray and
A. Norberg, transcript, 28 Oct. 1988, in
Cambridge, Mass., Charles Babbage Inst., Univ.
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, pp. 6-7.
39. See Ref. 36. Licklider interview by Aspray and Nor-
berg, transcript, 1988, p. 10. Though he men-
tioned the computer as TX-2, it might be TX-0.
40. W. Clark, email interview by C. Ishikawa Kita, 24
June 2000.
41. Group Organization List of MIT Lincoln Laborato-
ry, 1 July 1953. There were several informal meet-
ings organized by Selfridge among people who
were researching the function of the human
brain through digital computers. Licklider joined
the meetings. (W. Clark, email interview by C.
Ishikawa Kita, 24 June 2000. Preliminary
interview was done on 27 Mar. 2000, Palo Alto,
Calif.) I conﬁrmed the fact with Marvin Minsky,
(email interview by C. Ishikawa Kita, 27 May
2000) and O. Selfridge, (interview, 23 Dec. 2000,
Cambridge, Mass.). Selfridge said that he could
not recognize which meetings they were because
he talked on the matter with a variety of people,
including the people Clark suggested. Thus the
fact that they had some relationship and talked
about the “human brain and computer” can at
least be counted as a historical fact.
42. The session of “Learning Machines,” Proc. West-
ern Joint Computer Conf., Inst. of Radio Engineers,
1955, pp. 85-111; O.G. Selfridge, “Pattern
Recognition and Modern Computers,” pp. 91-
93; G.P. Dinneen, “Programming Pattern Recog-
nition,” pp. 94-100.
43. Ibid., W.A. Clark and B.G. Farley, “Generalization
of Pattern Recognition in a Self-Organizing Sys-
tem,” pp. 86-91.
44. J.C.R. Licklider, “The Truly SAGE System,” cover
page.
45. Ibid., p. 8. Licklider used “information center”
and “thinking center” interchangeably in the
paper.
46. Project Charles and MIT Lincoln Laboratory were
initiated by the US Air Force. Licklider served as a
member of the Scientiﬁc Advisory Board, Ofﬁce
of the Chief of Staff, US Air Force, circa 1961.
47. “Man–Computer Symbiosis” (1960) was
“supported largely by the Behavioral Science
Division, Air Force Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc research, Air
Research and Development Command,” as indi-
cated on the ﬁrst page of the publication. Licklid-
er, “Man–Computer Symbiosis,” p. 4.
48. J.C.R. Licklider, “Truly SAGE system,” p. 1.
49. Ibid., p. 2.
50. Ibid., p. 2-3.
51. Ibid., p. 3.
52. According to J. McCarthy, “Reminiscences on the
History of Time-Sharing,” Annals of the History of
Computing, vol. 14, no. 1, Jan.–Mar. 1992, pp.
19-24. For more detail at MIT, see S.L. Garﬁnkel,
Architects of the Information Society; Thirty-Five
Years of the Laboratory for Computer Science at
MIT, H. Abelson, ed., MIT Press, 1999, pp. 2-9.
53. J. McCarthy could not remember whether he had
a conversation with Licklider before Sept. 1957
on “time-sharing.” J. McCarthy, email interview
by C. Ishikawa Kita, 30 Oct. 2001.
54. R.R. Everette, C.A. Zraket, and H.D. Bennington,
“SAGE—A Data Processing System for Air
Defense,” Proc. Eastern Joint Computer Conf., Inst.
of Radio Engineers, 1957, pp. 153-154.
55. J.A.N. Lee, “Time-Sharing at MIT: Introduction,”
Annals of the History of Computing, vol. 14, no. 1,
Jan.–Mar. 1992, pp. 13-15. See also, J.A.N. Lee,
“Claims to the Term “Time-Sharing,” Ibid., pp.
16-17. 
56. See, for example, A. Rosenberg, “Time-Sharing: A
Status Report; Problems and Prospects,” Datama-
tion, Feb. 1966, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 66-77.
57. J.C.R. Licklider, “Man–Computer Symbiosis: Part
of the Oral Report of the 1958 NAS-ARDC Special
Study, Presented on Behalf of the Committee on
the Roles of Men in Future Air Force Systems, 20-
July–September 2003
75
21 November 1958,” box 6, folder “1958,” Lick-
lider Papers at the MIT Libraries, pp. 2-3.
58. J.C.R. Licklider, “Man–Computer Symbiosis,”
1960, p. 4.
59. J.C.R. Licklider, “The Truly SAGE System,” p. 4.
60. About Sabre, see for example, J.L. McKenney with
D.C. Copeland and R.O. Mason, Waves of Change:
Business Evolution through Information Technology,
Harvard Business School Press, 1995. Especially,
chapter 4: “Rattling SABRES: American Airlines and
the Reservation System Revolution,” pp. 97-140.
61. M. Campbell-Kelly and W. Aspray, “Computers,”
pp. 169-176.
62. Ibid., p. 174.
63. See, for example, A.L. Samuel, “Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence: A Frontier of Automation,” The Annals of
the American Academy of Political and Social
Science, vol. 340, Mar. 1962, pp. 10-20.
64. Especially, the phrase “giant brain” was diffused
by E.C. Berkeley, Giant Brains, or Machines that
Think, John Wiley & Sons, 1949.
65. J.C.R. Licklider, “The Truly SAGE System,” p. 12.
66. M. Minsky homepage, http://www.ai.mit.edu/
people/minsky/people.html.
67. J. Bernstein, “Mind and Machine: Proﬁle of Mar-
vin Minsky,” Science Observed, Basic Books, 1982,
p. 29.
68. M. Minsky, email interview by C. Ishikawa Kita,
28 May 2000.
69. J. Bernstein, “Mind and Machine: Proﬁle of Mar-
vin Minsky,” p. 101. The word the machine could
recognize was not “watermelon” but “butterfat”
according to G. Miller, interviewed by Ishikawa
Kita, 2001.
70. According to H. von Foerster, ed., Cybernetics; Cir-
cular Causal and Feedback Mechanisms in Biological
and Social Systems, vol. 7, Macy Foundation, New
York, 1951, Licklider’s talk was “The Manner in
Which and Extent to Which Speech Can Be Dis-
torted and Remain Intelligible.” The best historical
work on the meetings: S.J. Heims, Constructing A
Social Science for Postwar America: The Cybernetics
Group, 1946–1953, MIT Press, 1991.
71. M. Mitchell Waldrop, Complexity, Simon & Schus-
ter, 1992, pp. 157-160.
72. D.O. Hebb, The Organization of Behavior, John
Wiley & Sons, 1949.
73. Licklider, “Man–Computer Symbiosis,” 1960, p. 5.
74. C.T. Morgan et al., eds., Human Eng. Guide to
Equipment Design, McGraw-Hill, 1961, p. 1.
75. J. Phinney Baxter 3rd, Scientist Against Time, Lit-
tle, Brown, 1946, part ﬁve: “Men and Machines,”
pp. 395-417.
76. W. Sinaiko, ed., Selected Papers on Human Factors
in the Design and Use of Control System, Dover
Publications, 1961, p. vii.
77. E.J. McCormick, Human Engineering, McGraw-
Hill, 1957. 
78. See the section “Ofﬁcers, Board, Committees,
and Representatives of the American Psychologi-
cal Association, 1957–1958,” The American Psy-
chologist, vol. 12, no. 11, p. 710.
79. Human Factors, vol. 1, no. 1, Sept. 1958 (it was
issued in 1959).
80. “Proc. Sixty-Ninth Ann. Business Meeting,” The
American Psychologist, vol. 16, no. 12, p. 785.
81. J.C.R. Licklider, “Man–Computer Symbiosis: Part
of the Oral Report of the 1958 NAS-ARDC Special
Study,” Licklider Papers at the MIT Libraries.
82. Ibid., front page.
83. Ibid., p. 2.
84. Ibid., pp. 4-7.
85. J.C.R. Licklider, “The Cerebral Frontier,” 24 Apr.
1961, Licklider Papers at MIT Libraries, box 6,
folder “1961,” front page.
86. Inst. for Defense Analyses, “Computers in Com-
mand and Control,” pp. 56-57.
87. J.C.R. Licklider, “Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Military
Intelligence, and Command and Control,” p. 133.
88. A. Norberg and J. O’Neill, Transforming Computer
Technology, pp. 204-209.
89. Ibid., p. 14. Chapters two through ﬁve were ded-
icated for each of four research areas: time-shar-
ing, computer graphics, networking, and AI.
90. See, for example, P.H. Salus, Casting the Net,
Addison-Wesley, 1995, pp. 6-7; P.N. Edwards, The
Closed World, MIT Press, 1996, pp. 262-271; K.
Hafner and M. Lyon, Where Wizards Stay Up Late:
The Origins of the Internet, Touchstone, 1996, pp.
24-40; M. Hauben and R. Hauben, Netizens: On
the History and Impact of Usenet and the Internet,
IEEE CS Press, 1997, chapter 6; T.P. Hughes, Res-
cuing Prometheus, Pantheon Books, 1998, pp.
258-265; J. Abbate, Inventing the Internet, MIT
Press, 1999, pp. 43-44; and J. Naughton, A Brief
History of the Future: The Origins of the Internet,
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1999, pp. 65-76.
91. I. Sutherland, “Computer Graphics: Ten Unsolved
Problems,” Datamation, vol. 12, no. 5, May
1966, pp. 22-27.
92. A. Norberg and J. O’Neill, Transforming Computer
Technology, pp. 129-130.
93. L.G. Roberts, Graphical Communication in a Time-
Sharing Environment, tech. report, MIT Lincoln
Laboratory, May 1965, p. 1. (This paper was pre-
sented at the 1965 IFIPS Congress, 24-29 May
1965, New York.)
94. I.E. Sutherland, “The Future of On-Line Systems,”
On-Line Computing Systems, E. Burgess, ed., pro-
ceedings of the symposium sponsored by the
Univ. of California at Los Angeles and Informatics
Inc., 2-4 Feb. 1965, American Data Processing,
1965, p. 13.
95. Macromodular Computer System project at
Washington Univ. led by W. Clark from Mar.
1965, and Parallel Processor (ILLIAC IV) project at
76
IEEE Annals of the History of Computing
J.C.R. Licklider and the IPTO
Univ. of Illinois led by D. Slotnick from Feb. 1966.
See, for example, Norberg and O’Neill,
Transforming Computer Technology, pp. 264-269.
96. I. Sutherland, OH171, oral history interview by
W. Aspray, transcript, 1 May 1989, Pittsburgh,
Charles Babbage Inst., Univ. of Minnesota, p. 20.
97. A. Norberg and J. O’Neill, Transforming Computer
Technology, p. 264.
98. Ibid., pp. 204-209.
99. I. Sutherland, “The Future of On-line Systems,”
p. 11.
100. A. Norberg and J. O’Neill, Transforming Computer
Technology, p. 116.
101. See, for example, A.G. Hammersmith, “Selecting
a Vendor of Time-Shared Computer Services,”
Computers and Automation, vol. 17, no. 10, Oct.
1968, pp. 16-22; R.T. Bueschel, “Time Sharing in
the Near Future,” Computers and Automation, vol.
18, no. 1, Jan. 1969, pp. 28-30.
102. T.P. Hughes, Rescuing Prometheus, p. 265.
103. See, for example, R.A. MacGowan, “Small Scientif-
ic Computers versus Data Communications
Systems in a Large Computer Environment,” Com-
puters and Automation, vol. 13, no. 2, Feb. 1964,
pp. 26-28; M. Emerson, “The ‘Small’ Computer
versus Time-Shared Systems,” Computers and
Automation, vol. 14, no. 9, Sept. 1965, pp. 18-20.
104. R.W. Taylor, “Man–Computer Input-Output Tech-
niques,” IRE Trans. Human Factors in Electronics,
vol. 8, vol. HFE-8, no. 1, Mar. 1967, p. 2.
105. R.W. Taylor, “Plans for an Experimental, Interac-
tive Computer Network,” paper prepared for the
2nd Workshop on National Systems of the Task
Group on National Systems for Scientiﬁc and
Technical Information, Front Royal, Va., circa
1968, pp. 9-10; Taylor’s personal ﬁles.
106. T. Marill and L.G. Roberts, “Toward a Coopera-
tive Network of Time-Shared Computers,” AFIPS
Conf. Proc. Fall Joint Computer Conf., Spartan
Books, vol. 29, 1966, pp. 425-431.
107. L.G. Roberts, “The ARPANET and Computer Net-
works,” A History of Personal Workstations, A.
Goldberg, ed., ACM Press, 1988, pp. 143-144.
108. Ibid., p. 146.
Chigusa Ishikawa Kita was
granted a doctorate in 2002
from Kyoto University. Her
research interests include the
formation of technological
vision and research agenda, the
social impact of computing
technology, and the process of
institutionalization in the ﬁeld of computer science.
A book on the early history of the IPTO based on her
dissertation was published in Japan in 2003.
Readers may contact Chigusa Ishikawa Kita at
Academic Center for Computing and Media Studies,
Kyoto University, Yoshida-Nihonmatsu-cyo, Sakyo,
Kyoto, Japan 606-8501; chigusa.kita@nifty.ne.jp.
For further information on this or any other com-
puting topic, please visit our Digital Library at
http://computer.org/publications/dlib.
July–September 2003
77
SET
INDUSTRY
STANDARDS
computer.org/standards/
HELP SHAPE FUTURE TECHNOLOGIES • JOIN AN IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY STANDARDS WORKING GROUP AT 
IEEE Computer Society members work together to deﬁne standards like 
IEEE 802, 1003, 1394, 1284, and many more.
802.11 FireWire
token rings
gigabit Ethernet
wireless networks
enhanced parallel ports
