ELSEVIER 
15 July 1996 
Physics Letters A 217 (1996) 188-193 
PHYSICS LETTERS A 
The physical nature of information 
Rolf Landauer 1 
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, P.O. Box 218. Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA 
Received 9 May 1996 
Communicated by V.M. Agranovich 
Abstract 
Information is inevitably tied to a physical representation and therefore to restrictions and possibilities related to the laws 
of physics and the parts available in the universe. Quantum mechanical superpositions of information bearing states can be 
used, and the real utility of that needs to be understood. Quantum parallelism in computation is one possibility and will be 
assessed pessimistically. The energy dissipation requirements of computation, of measurement and of the communications 
link are discussed. The insights gained from the analysis of computation has caused a reappraisal of the perceived wisdom 
in the other two fields. A concluding section speculates about the nature of the laws of physics, which are algorithms for 
the handling of information, and must be executable in our real physical universe. 
1. Information is physical 
Information is not a disembodied abstract entity; it 
is always tied to a physical representation. It is repre- 
sented by engraving on a stone tablet, a spin, a charge, 
a hole in a punched card, a mark on paper, or some 
other equivalent. This ties the handling of informa- 
tion to all the possibilities and restrictions of our real 
physical word, its laws of physics and its storehouse 
of available parts. 
This view was implicit in Szilard's discussion of 
Maxwell's demon [1]. Szilard's discussion, while a 
major milestone in the elucidation of the demon, was 
by no means an unambiguous resolution. The history 
of that can be found in Refs. [ 2,3 ]. The acceptance of 
the view, however, that information is a physical en- 
tity, has been slow. Penrose [4], for example, argues 
for the Platonic reality of mathematics, independent 
of any manipulation. He tells us "... devices can yield 
] E-Maih landaue@watson.ibm.com. 
only approximations to a structure that has a deep and 
'computer-independent' existence of its own." Indeed, 
our assertion that information is physical amounts to 
an assertion that mathematics and computer science 
are a part of physics. We cannot expect our colleagues 
in mathematics and in computer science to be cheer- 
ful about surrendering their independence. Mathemati- 
cians, in particular, have long assumed that mathemat- 
ics was there first, and that physics needed that to de- 
scribe the universe. We will, instead, ask for a more 
self-consistent framework in Sec. V. 
EW. Bridgman, recognized as Nobel laureate for his 
work in high pressure physics, published a remarkable 
paper [ 5 ] in 1934. That was his attempt to wrestle with 
the paradoxes of set theory. His solution: Mathematics 
must be confined to that which can be handled by 
a succession of unambiguous executable operations. 
Bridgman's paper is essentially a want ad for a Turing 
machine, which came a few years later. In a remarkable 
coincidence Bridgman even uses the word program 
for a succession of executable instructions. Bridgman 
0375-9601/96/$12.00 (~) 1996 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
PII S0375-9601 (96)00453-7 
R. lzmdauer/Physics Letters 
did not go on to discuss the physical executability of 
the successive instructions, but that is the additional 
requirement we emphasize here [6,7]. 
2. Quantum information 
When we first learned to count on our very classical 
and sticky little fingers we were misled into thinking 
about information as a classical entity. In the binary 
case that that requires either a 0 or I state. But nature 
allows a quantum mechanically coherent superposi- 
tion of 0 and 1. That is a degree of freedom appre- 
ciated only in recent years, and its impact still needs 
to be fully understood [8]. This new possibility has 
been investigated in three different scenarios so far; 
undoubtedly the list will grow. 
One of these scenarios deals with quantum tele- 
portation [9]. Here we use two previously prepared 
and correlated quantum objects; an EPR pair. One is 
shipped to the transmitting end, the other to the receiv- 
ing end. An interaction between this prepared object 
at the transmitting end and the source object whose 
state is to be transmitted is used to generate a clas- 
sical signal. At the receiving end this classical signal 
interacts with the prepared object located there to gen- 
erate a copy of the teleported source state. The state 
of the source object is changed in the interaction that 
generates the classical signal. Quantum teleportation 
is a subject of serious conceptual interest, but it is not 
clear that it is a practical recipe for something that 
really needs to be done, and will not receive further 
discussion. 
The most developed and obviously useful of the 
three scenarios is quantum cryptography [ 10], which 
has been demonstrated successfully in real systems, 
though its eventual realm of applicability is still uncer- 
tain. This application makes direct practical use of the 
uncertainty principle. A stream of quantum informa- 
tion cannot be examined by an eavesdropper without 
leaving a mark on the measured stream. A communi- 
cation link, in contrast to computation, subjects each 
bit to limited handling, and this minimizes the need 
for each operation to do exactly what it is supposed to 
do. Furthermore, it is well known [ 11 ] that in a com- 
munications link (or memory) occasional rare errors 
are easily remedied by redundancy. Quantum cryptog- 
raphy, therefore, typifies a promising direction for the 
A 217 (1996) 188-193 
189 
use of quantum information, in contrast to quantum 
parallelism, which will be discussed next. 
Paul Benioff [ 12] first understood that a purely 
quantum mechanical time evolution can cause inter- 
acting bits (or spins) to change with time just as we 
would want them to do in a computer. David Deutsch 
later [ 13] realized that such a computer does not have 
to be confined to executing a single program, but can 
be following a quantum mechanically coherent super- 
position of different computational trajectories. At the 
end we can gain some kinds of information that de- 
pend on all of these parallel trajectories, much as the 
diffraction pattern in a two-slit experiment depends on 
both trajectories. Eventually Shor [ 14] showed that 
this form of parallelism provides tremendous gains for 
the factoring problem, finding the prime factors of a 
large number. That, in turn, is important for cryptog- 
raphy, and as a result quantum parallelism has gained 
widespread attention. We cite only some of the most 
elementary surveys [ 15]. 
3. Quantum parallelism: A return to analog 
computation 
An analog computer can do much more per step 
than a digital computer. But an analog computer, in 
which a physical variable such as a voltage can take on 
any value within a permitted range, does not allow for 
easy error correction. Therefore, in the analog com- 
puter errors, due to unintentional imperfections in the 
machinery, build up quickly and the procedure can go 
through only a few successive steps before the errors 
accumulate prohibitively. A digital computer, by con- 
trast, allows only a 0 or 1. That permits us to restore 
signals toward their intended values, before they drift 
far away from that. In typical digital logic the signal 
is restored toward the power supply voltage or ground 
at every successive stage. This is what permits us to 
go through a tremendous number of successive digi- 
tal steps, and this has given the digital computer its 
power. In quantum parallelism we do not just use 0 and 
1, but all their possible coherent superpositions. This 
continuum range, which gives quantum parallelism its 
power, also gives it the problems of analog computa- 
tion, a point first explicitly stated by Peres [ 16]. If we 
have a state which is mostly a 1, with a small admix- 
ture of 0, we cannot simply eliminate that admixture; 
190 
R. Landauer/Physics Letters A 217 (1996) 188-193 
the superposition may be the intended signal. 
Imperfections in the quantum mechanically coher- 
ent computer generate several separate problems. First 
of all, interaction of the intentional information bear- 
ing degrees of freedom with the environment causes 
decoherence and spoils the quantum mechanical in- 
terference between alternative trajectories which con- 
stitute the basis of quantum parallelism. In the litera- 
ture generated by the advocates this is the most widely 
recognized of the several problems faced by quan- 
tum parallelism. We can give only a small sampling 
of that recognition [ 17]. Note that in order to carry 
out logic the information bearing degrees of freedom 
must interact strongly with each other. At the same 
time, to preserve coherence, they cannot interact with 
anything else, including the physical framework that 
holds the bits in their positions. That is a tall order! 
A second problem arises from the fact that there are 
manufacturing flaws; the machinery will not do ex- 
actly what is intended. For example, interacting bits 
may not be spaced exactly as needed. Or the exter- 
nal radiative pulses, invoked in a number of the more 
detailed embodiments, may not meet their exact spec- 
ification. A 7r/2 pulse may be a little too long, too 
short, or come too early. Flaws in the machinery can 
cause two separate problems. First of all they can, and 
generally will, introduce erroneous components into 
the states reached by the computation. Additionally, 
however, they can cause unintended reversals of the 
computational process; they can reflect the motion of 
the computer. This problem exists most clearly in the 
case of the Feynman computer [ 18]. In this computer 
the computation is launched as a wave-packet mov- 
ing down its computational track, much as an electron 
can be sent down a one-dimensional periodic chain 
of atoms. The one-dimensional electron case is be- 
set by localization: transmission diminishes exponen- 
tially with length due to irregularities in the suppos- 
edly periodic potential. We can expect the same for the 
computational trajectory. Most of the recent quantum- 
mechanical computer proposals are not Feynman com- 
puters; they do not propagate with their initial kinetic 
energy. Rather, they are clocked externally. One can 
then hope that if we push the computation forward in 
a sufficiently determined manner (strong arm and stiff 
crank?) reflections can be avoided. That is a hope, 
not yet backed by analysis. One clocked scheme using 
time-dependent Hamiltonians has been analyzed [ 19], 
and does exhibit a reversal problem. Localization is 
a condensed matter theory concept, whereas quantum 
computation has been studied by computer scientists 
and by physicists who (largely) do not have a con- 
densed matter background. That is why unintended 
reversals are not even discussed by the advocates. For 
exceptions see Ref. [20]. 
Error recognition and error correction in quantum 
computation cannot follow the recipes we learned for 
classical digital computers. Error recognition requires 
the ability to distinguish a signal from its ideal value. 
But we cannot, in general, tell whether two arbitrary 
quantum states differ, or not. Even if we were able to 
recognize errors, we cannot throw away the descrip- 
tion of the error. Discarding information is a dissi- 
pative event and will spoil the coherence needed for 
quantum parallelism. If we do keep a record of the er- 
ror it must be led aside, so as not appear in the subse- 
quent interference. Despite these difficulties progress 
has been made toward error reduction, and we can cite 
only a sample of the material on its way [21 ]. This 
is far more progress in fact than this author thought 
possible, but not enough to permit computation. An 
effective error correction approach must work for all 
logic steps, and must not rely on perfect supplemen- 
tary apparatus nor on additional signals which have 
to be presumed to be perfect. Undoubtedly, further 
progress will be made, but victory is not yet in sight. 
A particularly serious difficulty is caused by compo- 
nents which, even if they meet the ideal specification, 
still do not do exactly what they are supposed to do. 
Ref. [ 19] listed the difficulties faced by Lloyd's pro- 
posal [ 22 ]. Ref. [ 23 ] listed the subtle deviations from 
those that are actually required in the steps needed 
for a quantum communications scheme. We suspect 
that most proposals, if analyzed equally carefully, will 
show similar flaws. If the devices, even in their ideal 
state, do not do exactly what is needed, that becomes 
a particularly stubborn problem. At best, only interac- 
tion of the results with those obtained in a totally dif- 
ferent way can give any hope of error reduction, and 
it is not clear how this can be achieved and whether it 
can provide adequate correction. 
Finally there is a computer science problem, unre- 
lated to the physics and technology we have stressed. 
Even if quantum parallelism can be made to work, 
what is its range of application? The world is unlikely 
to want to pay for the development of a difficult tech- 
R. Landauer/Physics Letters 
nology without a broad payoff. The suggestion has 
been made [24] that quantum computers are partic- 
ularly good at simulating quantum systems. But for 
that to be true the system, which needs to be analyzed, 
must have a structure which maps easily and cleanly 
onto that of the computer. Would a one-dimensional 
chain of interacting two level systems [22] make it 
easy to follow electronic motion in a heavy atom? 
Despite the pessimism I have expressed, the mere 
possibility of quantum parallelism has changed the- 
oretical computer science permanently. Those con- 
cerned with theorems about the minimal number of 
steps required for the execution of an algorithm must 
allow for quantum parallelism. 
4. Energy dissipation requirements 
The history that led to our understanding of the 
energy requirements of the computer has been sum- 
marized elsewhere [ 2]. Reversible classical computa- 
tion, in the presence of viscous friction proportional 
to velocity, can be accomplished with as little energy 
dissipation, per step, as desired. Occasional objec- 
tions still appear to reversible computation and/or the 
need to dissipate energy when discarding information. 
Some of the objections are discussed and put aside by 
Shizume [26]. But most of the interested community 
long ago accepted these notions. It is, however, not 
widely recognized that the same body of work that 
led to reversible computing also demonstrated that any 
desired immunity to noise can be obtained, and that 
this is not limited to thermal noise. Similarly, in the 
measurement process, the reversible operations can 
be carried out with arbitrarily little dissipation. Re- 
setting the meter, after it has become separated from 
the system to which it was coupled for measurement, 
is irreversible, and is the essential Iossy step [3]. It 
is a sociological puzzle why this insight, achieved so 
long after Maxwell first posed the demon question, 
has not been celebrated more widely. As in the case 
of most scientific insights, a number of investigators 
contributed along the way as discussed in Ref. [27]; 
nevertheless, the clear, confident and complete reso- 
lution stems from the 1980's. 
A comparable understanding of the energy needs 
of the communications channel came later. For many 
decades the general perception has been that it takes 
A 217 (1996) 188-193 
191 
kT In 2 to send a bit in a classical channel, and more 
if hv > kT, where v is a typical signalling frequency. 
This mode of thought has been described in more de- 
tail elsewhere [23,28]. It is based on the assumption 
that a linear boson channel is used and that the en- 
ergy used in the transmission has to be dissipated. As 
stressed in Ref. [ 25 ], this whole field of concern with 
the physical fundamentals of information handling is 
characterized by first answers which have been wrong. 
Alternative communication methods have been pro- 
posed which, in the classical case [28,29] take arbi- 
trarily little energy dissipation, if the bits are moved 
slowly. Slow motion does not imply a low bit rate; 
the bits can follow each other as densely as desired. 
Furthermore, as in the case of reversible computation, 
the classical communication schemes allow for any 
desired immunity to noise by suitable choice of the 
device parameters. The methods do not require per- 
fect components. The classical conclusion should have 
been obvious once reversible computation is accepted. 
After all bits are moved around in a computer and 
therefore there can be no minimal unavoidable energy 
penalty for bit motion, if there is none for the overall 
computation. The quantum communication link does 
not allow an equally easy chain of reasoning. The ex- 
isting theoretical treatments of the quantum computer 
allow only for the interacting information bearing de- 
grees of freedom, and ignore all others degrees of free- 
dom including those in internal communication links. 
Therefore the fact that the literature describes Hamil- 
tonian quantum computers provides no insight into 
their internal communication links. 
It has been shown, however, that if we optimisti- 
cally assume that frictionless and quantum mechan- 
ically coherent machinery is available, then a non- 
dissipative quantum communications link can be con- 
structed [23]. It does depend, not surprisingly, on a 
sequence of operations each of which is reversible. 
The classical and quantum communication links pro- 
posed by this author are not practical recipes, but are 
only existence theorems. In particular they invoke ac- 
tive machinery all along the link, in contrast to the pas- 
sive nature of an electromagnetic transmission line or 
an optical fiber. It is not clear, however, that this is an 
essential restriction [23]; there may be room for in- 
vention. Again there is a sociological mystery. When I 
first proposed low energy communication links, in the 
classical case, I did not expect ready acceptance for 
192 
R. Landauer/Physics Letters 
my refutation of the conventional wisdom. I expected 
angry rebuttal. In actual fact, with the exception of one 
dissenting publication [ 30], concerned really with re- 
versible computation rather than the communications 
link, there was remarkable silence. 
5. Impact on the laws of physics 
This is by far the most speculative part of this dis- 
cussion, but perhaps also its most significant aspect. 
I return here to notions first presented almost thirty 
years ago [6] and elaborated on a number of occa- 
sions after that, e.g. in Ref. [31]. The laws of physics 
are essentially algorithms for calculation. These algo- 
rithms are significant only to the extent that they are 
executable in our real physical world. Our usual laws 
of physics depend on the mathematician's real number 
system. With that comes the presumption that given 
any accuracy requirement, there exist a number of cal- 
culational steps, which if executed, will satisfy that 
accuracy requirement. But the real world is unlikely 
to supply us with unlimited memory or unlimited Tur- 
ing machine tapes. Therefore, continuum mathemat- 
ics is not executable, and physical laws which in- 
voke that can not really be satisfactory. They are ref- 
erences to illusionary procedures. Can we not prove 
that cos 2 0 + sin 2 0 = I exactly, and not just to some 
very large number of bits? Yes, within a closed pos- 
tulate system that can be demonstrated with a limited 
number of steps. But the laws of physics need to go 
beyond that and require actual number crunching. In 
a world with limited memory we simply cannot dis- 
tinguish between 7r and a terribly close neighbor. 
In fact, the limit on memory size is not the only lim- 
itation likely to be imposed by the real world. Com- 
puter elements are continually beset by an endless va- 
riety of adverse influences. Cosmic rays, alpha parti- 
cles, electromigration, corrosion, spilled cups of cof- 
fee and earthquakes are a partial list. Can we keep 
going without limit in the presence of this exposure? 
Can we invent hardware which can be made arbitrar- 
ily immune to degradation? If we simply make the 
equipment more massive, then we will exhaust the uni- 
verse's supply of available parts more quickly. At this 
point the skeptic will respond: Our inability to calcu- 
late the exact evolution under a law of physics does 
not prevent the universe from following that law. The 
A 217 (1996) 188-193 
evolution is precisely determined; it is only our ability 
to simulate that on a computer which is limited. The 
answer to that: It is not an incorrect response; it is an 
unverifiable and therefore meaningless response. The 
skeptic of my proposed statement will suggest that we 
can divide the universe into two halves, set them into 
identical initial states lending to the same subsequent 
history. Quantum mechanics does not, of course, allow 
us to be sure we have set two systems into the same 
state [32]. But even if we ignore that, how can we 
possibly be sure that two such large entities, requiring 
remarkably complex description, are alike? There can- 
not be a meaningful wave function for the universe, 
and very likely not even for half of it. 
The limited precision available for the execution of 
algorithms implies that there is some sort of uncer- 
tainty in the laws of physics. This is not necessarily 
exhibited in the form of a limit to a certain number of 
bits, it may be more stochastic in nature. This may in 
turn be the ultimate source of noise and of irreversibil- 
ity in the universe [28,33]. 
Even if the speculation just presented is not accept- 
able to the reader, our argument that mathematics, or 
any information handling process, cannot reasonably 
invoke an unlimited number of successive steps, is 
broader and more compelling. We cannot, of course, 
expect mathematicians to give up their beautiful array 
of concepts without hesitation and struggle. 
A reluctance to accept the continuum can be found 
in many places. See for example John Wheelers's fre- 
quent slogan "no continuum" [34], and his citation 
of others with that view [ 35 ]. John Wheeler also has 
a second and more significant relation to this discus- 
sion. Our scientific culture normally views the laws of 
physics as predating the actual physical universe. The 
laws are considered to be like a control program in a 
modern chemical plant; the plant is turned on after the 
program is installed. In the beginning was the Word 
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God 
(John 1,1 ), attests to this belief. Word is a translation 
from the Greek Logos "thought of as constituting the 
controlling principle of the universe" [36]. Wheeler, 
in a number of discussion [37] has an adventurous 
view in which the laws of physics result from our ob- 
servation of the universe. Wheeler's details are not my 
details, but we both depart from the notion that the 
laws were there at the beginning. The view I have ex- 
pounded here makes the laws of physics dependent 
R. Landauer/Physics Letters A 217 (1996) 188-193 
193 
upon the apparatus and kinetics available in our uni- 
verse, and that kinetics in turn depends on the laws of 
physics. Thus, this is a want ad for a self-consistent 
theory. 
References 
[1] L. Szilard, Z. Phys. 53 (1929) 840. 
[21 C.H. Bennett, IBM J. Res. Dev. 32 (1988) 16. 
1131 H.S. Left and A.E Rex, Maxwell's demon: entropy, 
information, computing (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, 
1990). 
[4] R. Penrose, The emperor's new mind (Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, 1989). 
[5] RW. Bridgman, Scr. Math. 2 (1934) 3. 
[6] R. Landauer, IEEE Spectrum 4(9) (1967) 105; Reprinted 
with added commentary in Speculations in Science and 
Technology 10 (1987) 292. 
[7] A. Ekert, in: Proceedings of the 14th ICAP, eds. D. Wineland 
et al. (AIP, New York, 1995) p. 450. 
[8] C.H. Bennett, Phys. Today 48 (October 1995) 24. 
19] C.H. Bennett, G. Brassard, C. Cr6peau, R. Jozsa, A. Peres 
and W.K. Wootters, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 (1993) 1895. 
1101 1. Peterson, Science News 149 ( 10 February 1996) 90; 
A. Muller, H. Zbinden and N. Gisin, Europhys. Lett. 33 
(1996) 335. 
[11 ] C.E. Shannon, Bell Syst. Tech. J. 27 (1948) 379, 623. 
[12] P. Benioff, J. Stat. Phys. 22 (1980) 563; J. Stat. Phys. 29 
(1982) 515; Phys. Rev. Lett. 48 (1982) 1581. 
[13] D. Deutsch, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 400 (1985) 97. 
[14] P.W. Shor, in: Proc. 35th Annual Symposium on the 
Foundation of computer science (IEEE Computer Society, 
Los Alamitos, CA, 1994) p. 124. 
115] S. Lloyd, Sci. Am. 273 (1995) 140; 
D. DiVincenzo, Science 270 (1995) 255; 
J. Glanz, Science 269 (1995) 28; 
B. Schwarzschild, Phys. Today 49 (1996) 21. 
[161 A. Peres, Phys. Rev. A 32 (1985) 3266. 
[17] I.L. Chuang, R. Laflamme, P.W. Shor and W.H. Zurek, 
Science 270 (1995) 1633; 
M.B. Plenio and P.L. Knight, Phys. Rev. A 53 (1996) 2986; 
W.G. Unruh, Phys. Rev. A 51 (1995) 992. 
[18] R. Feynman, Opt. News 11 (2) (1985) 11; reprinted in: 
Found. Phys. 16 (1986) 507. 
[19] R. Landauer, in: Proc. Drexel-4 Symposium on Quantum 
nonintegrability - quantum-classical correspondence, eds. 
D.H. Feng and B-L. Hu (International Press, Boston), in 
press. 
[20] S.C. Kak, Found. Phys. 26 (1996) 127; 
P.B. Benioff, Hamiltonian models of quantum computers 
which evolve quantum ballistically, preprint. 
[211 C.H. Bennett, D.P. DiVincenzo, J.A. Smolin and W.K. 
Wootters, Mixed state entanglement and quantum error- 
correction, Phys. Rev. A., to be published; 
R. Laflamme, C. Miquel, J.-P. Paz and W.H. Zurek, Perfect 
quantum error correction code, to be published; 
P. Shot, Phys. Rev. A. 52 (1995) 2493. 
[22] S. Lloyd, Science 261 (1993) 1569. 
[231 R. Landauer, Minimal energy requirements in commu- 
nication, Science, to be published. 
[241 R.P. Feynman, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21 (1982) 467; 
S. Lloyd, Universal quantum simulators, preprint. 
[25] R. Landauer, in: Proc. Workshop on Physics and computation 
PhysComp '94, (IEEE Computer Society Press, Los 
Aiamitos, 1994) p. 54. 
[26] K. Shizume, Phys. Rev. E 52 (1995) 3495. 
[27] R. Landauer, Physica A 194 (1993) 551. 
[28] R. Landauer, in: Selected topics in signal processing, ed. 
S. Haykin (Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1989) p. 18 
(printed version has some figures oriented incorrectly). 
[29] R. Landauer, Appl. Phys. Lett. 51 (1987) 2056. 
130] W. Porod, Appl. Phys. Lett. 52 (1988) 2191. 
[31] R. Landaner, in: Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. on Foundations of 
quantum mechanics - in the light of new technology, eds. S. 
Kobayashi, H. Ezawa, Y. Murayama and S. Nomura (The 
Physical Society of Japan, Tokyo, Japan, 1990) p. 407. 
132] W.K. Wootters and W.H. Zurek, Nature 299 (1982) 802. 
[33] R. Landauer, Z. Phys. B Condensed Matter 68 (1987) 217. 
[ 341 J.A. Wheeler, in: Physical origins of time asymmetry, eds. J.J. 
Halliwell, J. Perez-Mercader and W.H. Zurek (Cambridge 
Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK, 1994). 
[35] LA. Wheeler, IBM J. Res. Dev. 32 (1988). 
[36] Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language, 
ed. D.B. Guralnik (William Collins + World Publishing, 
1978). 
[37] J.A. Wheeler, in: Problems in theoretical physics, A. 
Giovanni, E Mancini and M. Marinaro, Eds. (University 
of Salerno Press, Salerno, 1984) p. 121; in: Frontiers of 
nonequilibrium statistical physics, eds. G.T. Moore and M.O. 
Scully (Plenum, New York, 1986). 
