ZIG-ZAG PATH TO UNDERSTANDING 
ROLF LANDAUER 
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center 
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598 
ABSTRACT 
OUT understanding of the fundamental physical lim- 
its of information handling has developed along a very 
convoluted path. Most of the initially plausible physi- 
cal conjectures have turned out to be wrong. A partici- 
pant’s personal view of these events is not a disciplined 
contribution to the history of science. I do, however, 
last my own mistakes along with those of others. 
1: Computation 
The attempt to understand the ultimate physical 
limits of the computational process is almost as old as 
the modern electronic digital computer. This search 
was stimulated by the earlier examples of thermody- 
namics which arose from the attempt to understand 
the limits of steam engines, and by Shannon’s channel 
capacity theory. These examples suggested that the 
computer could be characterized in a similar way. The 
earlier prototypes had derived optimum performance 
limits in a way which transcended particular technolo- 
gies and design choices. Scientists and engineers take 
pride in the ability to do back-of-the-envelope calcu- 
lations, to quickly reach to the critical aspects with- 
out encumbering details. Yet, in this field of ultimate 
physical limits of information handling, the quick and 
dirty approaches have turned out to be wrong in a re- 
markably consistent way. All of the first answers have 
been misleading. 
In the 1950’s it was natural to associate a binary 
degree of freedom with kT and to assume that a mini- 
mal energy of that order had to be associated with an 
elementary logic step, to provide noise immunity. The 
identification of “associate with” with required energy 
dissipation tended to be made in casual blackboard 
discussions. It was not until 1961 [l] that it became 
clear that the process which really required a minimal 
and unavoidable energy penalty was the discarding of 
information. 
The assumption that an energy dissipation of the 
order of kT was required by every logic step seemed, 
in the 1950’s, to be a natural consequence of “known” 
results. It was “known,” after all, that it took kTln2 
to send a bit along a communications line, and compu- 
tation required the frequent transmission of signals. It 
was also “known” that measurement required energy 
dissipation. Unfortunately, as we now know, the com- 
munication results were really more limited than gen- 
erally presumed. Furthermore the sophisticated liter- 
ature on the measurement process often left it unclear 
what a measurement really is and how to tell a mea- 
surement from an elephant’s trunk. Additionally, as 
is now known, classical measurement theory as then 
accepted suffered from its own blemishes which were 
not widely understood until the 1980’s. 
This subject, during the 1950’s was mostly one for 
casual unpublished speculations. Ref. [2] tells us, for 
example, that “ . . .von Neumann [3] and Brillouin 
[4] conjectured that kTln2 minimum energy must be 
spent for each step of information processing”. Many 
other authors have related statements, e.g. Igeta’s 
reference to Brillouin [5]. Brillouin’s famous book [4] , 
despite a chapter The Problem of Computing, does 
not allude to the actual logic processes in a computer, 
e.g. to a logical and or a logical OT, and contains no 
references to a total working computer, such as a Tur- 
ing machine or a cellular automaton. Arthur Burks 
[3], nine years after von Neumann’s death, and five 
years after Ref. [l], credits von Neumann with the no- 
tion that a computer must dissipate at least kTln2 
at room temperature “per elementary act of informa- 
tion, that is per elementary decision of a two-way al- 
ternative and per elementary transmittal of one unit 
of information.” This comes closer to a sensible dis- 
cussion than can be found in Ref. [4], but still involves 
the ambiguous per elementary decision of a two-way 
alternative. Indeed, we now know [6], the mere trans- 
mission of information does not require any minimal 
energy dissipation [7]. 
von Neumann’s insight into the computational pro- 
cess and associated physics was impressive. One of 
his patents [a], assigned to my company, has exerted 
a tremendous influence on my own work. I do not 
54 
0-8186-6715-X/94 
$4.00 0 1994 IEEE 
question that von Neumann could have answered the 
energy dissipation question properly, and perhaps did. 
But the written record demonstrating that has not 
been published. 
In 1961, when Ref. [l] appeared, it was natural to 
assume that discarding information was an inevitable 
part of computation. After all, computers did lots of 
that. Ref. [l] already appreciated that information 
discarding operations could be imbedded in larger op- 
erations which were 1:l. But that did not constitute 
an understanding of reversible computation; that had 
to await Charles Bennett’s paper [9] which Wheeler 
and Zurek have labelled epoch-making [lo]. In partic- 
ular, I had assumed (quite incorrectly), that a compu- 
tation which runs along a chain of 1:l transformations 
is a table look-up device, where the designer has to an- 
ticipate every possible computational trajectory. Ben- 
nett’s insight that computation can utilize a series of 
steps, each logically reversible, and that this in turn al- 
lows physical reversibility, was counter-intuitive when 
it first appeared. (Reversible computation, without 
understanding of its physical significance, was first de- 
scribed by Lecerf in 1963 [ll].) That computation 
could be done with arbitrarily little dissipation, per 
step, was not actually in contradiction to the princi- 
pal thesis of Ref. El], but seemed to go remarkably 
beyond that. It also distinguished the computational 
process in a surprising way from our perceptions, at 
that time, about communications and measurement. 
The notions expressed by Charles Bennett and my- 
self have been elaborated in many ways by others. 
Despite that, some grumbling persists as evidenced 
by two papers in the 1992 version of this workshop 
[5, 121. This is best characterized by the excerpts from 
Ref. [13], based in turn on my own unpublished com- 
ments in the electronic forum resulting from the 1992 
version of this workshop. 
Nothing in science is ever settled totally, and be- 
yond all question. In 1994 we will again see some chal- 
lenges to the second law, and some proposals for su- 
perluminal signal propagation. A few of these may be 
genuine open-minded and scholarly attempts to probe 
the limits of our certainty. A larger number will reflect 
honest attempts t o  respond t o  a poor exposition with 
the challenger unaware of the diversity of paths that 
has led t o  the established conclusions. But the large 
majority.. . 
... I did not believe or understand Charles [Ben- 
nett] when he first explained his emerging notions to 
me, an 1971. It took m e  some months to come to un- 
derstanding and agreement. 
It is no longer 1961 or 1973. Our concepts have 
been explored, expanded, and reformulated by many 
colleagues with different backgrounds and differing mo- 
tivations. I, therefore, believe that our results are es- 
tablished as well as most scientijc results can be, even 
though there will continue to be a modest flow of ob- 
jections .... 
For a number of years all reversible computer em- 
bodiments were either impractical mechanical machin- 
ery, or else were based on nucleic-acid inspired chem- 
ical reaction sequences. I found myself searching for 
deep reasons for that; why were there no electrical ver- 
sions? That was solved eventually, when Likharev [14] 
came out with a Josephson junction version. There 
was no deep mystery! On the other hand, Likharev’s 
proposal was very demanding on the allowed variation 
of components. Furthermore it was tied to a tech- 
nology which was about to disappear from the list of 
serious candidates. 
The 1992 version of this meeting showed through 
realistic CMOS circuit proposals, that reversible com- 
putation was not just a tool for answering conceptual 
questions about limits, but a tool for reducing power 
consumption in reality [15]. Once again an unexpected 
turn, even though partially anticipated by the earlier 
work of Seitz [16]. Normally, in CMOS circuits, the 
energy stored in capacitances is discharged and dis- 
sipated in each switching event. In the proposals of 
Ref. [15] the charging process is reversed, and the en- 
ergy taken back into (the suitably designed) power 
supply. The forward propagation of the signal, be- 
tween latches, is simply reversed. Whether the added 
delays and complexity that come with these proposals 
leave them advantageous is a question to be settled by 
further exploration. These proposals, in turn, have in- 
spired a version [17] which avoids the need for detailed 
reversal, but still saves most of the power. 
Why was the possibility of reversible CMOS logic 
appreciated at such a late stage? In part perhaps, be- 
cause the people interested in reversible computation 
were largely computer scientists or basically oriented 
physicists, rather than circuit or device technologists. 
But there were additional errors in perception, at least 
in my own case, and I suspect that others shared my 
mistake, which will be explained. Reversible computa- 
tion as invented and described by Bennett [9], requires 
every single step to be reversible. It is not enough to 
save a copy of the initial state of the computer. Now 
an and or or, for example, are not 1:l operations; the 
input cannot be deduced from the output, and there- 
fore one might (and I did) assume that such operations 
cannot be utilized in reversible computing. Reversible 
computation is as shown in Fig. la, in contrast to 
55 
E-- 
FO-O--- 
Figure 1: a. One-to-one computation. The left- 
hand end of a horizontal chain represents the initial 
state, and forward computation represents motion to 
the right, through a sequence of states represented by 
successive open circles. Different capital letters cor- 
respond to different initial states, that is, different 
programs. b. Information-discarding junction. Two 
computational paths, moving to the right, merge into 
one. 
Fig. l b  where trajectories merge. 
Now, however if, as in Hansel and Gretel you leave 
markers behind to identify your trail, Fig. l b  is re- 
versible. You only need to spot and pick up the mark- 
ers on the return trip. In the recent reversible CMOS 
proposals the markers are replaced by the input signal, 
which stays there. It remains there until the output 
reversal is completed. Thus, the usual simple logic cir- 
cuitry with and and or gates can be used. Of course, 
if we want to save the capacitive energy in the latches 
it gets more complex; that will not be discussed here. 
2: 
Measurement and communication 
The historical zig-zag pattern also applies to two 
auxiliary fields: the energy required for measurement 
and the energy required for the communications chan- 
nel. The history of Maxwell’s demon which caused us 
to focus on the energy needed in the classical measure- 
ment, has been documented in detail in Refs. [13, 181. 
Maxwell’s demon utilises the fact that if we have in- 
formation about the motion of individual molecules, 
we can extract their kinetic energy to do useful work. 
Thus, we must make measurements on individual 
molecules. For a good many years it was assumed 
that the transfer of information from the object to be 
measured, to the meter, required a minimal and un- 
avoidable energy dissipation, and that this dissipation 
saved the second law. Instead it is the resetting of the 
meter, to a standardized state, after each use (and be- 
fore the first use), that requires the energy dissipation 
needed to save the second law. An adapted quota- 
tion from Ref. [19] describes this setting: Well known 
discussions, by Brillouin [d], 
followed by a refined ver- 
sion due to Gabor [ZO], invoke the fact that to “see” 
a molecule a photon must be used. In order to distin- 
guish it from the surrounding black body radiation, the 
photon must have an energy hv > kT. This energy is 
assumed to be lost in the process. A great deal of lateT 
literature of which we cite only a few ezamples, echoes 
these notions [Zl]. In retrospect, this acceptance of the 
Brillouin-Gabor view appears as one of the great puz- 
zles in the sociology of science. If someone proposes 
a method for ezecuting the “measurement, ” ... which 
consumes a certain amount of energy, why should we 
believe that the suggested method represents an opti- 
mum? 
The communications channel represents another 
similar episode. There is a widespread presumption 
that it takes kTln2 to send a bit from one place to 
another. It is implied that this follows directly from 
Shannon’s results for the linear transmission line 
P + N  
c = Wlog2 - 
N 
where W is the line’s bandwidth, P the signal power, 
and N = k T W  the thermal equilibrium noise power. 
Shannon never claimed such a universal applicability 
for his result. I have supplied a number of counter- 
examples to show that a bit can be transmitted with 
arbitrarily little dissipation, if we are willing to do 
it slowly [19, 221. Despite the fact that my analysis 
ran contrary to the prevailing wisdom, it has been 
ignored. Only Porod [23] has paid me the compliment 
of a debate, and Ref. [24] correctly characterizes the 
limits of the widely accepted viewpoint. 
3: 
Quantum computers 
Finally let me allude to the totally quantum me- 
chanical computational process. I had attempted, in 
unpublished work, to describe such a process, e.g. 
quantum versions of the Bennett-Fredkin-Turing ma- 
chine [25], but got hopelessly bogged down in the com- 
plexity of that. Eventually Benioff saw the way to do 
that [26]. You invoke a Hamiltonian (or a unitary time 
56 
evolution) which causes the information bearing de- 
grees of freedom to interact, and to evolve with time, 
as they do in a computer. You introduce no other 
parts or degrees of freedom. I was too engineering ori- 
ented to see that possibility; I assumed that you had 
to describe the apparatus and not just the Hamilto- 
nian. Benioff’s idealization was of course just that. A 
penalty paid to permit a theory. Benioff’s work led 
to a wide literature which I have assessed elsewhere 
[6, 7, 271. Feynman was a particularly significant con- 
tributor to the stream [28] that followed Benioff. Feyn- 
man was present at the 1981 workshop at M.I.T. [29] 
where many of us discussed Benioff’s notions and the 
paper Benioff presented there [30]. Did we understand 
and believe Benioff? Feynman did not need much of a 
clue, and as a result generated his own very appealing 
and effective view [28] of quantum mechanical compu- 
tation. Unfortunately, Feynman failed to cite Benioff. 
This meeting also provided Feynman’s first exposure 
to Bennett’s notion of reversible computation. Feyn- 
man understood immediately, an impressive feat in 
1981. For an alternative and complementary view of 
Feynman’s role in this field see Ref. [31]. 
Recently there has been a good deal of excitement 
about quantum parallelism, undoubtedly reflected in 
some companion papers in this volume, as well as in 
the earlier 1992 proceedings [32]. I cannot but help 
contrast that field to the discussions of the energy re- 
quirements of the communications channel. The pro- 
ponents of quantum parallelism have provided us with 
a description of the computational Hamiltonian, not 
of apparatus. They have not, up to now, inquired 
about the consequences of Hamiltonians which devi- 
ate somewhat from the exact desired value. This gen- 
erosity of spirit contrasts strikingly with that found 
in the communications channel literature. The lat- 
ter concentrates on the linear boson channel, despite 
the fact that written communication, as well as the 
shipment of floppy disks, are well established ways of 
sending messages. Levitin’s contribution [33] to the 
earlier 1992 workshop is typical of this literature. 
4: 
Overview 
The path to understanding in science is often dif- 
ficult. If it were otherwise, we would not be needed. 
This field, however, seems to have suffered from an 
unusually convoluted path. 
Conference records [29,34] demonstrate that a good 
many perceptive investigators enter a field without 
any attempt to read the existing literature. That is 
a contributing factor to the difficulty we have noted. 
The lack of experimental data also permits us to stick 
to erroneous concepts. But these are auxiliary sources; 
the zig-zag path, ultimately, arises from the difficulty 
of the problem when compared to our ability. 
References 
[l] R. Landauer, “Irreversibility and Heat Generation 
in the Computing Process,” IBM J. Res. Dev. vol. 
5, 1961, pp. 183-191. [Reprinted in: Maxwell’s 
Demon. H.S. Leff and A.F. Rex, eds. Princeton: 
Princeton Univ. Press, 1990, pp. 188-1961. 
[2] E. Goto, W. Hioe and M. Hosoya, “Physical Limits 
to Quantum Flux Parametron Operation,” Phys- 
ica C vol. 185-189, 1991, pp. 385-390. 
[3] J. von Neumann, Theory of Self-Reproducing Au- 
tomata, A.W. Burks, ed. Urbana: Univ. Illinois 
Press, 1966. 
[4] L. Brillouin, Science and Information Theory. New 
York: Academic Press, 1956. 
[5] K. Igeta, “Physical Meaning of Computation,” In: 
Proc. Workshop on Physics and Computation. Los 
Alamitos: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1993, 
pp. 184-191. 
[6] R. Landauer, “Information is Physical,” Phys. To- 
day vol. 44, May 1991, pp. 23-29. 
[7] R. Landauer, “Information is Physical,” In: Proc. 
Workshop on Physics and Computation. Los 
Alamitos: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1993, 
pp. 1-4. 
[SI J. von Neumann, “Non-linear Capacitance or In- 
ductance Switching, Amplifying and Memory Or- 
gans,” U.S. Patent 2,815,488, filed 4/28/54, issued 
12/3/57, assigned to IBM. 
[9] C.H. Bennett, “Logical Reversibility of Computa- 
tion,” IBM J. Res. Dev. vol. 17, 1973, pp. 525-532. 
[lo] J.A. Wheeler and W.H. Zurek, eds. Quantum 
Theory and Measurement. Princeton: Princeton 
Univ. Press, 1983. p. 782. 
[ll] Y. Lecerf, “Machines de Turing RCversibles. 
RCcursive insolubilitd en neN de 1’ kquation 
U = P u ,  o li 8 est un ‘isomorphisme de 
codes.’ ” Compt. Rend. vol. 257, 1963, pp. 2597- 
2600; “RCcursive insolubilitC de Equation gCnCrale 
de diagonalisation de deux monomorphismes de 
57 
monoides libres 4~ = $x,” Compt. Rend. vol. 257, 
1963, pp. 2940-2943. 
[12] T. Schneider, “Use of Information Theory in 
Molecular Biology,” In: 
PTOC. Workshop on 
Physics and Computation. Los Alamitos: IEEE 
Computer Society Press, 1993, pp. 102-110. 
[13] H.S. Leff and A.F. Rex, “Maxwell’s Demon: En- 
tropy Historian,” In: Proc. Entropy Conference, 
April, 1994. Cambridge: MIT Press, to be pub- 
lished. 
[14] K.K. Likharev, “Classical and Quantum Limita- 
tions on Energy Consumption in Computation,” 
Int. J. Theor. Phys. vol. 21, 1982, pp. 311-326. 
[15] R.C. Merkle, “Towards Practical Reversible 
Logic,” In: PTOC. Workshop on Physics and Com- 
putation. Los Alamitos: IEEE Computer Society 
Press, 1993, pp. 227-228; J.S. Hall, “An Electroid 
Switching Model for Reversible Computer Archi- 
tectures,” ibid., pp. 237-247; J.G. Koller and W.C. 
Athas, “Adiabatic Switching, Low Energy Com- 
puting, and the Physics of Storing and Erasing In- 
formation,” ibid., pp. 267-270. 
[16] C.L. Seitr, A.H. Frey, S. Mattisson, S.D. Rabin, 
D.A. Speck and J.L.A. van de Sneepscheut, “Hot- 
Clock nMOS,” 1985 Chapel Hill Conference on 
VLSI. Chapel Hill: Computer Science Press, pp. 
1-17. 
[17] A. Kramer, J.S. Denker, S.C. Avery, A.G. Dick- 
inson and T.R. Wik, “Adiabatic Computing with 
the 2N-2N2D Logic Family,” preprint. 
[18] H.S. Leff and A.F. Rex, eds. Mazwell’s Demon. 
Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1990. 
[19] R. Landauer, 
“Computation, Measurement, 
Communication and Energy Dissipation,” In: Se- 
lected Topics in Signal Processing. S. Haykin, ed. 
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1989, pp. 188- 
196. (Note: Some diagrams printed with wrong 
orientation.) 
[20] D. Gabor, “Light and Information,” In: Progress 
in Optics. E. Wolf, ed. Amsterdam: 
North- 
Holland Publishing Co. vol. I, 1961, pp. 109-153. 
[21] F.T.S. Yu, Optics and Information Theory. New 
York: 
John Wiley, 1976, Ch. 5, pp. 93-111; 
A.F. Rex, “The Operation of Maxwell’s De- 
mon in a Low Entropy System,” Am. J. Phys. 
vol. 55, 1987, pp. 359-362; J.D. Barrow and 
F.J. Tipler, The Antropic Cosmological Principle. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986, See pp. 179, 662; 
K.G. Denbigh and J.S. Denbigh, Entropy in Rela- 
tion to Incomplete Knowledge. Cambridge: Cam- 
bridge Univ. Press, 1985, pp. 1-118; E.E. Daub, 
“Maxwell’s Demon,” Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. vol. 1, 
1970, pp. 213-227. 
[22] R. Landauer, “Energy Requirements in Commu- 
nication,” Appl. Phys. Lett. vol. 51, 1987, pp. 
2056-2058; 
[23] W. Porod, “Comment on ‘Energy Requirements 
in Communication ’ ” Appl. Phys. Lett. vol. 52, 
1988, p. 2191; R. Landauer, “Response to ‘Com- 
ment on Energy Requirements in Communica- 
tion ’ ” Appl. Phys. Lett. vol. 52, 1988, pp. 2191- 
2192. 
[24] C.M. Caves and P.D. Drummond, “Quantum 
Limits on Bosonic Communication rates,” Rev. 
Mod. Phys. vol. 66, 1994, pp. 481-537 
[25] R. Landauer, “Fundamental Limitations in the 
Computational Process,” Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. 
Chem. vol. 80, 1976, pp. 1048-1059. 
[26] P. Benioff, “The Computer as a Physical System: 
A Microscopic Quantum Mechanical Hamiltonian 
Model of Computers as Represented by Turing 
Machines,” J. Stat. Phys. vol. 22, 1980, pp. 563- 
591; “Quantum Mechanical Hamiltonian Models of 
Turing Machines,” J. Stat. Phys. vol. 29, 1982, pp. 
515-546; “Quantum Mechanical Models of Turing 
Machines that Dissipate No Energy,” Phys. Rev. 
Lett. vol. 48, 1982, pp. 1581-1585. 
[27] R. Landauer, “Is Quantum Mechanics Useful?” 
PTOC. R. Soc. London A, 1994, in press; “Is Quan- 
tum Mechanically Coherent Computation Useful?” 
PTOC. 4th Drezel Symposium on Quantum Nonin- 
tegrability, Sept. 8-10, 1994. D.H. Feng and B.- 
L. Hu, eds. (International Press), to be published. 
[28] R. Feynman, “Quantum Mechanical Computers,” 
Opt. News vol. 11(2), 1985, pp. 11-20; [Reprinted 
in: Found. Phys. vol. 16, 1986, pp. 507-531.1 
[29] Papers presented at the 1981 Conference on 
Physics of Computation, Part I: Physics of Compu- 
tation, Int. J. Theor. Phys. vol. 21, 1982, pp. 165- 
350; Part 11: Computational Models of Physics, 
ibid., 1982, pp. 433-600; Part 111: Physical Models 
of Computation, ibid., 1982, pp. 905-1015. 
58 
[30] P. Benioff, “Quantum Mechanical Hamiltonian 
Models of Discrete Processes That Erase Their 
Own Histories: Application to Turing Machines,” 
Int. J. Theor. Phys. vol. 21, 1982, pp. 177-201. 
[31] J. Mehra, The Beat of a Diflerent Drum. Oxford: 
Oxford Univ. Press, 1994, Ch. 24, pp. 525-542. 
[32] R. Jozsa, “Computation and Quantum Superpo- 
sition,” In: Proc. Workshop on Physics and Com- 
putation. Los Alamitos: IEEE Computer Society 
Press, 1993, pp. 192-194; A. Berthiaume and G. 
Brassard. “Oracle Quantum Computing,” ibid., 
pp. 195-199. 
[33] L.B. Levitin, “Physical Information Theory Part 
I. Quasiclassical Systems,” In: Proc. Workshop on 
Physics and Computation, Los Alamitos: IEEE 
Computer Society Press, 1993, pp. 210-214. 
[34] Proc. Workshop on Physics and Computation. 
Los Alamitos: IEEE Computer Society Press, 
1993. 
59 
