Introduction to the MIT Press Edition 
The Eternal Now  
Lewis H. Lapham 
 
 
Thirty years ago this past summer Herbert Marshall McLuhan published Understanding 
Media: The Extensions of Man, and within a matter of months the book acquired the 
standing of Holy Scripture and made of its author the foremost oracle of the age. Seldom 
in living memory had so obscure a scholar descended so abruptly from so remote a garret 
into the center ring of the celebrity circus, but McLuhan accepted the transformation as if 
it were nothing out of the ordinary, nothing more than the inevitable and unsurprising 
proof of the hypothesis that he had found in the library at the University of Toronto. He 
was fifty-two years old at the time, Canadian by birth and a professor of English 
literature. As enigmatic as he was self-preoccupied, he had about him the air of a man 
who believed that it was the business of prophets to bring prophetic news, and if he had 
peered into the mist of the future and foreseen the passing of the printed word, well, he 
had done no more than notice what was both obvious and certain. 
 
His book introduced into the language our present usage of the term media, as well as a 
number of other precepts, among them "global village" and "Age of Information" that 
since have become commonplaces, and by the fall of 1965 Understanding Media had 
prompted the New York Herald Tribune, speaking on behalf of what was then the 
consensus of informed opinion to proclaim its author "the most important thinker since 
Newton, Darwin, Freud, Einstein and Pavlov. ..." For the next four or five years 
McLuhan toured the television talk shows as well as the corporate lecture circuit, 
astonishing his audiences with a persona that joined, in Tom Wolfe's phrase, "the 
charisma of a haruspex with the irresistible certitude of the monomaniac. " Woody Allen 
placed him on the set of Annie Hall, and artists as well known as Andy Warhol and 
Robert Rauschenberg appointed him to the office of honorary muse. In journals as unlike 
one another as Newsweek and Partisan Review, the resident cognoscenti found that when 
confronted with sets of otherwise unrelated circumstance they could resolve their 
confusion merely by deploying the adjective "McLuhanesque." Although transformed 
into an eponym, the sage of the north retained the character of the rumpled professor, a 
gaunt and kindly figure, disorganized, absent-minded and quixotically dressed, always 
sure that the whole world could be made to fit into the trunk of his hypothesis, bestowing 
on audiences young and old, whether of insurance executives or guitarists on their way to 
Woodstock, the gifts of Delphic aphorism: 
 
"The electric light is pure information. " 
 
"We are moving out of the age of the visual into the age of the aural and tactile. " 
 
"We are the television screen ...We wear all mankind as our skin." 
 
But even as McLuhan passed across the zenith of his fame, few of the people who 
explicated his text fully understood what it was that he was trying to say. They guessed 
1/11 
that he had come upon something important, but for the most part they interpreted him as 
a dealer in communications theory and turned his prophecies to practical uses of their 
own. McLuhan had classified print as a hot medium and television as a cool medium, and 
although not one critic in five hundred was entirely sure what he meant by the distinction, 
the phrases served to justify a $40 million advertising campaign, a novel lacking both a 
protagonist and a plot, a collage of junked automobile tires. 
 
The alarms and excursions associated with Understanding Media didn't survive 
McLuhan's death (on New Year's Eve 1980, at the age of sixty-nine), and as perhaps was 
to be expected from artisans still working in a medium that the decedent had pronounced 
obsolete, the obituary notices were less than worshipful. Informed opinion had moved on 
to other things, and McLuhan's name and reputation were sent to the attic with the rest of 
the sensibility (go- go boots, Sgt. Pepper, Woodstock, the Vietnam War) that embodied 
the failed hopes of a discredited decade. 
 
The judgment was poorly timed. Much of what McLuhan had to say makes a good deal 
more sense in 1994 than it did in 1964, and even as his book was being remanded to the 
backlist, its more profound implications were beginning to make themselves manifest on 
MTV and the Internet, in Ronald Reagan's political image and the re-animation of 
Richard Nixon, via television shopping networks and e-mail-all of them technologies that 
McLuhan had presupposed but didn't live to see shaped in silicon or glass. 
 
Despite its title, the book was never easy to understand. By turns brilliant and opaque, 
McLuhan's thought meets the specifications of the epistemology that he ascribes to the 
electronic media - non-lineal, repetitive, discontinuous, intuitive, proceeding by analogy 
instead of sequential argument. Beginning from the premise that "we become what we 
behold," that "we shape our tools, and there- after our tools shape us," McLuhan 
examines the diktats of two technological revolutions that overthrew a settled political 
and aesthetic order: first, in the mid-fifteenth century, the invention of printing with 
movable type, which encouraged people to think in straight lines and to arrange their 
perceptions of the world in forms convenient to the visual order of the printed page; 
second, since the late nineteenth century, the new applications of electricity (telegraph, 
telephone, television, computers, etc.), which taught people to rearrange their perceptions 
of the world in ways convenient to the protocols of cyberspace. Content follows form, 
and the insurgent technologies give rise to new structures of feeling and thought. 
 
Once having stated this proposition, McLuhan works it through a series of variations for 
the entire orchestra of human expression, and his chapter titles (The Gadget Lover: 
Narcissus as Narcosis; The Typewriter: Into the Age of the Iron Whim; Weapons: War of 
the Icons; The Photograph: The Brothel without Walls) bear witness both to the tone of 
his rhetoric and the reach of his ambition. His vocabulary takes some getting used to 
(writing is visual; television is aural and tactile), and quite a few of the notions to which 
he off- handedly refers in the early pages, as if everybody already knew what he meant, 
he doesn't bother to explain until the later pages, often by way of an afterthought or an 
aside. Not until page 305 does he suggest that the content of any medium is always 
another medium - "the content of the press is literary statement, as the content of the book 
2/11 
is speech, and the content of the movie is the novel"-and it is only on page 349 that he 
clarifies his use of the phrase "mass media" by saying that "they are an indication, not of 
the size of their audiences, but of the fact that everybody becomes involved in them at the 
same time. " 
 
Some of his variations seem more credible than others, but I find that by making a list of 
the leitmotifs that wander in and out of his prose in the manner of Homeric epithets, I can 
formulate his dialectic as a set of antonyms. The meanings in the left-hand column 
McLuhan aligns with the ascendancy of the printed word during the four centuries 
between Johan Gutenberg's invention of printing with movable type and Thomas Edison's 
invention of the electric light; the meanings in the right hand column he associates with 
the sensibility now known as postmodern. 
 
 
Print 
visual  
mechanical  
sequence  
composition  
eye 
active 
expansion 
complete 
soliloquy 
classification 
center 
continuous 
syntax 
self-expression 
Typographic man 
 
Electronic Media 
tactile 
organic 
simultaneity  
improvisation  
ear 
reactive 
contraction 
incomplete 
chorus 
pattern recognition 
margin 
discontinuous 
mosaic 
group therapy 
Graphic man
 
 
 
Within a week of the publication of Understanding Media, the guardians of the 
established literary order in Toronto and New York read in the right-hand column 
the portents of their own doom, and they were quick to find fault with what the 
more scornful among them called McLuhan's "incantation. " Speaking mostly to 
themselves, they dismissed with contempt McLuhan's weird and hybrid dabbling in 
"scientific mysticism," his superficial under- standing of modern art, his naive faith 
in technology, and his too primitive belief in "merely physical sensation. " A 
number of the objections were well taken, most especially the ones pertaining to 
McLuhan's discussion of the central nervous system (a subject in clinical neurology 
about which he knew almost nothing), but for the most part the dyspeptic critics 
contrived to miss the point, refusing to accept McLuhan's approach to his topic and 
reducing the sum of his hypothesis to the trivial observation that the "Ed Sullivan 
Show" was easier to read than the collected works of Wittgenstein and Plotinus. He 
3/11 
was talking about the media as "make-happen agents," not as "make-aware agents," 
as systems similar to roads and canals, not as precious art objects or uplifting 
models of behavior, and he repeatedly reminds his readers that his proposition is 
best understood as a literary trope, not as a scientific theory. His method is that of 
an English professor long acquainted with libraries and familiar with the apparatus 
of academic scholar- ship. Delighting in bookish puns, he constantly cites as his 
authorities the idols of the Age of Print and quotes at length from the novels of 
James Joyce, chiefly Finnegans Wake, and the poems of T. S. Eliot and William 
Blake, the letters of John Ruskin. 
 
As often as not he employs the quotations to make sport of the high-minded literary 
gentlemen who continue to believe that all would be well if only the television 
networks would improve and correct the vulgar tone of their programming 
schedules, and he likes to compare his critics to the schoolmen of the late sixteenth 
century who railed against Gutenberg's typefaces as the precursors of intellectual 
anarchy and "the end of civilization as we know it"-that is, of an oral tradition 
founded upon illuminated manuscripts preserved in the vaults of a few monasteries. 
Just as the advent of print placed the means of communication in the hands of a 
good many' people previously presumed silent (prompting an excited rush of words 
from, among others, Rabelais, Cervantes, and Shakespeare) so also the broad 
dissemination of the electronic media invites correspondence from a good many 
more people presumed illiterate, and McLuhan suggests that in the twentieth 
century as in the sixteenth, the literary man prefers "to view with alarm to point 
with pride, while scrupulously ignoring what's going on." He has little sympathy or 
patience for people who defend positions already lost, and against the more 
pompous members of the literary academy (those who would restore the Republic 
of Letters as if it were a Colonial Williamsburg) he brings to bear a sardonic sense 
of humor-"for many years I've observed that the moralist typically substitutes anger 
for perception. " 
 
His irony speaks to the superfluousness of most of the criticism directed against the 
electronic media over the last thirty years, and while reading his book I was 
reminded of some of my own irrelevent pronouncements about the banality of 
network soap opera or the idiocy of the evening news. I had thought the 
pronouncements astute, or at least plausible, until I had occasion to write a six-hour 
television history of the twentieth century and discovered in the process what 
McLuhan meant by the phrase, "the medium is the message." Allowed 78 seconds 
and 43 words in which to explain the origins of World War II and provide the 
transition between the Munich Conference in September 1938 and Germany's 
invasion of Poland in September 1939, I understood that television is not narrative, 
that it bears more of a resemblance to symbolist poetry or the pointillist painting of 
Georges Seurat than it does to anything conceived by a novelist, a historian, an 
essayist, or even a writer of newspaper editorials. 
 
Understanding Media confirms my own experience on both sides of a television 
camera, and I think of it as the kind of book that the reader can open almost at 
4/11 
random, taking from it what he or she has the wit to find. Some of McLuhan's 
observations lead nowhere; others deserve at least fifty pages of further 
commentary, and I'm surprised that over the last thirty years, despite the constant 
and obsessive muttering about the media-their ubiquitous presence and innate 
wickedness-so few critics have taken account of McLuhan's general theory. His 
prescience is extraordinary, and the events of the last thirty years have proved him 
more often right than wrong. His hypothesis anticipates by two decades the 
dissolution of inter- national frontiers and the collapse of the Cold War. He assumes 
the inevitable rearrangement of university curricula under the rubrics of what we 
now call "multiculturalism," and he knows that as commodities come to possess 
"more and more the character of information, " the amassment of wealth will come 
to depend upon the naming of the things rather than the making of things. 
Recognizing the weightlessness and self-referential character of the electronic 
media as well as the supremacy of the corporate logo or the Q rating, McLuhan 
describes a world in which people live most of their lives within the enclosed and 
mediated spaces governed by the rule of images. As is his custom, he best expresses 
the general point in a conversational aside, while he seems to be talking about 
some- thing else: 
 
Travel differs very little from going to a movie or turning the pages of a 
magazine. ...People... never arrive at any new place. They can have 
Shanghai or Berlin or Venice in a package tour that they need never open. 
...Thus the world itself becomes a sort of museum of objects that have 
been encountered before in some other medium. (198) 
 
Let technology be understood, in Max Frisch’s phrase, as “the knack of so 
arranging the world so that we don’t have to experience it,” and McLuhan’s point 
about the museum explains not only Ralph Lauren’s fortune and Bill Clinton’s 
presence in the White House, but also the state of disrepair into which the United 
States has let fall its highways, its railroads, and its cities. If the media are nothing 
more than the means of storing and transporting information, and if by assuming the 
character of information commodities can be moved by fiber optics, fax machines, 
and A TM cards, then why bother to maintain an infrastructure geared to the 
purposes of me- dieval Europe or ancient Rome? 
 
On almost every page of Understanding Media McLuhan sets in motion equally 
promising lines of speculation, and although I'm tempted to pursue at least five or 
six of them-in particular the one ascribing the existence of Nazi Germany to the 
match between the medium of radio and Adolf Hitler's political persona (a persona 
that would have failed utterly on television)-1 only have space enough to take up 
his point about the media's preoccupation with what our more eminent critics still 
insist on deploring as "the bad news. " Nowhere else have I come across so succinct 
a reply to the ceaseless lament about the viciousness of the yellow press. McLuhan 
notices, correctly, that it is the bad news-reports of sexual scandal, natural disaster, 
and violent death-that sells the good news-that is, the advertisements. The bad news 
is the spiel that brings the suckers into the tent. Like the illustrations in a fifth-grade 
5/11 
reader, the sequence of scenes on CBS or CNN teaches the late-twentieth-century 
American catechism: first, at the top of the news, the admonitory row of body bags 
being loaded into ambulances in Brooklyn or south Miami; second, the inferno of 
tenement fires and bumming warehouses; third, a sullen procession of criminals 
arraigned for robbery or murder and led away in chains. The text of the day's lesson 
having been thus established, the camera makes its happy return to the always 
smiling anchorwoman, and so-with her gracious permission-to the previews of 
heaven sponsored by Delta Airlines, Calvin Klein, and the State Farm Insurance 
companies. The homily is as plain as a medieval morality play or the bloodstains on 
Don Johnson's Armani suit--0bey the law, pay your taxes, speak politely to the 
police officer, and you go to the Virgin Islands on the American Express card. 
Disobey the law, neglect your insurance payments, speak rudely to the police, and 
you go to Kings County Hospital in a body bag. 
 
It is the business of the mass media to sell products-their own as well as those of 
their clients-and the critics who complain about the ceaseless shows of violence 
miss the comparison to the cocaine trade. Bad news engages the viewer's 
participation in what McLuhan recognized as a collective surge of intense 
consciousness (a "process that makes the content of the item seem quite 
secondary"} and sets him up for the good news, which is much more expensively 
produced. A thirty-second television commercial sells for as much as $500,000 and 
can cost over $1 million to make; in Time magazine, a single page of color 
advertising costs roughly $125,000 (a sum equivalent to the annual salary paid to 
one of the magazine's better writers}, and McLuhan accurately accounts for the 
orders of priority by saying that the historians and archeologists one day will 
discover that the twentieth century's commercial advertisements (like the stained-
glass windows of fourteenth century cathedrals} offer the "richest and most faithful 
reflections that any society ever made of its entire range of activities. " 
 
McLuhan developed his dialectic during twenty years of teaching undergraduate 
courses in what was called "pop culture" at a succession of provincial universities in 
the United States and Canada, and as he learned better to understand the psychic 
effects of the electronic media, most notably their tendency to compress-and by so 
doing dissolve-the dimensions of space and time, he began to posit the existence of 
a world soul. In his more transcendent and optimistic moments he gives way to a 
utopian mysticism founded on his reading of G. K. Chesterton and his conversion, 
in his early twenties, to Catholicism. Believing that it was the grammar of print that 
divided mankind into isolated factions of selfishly defined interests, castes, 
nationalities, and provinces of feeling, McLuhan also believes that the unifying 
networks of electronic communication might restore mankind to a state of bliss not 
unlike the one said to have existed within the Garden of Eden. Every now and then 
he beholds a Biblical vision in the desert: 
 
If the work of the city is the remaking or translating of man into a more 
suitable form than his nomadic ancestors achieved, then might not our 
current translation of our entire lives into the spiritual form of information 
6/11 
seem to make of the entire globe, and of the human family, a single 
consciousness? (61) 
 
Or again, while telling the parable of the airline executive who built a little cairn of 
pebbles collected from all parts of the world, McLuhan makes of his text a lesson 
about mankind coming home at last from the exile to which it had been sentenced 
by Johann Gutenberg and the scholars of the Italian Renaissance: 
 
When asked "so what?," he [the airline executive] said that in one spot one 
could touch every part of the world because of aviation. In effect he had 
hit upon the mosaic or iconic principle of simultaneous touch and 
interplay that is inherent in the implosive speed of the airplane. The same 
principle of implosive mosaic is even more characteristic of electric 
information movement of all kinds. (185) 
 
 
It is this mystical component of McLuhan's thought that lately has revived his 
reputation among the more visionary promoters of "the Information Superhighway" 
and the Internet. Journals specific to the concerns of cyberspace (Wired or The 
Whole Earth Review) touch on similarly transcendent themes; the authors of the 
leading articles talk about the late-twentieth-century substitution of "the Icon of the 
Net for the Icon of the Atom," about the virtues of "the hive mind" (its sociability 
and lack of memory), about the connectedness of "all circuits, all intelligence, all 
things economic and ecological, " about the revised definitions of self that take 
account of mankind's "distributed, headless, emergent wholeness. " They echo 
McLuhan's dicta about the redemptive powers of art and the coming to pass of a ~ 
in which, "where the whole man is involved, there is no work. " 
 
The rhetoric falls into the rhythms of what I take to be a kind of utopian blank 
verse, and much of it seems as overblown as the bombast arriving from Washington 
about the beneficense of "the New World Order" and the great happiness certain to 
unite the industrial nations of the earth under the tent of the General Agreement on 
Tariffs on Trade. To my mind McLuhan is most persuasive in the secular phases of 
his hypothesis, when he talks about present effects instead of promised reunions. 
Approached as a guidebook to the artificial kingdom within the glass walls of our 
communications technologies, Understanding Media describes the world that I see 
and know on CBS News, at Disneyland, in the suburban malls, on the covers of the 
fashion magazines-a world in which human beings become commodities (sold on 
T-shirts or transposed into a series of digital numbers), a world in which, as Simone 
Weil once noticed, “it is the thing that thinks, and the man who is reduced to the 
state of the thing," a world in which children find it hard to conceive of a time 
future beyond ,the immediate and evangelical present, a world of people living in 
their own movies and listening to their own soundtracks, a never-never land where 
the historical memory counts for as little as last year's debutante, where the crippled 
boy wins the lottery, the chorus girl studies ancient Greek, and the lessons of 
experience never contradict the miracles of paradise regained. 
7/11 
 
The world that McLuhan describes has taken shape during my own lifetime, and 
within the span of my own experience I can remember that as recently as 1960 it 
was still possible to make distinctions between the several forms of what were then 
known as the lively arts. The audiences recognized the differences between 
journalism, literature, politics, and the movies, and it was under- stood that the 
novelist wasn't expected to double as an acrobat or a talk-show host. The 
distinctions blurred under the technical and epistemological pressures of the next 
ten years, and as the lines between fact and fiction became as irrelevant as they 
were difficult to distinguish, the lively arts fused into the amalgam of forms known 
as the media. News was entertainment, and entertainment was news, and by 1970 
network television was presenting continuous performances on the stage of events 
with a repertory company of high-definition personalities who, like the actors in a 
Shakespearean play, easily and abruptly shifted their mise-en-scenes to Dallas, 
Vietnam, Chicago, Vienna, Washington, and the Afghan frontier. The special 
effects were astonishing, and by 1980 McLuhan's theater of celebrity had replaced 
the old religious theater in which Poseidon and Zeus once staged cataclysmic floods 
and heavenly fires with the effortless aplomb of ABCs "Wide World of Sports. " 
 
The postmodern imagination is a product of the mass media, but as a means of 
perception it is more accurately described as pre- Christian. The vocabulary is 
necessarily primitive, reducing argument to gossip and history to the telling of fairy 
tales. The average American household now watches television roughly seven hours 
a day (as opposed to five-and-a-half hours a day when McLuhan published 
Understanding Media) and the soap opera stars receive thousands of letters a week 
in which the adoring faithful confess secrets of the heart that they dare not tell their 
wives, their husbands, or their mothers. Like the old pagan systems of belief, the 
mass media grant the primacy of the personal over the impersonal. Whether in 
Washington hearing rooms or Hollywood restaurants, names take precedence over 
things, the actor over the act. Just as the ancient Greeks assigned trace elements of 
the divine to trees and winds and stones (a river God sulked and the child drowned; 
a sky God smiled, and the corn ripened), the modern American assigns similar 
powers not only -to whales and spotted owls but also to individuals marked by the 
aureoles of fame. On television commercials and subway signs, celebrities of 
various magnitude, like the nymphs and satyrs and fauns of ancient myth, become 
the familiar spirits of automobiles, cameras, computers, and brokerage firms. 
Athletes show up on television breathing the gift of life into whatever products can 
be carried into a locker room, and aging movie actresses awaken with their 
"personal touch" the spirit dormant in the color of a lipstick or a bottle of perfume. 
 
The greater images of celebrity posed on the covers of our magazines impart a 
sense of stability and calm to a world otherwise dissolved in chaos. The newspaper 
headlines bring word of violent change-war in Bosnia, near anarchy in Moscow, 
famine in Somalia, moral collapse in Washington-but on the smooth surfaces of the 
magazines the faces look as vacant and imperturbable as they have looked for 
twenty years, as steady in their courses as the fixed stars, as serene as the bronze of 
8/11 
Buddha in the courtyard at Kamakura. There they all are-Liz and Elvis, Madonna 
and the Kennedys - indifferent to the turmoil of the news, bestowing on the 
confusion of events the smiles of infinite bliss. Like minor deities, or a little crowd 
of painted idols in a roadside shrine, they ease the pain of doubt and hold at bay the 
fear of death. 
 
As McLuhan noticed thirty years ago, the accelerated technologies of the electronic 
future carry us backward into the firelight flickering in the caves of a neolithic past. 
Among people who worship the objects of their own invention (whether in the 
shape of the fax machine or the high-speed computer) and accept the blessing of an 
icon as proof of divinity (whether expressed as the Coca-Cola trademark or as the 
label on a dress by Donna Karan), ritual be- comes a form of applied knowledge. 
The individual voice and singular point of view disappears into the chorus of a 
corporate and collective consciousness, which, in McLuhan's phrase, doesn't 
"postulate consciousness of anything in particular." In place of an energetic politics, 
we substitute a frenzied spectacle, and the media set the terms of ritual combat 
imposed upon the candidates who would prove themselves fit to govern the 
republic. Medieval chroniclers tell of princesses who send Christian knights in 
search of dragons, requiring them to recover bits and pieces of the true cross and to 
wander for many days and, nights in heathen forests. Toward the end of the 
twentieth century, in a country that prides itself on its faith in reason, American 
presidents endure the trials by klieg light and wander for many days and nights in a 
labyrinth of Holiday Inns. The presidency undoubtedly constitutes a fearful test of a 
man's capacities, but his capacities for what? Even if the electorate understood or 
cared about something as tedious as the mechanics of government, how does it 
choose between the rivals for its fealty and esteem? The one attribute that can be 
known and seen comes to stand for all the other attributes that remain invisible, and 
so the test becomes one of finding out who can survive the stupidity and pitiless 
indifference of the television cameras. 
 
Had McLuhan lived long enough to contemplate the media's delight in the 
inspection of Bill Clinton's soul, I expect that he might have suggested equipping 
the president with a broadsword or an old crossbow and sending him into the field 
against four horsemen in black armor or an infuriated bear. Assuming that the event 
could be properly promoted and attractively staged, I don't see why it wouldn't draw 
a sizable audience (at least as large as the one drummed up for Nancy Kerrigan and 
Tonya Harding at the Olympic games), and I can imagine Peter Jennings or Connie 
Chung murmuring sententious commentary about the president's prior showings 
against a lion, a Ninja, and a wolf. 
 
Again as McLuhan understood, the habits of mind derived from our use of the mass 
media-"we become what we behold. .'. ...We shape our tools and afterwards our 
tools shape us"- deconstruct the texts of a civilization founded on the premise of the 
printed page. To the extent that we abandon the visual order of print, and with it the 
corollary structures of feeling and thought (roads, empires, straight lines, hierarchy, 
classification, the novels of George Eliot or Jane Austen), we discard the idea of the 
9/11 
townsman or the citizen and acquire the sensibilities characteristic of nomadic and 
preliterate peoples. The two sets of circumstance imply different systems of 
meaning which, as with McLuhan's dialectic, also can be ex- pressed as a series of 
antonyms. Several years ago I had occasion to compose such a series, and I'm 
struck by its nearly exact parallel with McLuhan's distinction between the 
technology of the written word and those of the electronic media. As follows: 
 
 
Citizen 
build 
experience  
authority  
happiness  
literature  
heterosexual  
civilization 
will 
truth as passion  
peace  
achievement  
science 
doubt 
drama 
history  
argument 
wife 
art 
agriculture  
politics 
 
Nomad 
wander  
innocence  
power 
pleasure  
journalism  
polymorphous  
barbarism 
wish 
passion as truth  
war 
celebrity 
magic 
certainty  
pornography  
legend 
violence 
whore 
dream 
banditry  
prophecy 
 
 
The attitude of mind suggested by the words in the right-hand column is currently 
very much in vogue in the United States; it accounts not only for the triumph of 
Madonna and Rush Limbaugh but also for the reluctance of my children to believe 
that I completely and truly exist unless they can see me on television, By 
eliminating the dimensions of space and time, the electronic forms of 
communication also eliminate the presumption of cause and effect. Typographic 
man assumed that A follows B, that people who made things-whether cities, ideas, 
families, or works of art- measured their victories (usually Pyrrhic) over periods of 
time longer than those sold to the buyers of beer commercials. Graphic man 
imagines himself living in the enchanted garden of the eternal now. If all the world 
can be seen simultaneously, and if all mankind's joy and suffering is always and 
everywhere present (if not on CNN or Oprah, then on the "Sunday Night Movie" or 
MTV), nothing necessarily follows from anything else. Sequence becomes merely 
additive instead of causative. Like the nomadic hordes wandering across an ancient 
10/11 
desert in search of the soul's oasis, graphic man embraces the pleasures of 
barbarism and swears fealty to the sovereignty of the moment. 
11/11 
