tions of visible symbolic representations, and in ordered social relations, not only helps &mystify 
cognition within intelligent activities, it helps demystify our cultural beliefs in individuality, 
individual intelligence, and imagination-beliefs 
that have often found an ally in the cognitive 
tradition. These are mystifications that we all need help working our way through 
BRUNO LATOUR 
CSI, Ecole des Mines 
Cogito ergo sumus! Or psychology swept inside out by the 
fresh air of the upper deck . . . 
A Review of Ed Hutchins' Cognition in the Wild, Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press, 1995. 
"Decouvrez-VOUS, messieurs, car nous sommes 
dans St Pierre de Rome!" 
Captain Haddock in Le Tresor de Rackam le Rouge 
There is an old and inevitable feud every sailor has lived through, and that is the one that pits the 
skipper in the breeze, mist and cold of the cockpit against the navigator, down in the cabin, slightly 
nauseated, looking over the chart and leafing through the Nautical Instructions. 'The buoy should be 
there straight ahead and the tower on starboard" claims the navigator, cursing the lack of faith and the 
poor eyesight of the skipper, but the skipper detects no buoy at all and cannot take this slim rock 
battered by the surf for the tower of the Nautical Instructions, and she too curses the bookish knowledge 
and arrogant superiority of the navigator stuck in the cabin comforting himself with arithmetics and 
brandy.. . And it is indeed an extraordinary achievement when the skipper and the navigator reconcile 
the chart inside with the landmarks outside and do it together to lead the frail ship safely in to the harbor. 
This marvelous book is about this feud and this truce and about the feat of coordinating actions across 
so different social andmental spaces. But it isnot about smallboats like the one I used to sail in Brittany, 
but about the dreadnoughts of the U.S. Navy that San Diegans are accustomed to see sailing by, 
together with the whales deep down and the hang-gliders high above the cliff. 
The feud between the world of navigators and skippers is atso a good metaphor for the divide 
between two cognitive sciences, the one that believes in laboratory experiments, mental state, internal 
representation, and the other one that believes in the wind, in the wild, that claims to represent the real 
cognitive tasks in an organized and collective work site. Ed Hutchins has written the book that adds 
to cognitive psychology the view fiom the upper deck, which was missing wvtil now. 
The expression "in the wild" in his title may appear strange given that it leads the reader into one 
of the most disciplined, formalized, structured and routinized human cultures there is, that of the 
Mind, Culture, and Activity 
Volume 3, No. 1 1996 
Downloaded by [Moskow State Univ Bibliote] at 06:15 29 October 2013 
military. And yet, his field site is as wild and naturalistic as the Kenya where Shirley Strum decided 
to study baboons on foot instead of the caged and trapped animals of psychology laboratories. It is as 
wild as the scientific laboratories some of us decided to study, 20 years ago, to escape from the stuffy 
atmosphere of epistemology. All of these field sites are wild because the subjects of study - sailors, 
baboons, scientists - are allowed to raise the questions that interest them and to deploy the courses of 
action of their daily behavior, instead of answering the narrow range of questions that interested 
psychologists, primatologists or epistemologists. The results of Hutchins' inquiry are as devastating 
for psychology as the results of sociology of science were for epistemology or those of Shirley Strum 
for prirnatology. Everything that was crammed inside the mind of individuals is deployed outside and 
shared collectively with the culture, through the social connections and with the many cognitive 
artifacts the group has been able to devise. 
One of the great merits of the book is that it takes cognitive science seriously enough to make, in 
the last chapter, the extraordinary claim that computers - the darling model of mind in the classical 
view - might actually be good descriptions of socio-cultural systems, but not of human cognitive 
functions. This claim puts this book completely apart from others. Many anthropologists and 
sociologists, disgruntled by the sweeping claims of cognitive sciences, although they object with tears 
in their eyes "but where is the rest of humanity, where is the body, the feel, the emotion, the social?", 
still accept that the more formal, abstract, and symbolic functions of the human mind have been at least 
well modeled by their cold and scientistic enemies. They simply want the "human dimension" to be 
put back in. Hutchins, on the contrary, denies that cognitive science has even been able to model those 
"higher functions." For him, this is a case of mental surgery (p. 363) that put a computer in place of 
the mind. The very description of formal reasoning remains to be made, and to do so, one has to get 
on the deck, with the artifacts, in a work site, within a group. This refusal to grant to the classical view 
even the description of computation and formalism makes this book infinitely better than most social 
psychology and should interest, for that reason, not only the "softies," but also the hard core of 
cognitive scientists. What is at stake here is not the human dimension or the "low" aspects of thought, 
but the very content of the higher cognitive functions.' 
Hutchins has done for the Navy what he did so magnificently, for the Trobrianders in his first 
book.2 Instead of finding excuses for the bad reasoning of the Trobrianders by jumping on their 
symbolic order, as so many anthropologists had been prone to do, he single-handedly went for their 
land tenure system, and, sureenough, all the so called "mistakes in reasoning" that had taxed the charity 
of cognitivists for decades disappeared. In his rendering, Trobrianders were thinking like everyone 
else, but on a very different mate* 
their incredibly complex land tenure. For the Navy, for the 
Trobrianders, or for the Pacific navigators - beautifully rehabilitated in chapter two - the material 
world, the work site, the groupware, replaced the many extravagant and unwarranted assumptions 
about what it is to think or not to think. Through this beautiful instance of symmetry, the difference 
between primitive and advanced thinking disappears: 
If one believes that technology is the consequence of cognitive capabilities, and if one further believes 
that the only place to look for the source of cognitive capabilities is inside individual minds, then 
observed difference in level of technology between a "technologically advanced" and a "technologi- 
cally primitive" culture will inevitably be seen as evidence of advanced and primitive mind. @. 355) 
Hutchins, is one of the few symmetric anthropologists, like Jean Lave, Lucy Suchman, Chuck 
Goodwin or Helen Watson: who had the chance to study in the course of the same career, low-tech 
traditional people and high-tech "modem" culture. One of the main advantages of the field study 
presented here, however, is that Hutchins has hit on a task that is much more richly endowed with 
Review Symposium 
Bruno Latour 
Downloaded by [Moskow State Univ Bibliote] at 06:15 29 October 2013 
mathematics, formal reasoning, and metrological traditions than any of the others described by 
anthropologists interested in "mundane reasoning."* Jean Lave's shoppers have to do arithmetic, to 
be sure, but when they cannot get at the solution they abandon the problems. Navigators aboard ships 
have to find their bearings and complete the calculation even when there is no steam - this is what 
happens in the gripping first chapter of the book. So the chosen setting with its strong hierarchy, its 
massive use of formal procedures, its necessity of carrying out the calculations no matter what, makes 
it one of the best "fruit flies" of cognitive science. Hutchins demonstrates that one can be "in the wild" 
and yet better equipped empirically than in any psychological laboratory with all the variables 
controlled. The amusing paradox is that in leaving psychological laboratories for the deck of an 
helicopter carrier, Hutchins has managed to build a better laboratory, equipped with video and tape 
recorders and was able to describe in excruciating details the achievements of navigational tasks. Out 
in the wild, it is even better than inside as far as laboratory experimentation goes . . . 
So what is left of cognitive science after this study of those fruit flies? One central phenomenon, 
repeated over the whole book, although it is not treated as a full blown the01-y:~ 
cognition has nothing 
to do with minds nor with individuals but with the propagation of representations through various 
media, which are coordinated by a very lightly equipped human subject working in a group, inside 
a culture, with many artifacts and who might have internalized some parts of the process. 
Let me sketch this central claim, which is so radical that it may very well reorganize around itself 
the whole of the cognitive sciences, once the hopes of artificial intelligence (AI) and scientistic 
psychology will be recognized for what they are, beautiful ruins in an old romantic landscape. The fmt 
point is not to follow mental or individual activities but trajectories of modified representati~ns.~ 
In 
other words, there is not, according to Hutchins, any meaning in the expression "I think" or "I 
represent." What can be documented is a shift in representation through different media. For instance, 
it is not observable in the chart itself, but it is there in a group trying to make features of the landscape 
correspond with features on the chatt. There is no meaning in asking what is in the mind of the plotter. 
But there is meaning in observing how the plotter coordinates various media - bearings reported on 
the phone by the pelorus operators, instructions precoded on the chart, orders from the captain - in one 
single line on the paper. 
This attention to modification of media instead of "mental events" has, in my reading, three 
decisive consequences. 
The first one is a renewed attention to intellectual technologies - attention that is shared with the 
history and sociology of science that Hutchins almost totally ignores (I 
will come back to this later). 
His notion of mediation by artifacts is infinitely much more advanced than the notions of those who 
see technology - compasses, hoey, rulers - as situated "in between" mental events. It is much more 
interesting, for instance, than the conception of Don Norman, Hutchins' mentor? A few quotations will 
make the originality of Hutchins clearer: 
None of the component cognitive abilities has been amplifid by the use of any of the tools. Rather, each 
tool presents the task to the user as a different sort of cognitive problem requiring a different set of 
cognitive abilities or a different organization of the same set of abilities. (p. 154, my italics) 
In this sense, these mediating technologies do not stand between theuser and the task. Rather, they stand 
with the user as resources used in the regulation of behavior in such a way that the propagation of 
representational state that implements the computation can take place. (p. 154) 
Mind, Culture, and Activity 
Volume 3, No. 1 1996 
Downloaded by [Moskow State Univ Bibliote] at 06:15 29 October 2013 
Rather than focus on the mediating artifact as something that "stands between." I will view it as one of 
many structural elements that are brought into coordination in the performance of the task Any of the 
structures that are brought into coordination in the performance of the task can be seen as amediating 
structure. @. 290) 
This definition of mediation and technology allows Hutchins to pay passionate attention to the 
details of practice, which do not take him away from cognition, as if cognition was "implemented" in 
the artifacts, but, and this is the decisive move, as if technology was the real stuff cognition was made 
of. Having cognition is devising intellectual technologies. 
The second consequence is that Hutchins thus escapes the pitfalls of pliabilism, this dire 
intellectual disease due to excessive reading of Wittgenstein and Harry Collins, I should add? 
Pliabilistg are disappointed rationalists, so the only way for them to show that a task is not formal, is 
to show that some human, some locally situated action, is always necessary to make sense of the 
formalism or to interpret the data. Fortunately, with his theory of propagation through different media, 
Hutchins does not have to insist on the indefinite pliability of interpretations or to show with endless 
delight that there is no formal rule to describe the application of arule. On the contrary, he shows, very 
convincingly, that every propagation through a different medium modifies the distribution of the 
required skills and allows for simpler cognitive processes to be brought in: 
In producing the coordinatioq between the and the chart, the task performer can transform the task to 
an easier one by achieving coordination with an internal artifact: the knowledge of this technique. (p. 
144) 
These tools permit the people using them to do the tasks that need to be done while doing the kinds of 
things people are good at: recognizimg patterns, modeling simple dynamics of the world, and 
manipulating objects in the wvironment. @. 155, my italics). 
So the notion of propagatidn is clearer. It does not mean a transportation without deformation, but 
a m-cation, 
a translation, a $hift, a reformatting of the skills. Thinking becomes an ingenious way 
of constantly shifting from one medium to the other until one reaches "simpler" or "easier" tasks by 
delegating more and more tasks to other actors in the setting, either humans or non-humans. Thanks 
to Hutchins' theory, one is freed from the stifling alternative either to believe in formalism in the head, 
or to be stuck in the indefinite pliability of local skilled practice. To be a local skilled practitioner is 
to be able to propagate representational states in other and simpler forms elsewhere. Attention to local 
practices leads away from the locus and into tasks that require difSerent practices? 
The lhird consequence is even more interesting for cognitive science. With this positive notion 
of mediating artifacts, and this idea of propagation as redistribution of skills, Hutchins, going much 
further than Vygotsky, can extend his definition to internal phenomena. As he shows in great details, 
cognitive processes are not intelrnal, but rather partially and provisionally internalized. In one of the 
most radical sentences of the book, Hutchins writes: 
Internalization has long connpted some thing moving across some boundary. Both elements of this 
definition are misleadillg. What moves is not a thing, and the boundary across which movement takes 
place is a line that, if drawn too f i y ,  obscures our understanding of the nature of human cognition. 
Within this larger unit of an$ysis, what used to look like internalization now appears as a gradual 
propagation of organized functional properties across a set of malleable media. @. 312) 
Review Symposium 
Bruno Latour 
Downloaded by [Moskow State Univ Bibliote] at 06:15 29 October 2013 
This means that there is nothing below the skin except the continuation of the same processes that 
go on outside. But this is not to be seen as a socialization of psychology as if sociology and context 
had taken over what psychology wouldbe unable to reveal This is not the case because what gets inside 
is cognition through and through, but a cognition distributed, materialized and propagated. Approach- 
ing the mental states of the subject leads the analyst away and beyond, and if it is possible to seize the 
internalized translations, they have the same mediating properties as what occurs outside. 
Language also, in this sweeping view, becomes a mediating artifact like the ruler, the chart, or the 
hoey, even when we talk to ourselves, memorize a routine, or invent shortcuts and rules of thumb to 
overcome the difficulty of calculating (see the marvelous case of the rule of three). One rather radical 
sentence summarizes the author's point 
It is tempting to think that the words and the world are coordinated by language in order to produce the 
meanings. It is more accurate to say that themeanings, the world, and the words are put into coordination 
with one another via the mediating structure of language. (p. 300) 
What is true of language is of course truer of symbols, which are not seen as what is in the head 
but as what is written, marked, underlined, manipulated, reshuffled, and which only later, through 
other routines and by reformatting once again the tasks, may be put in the head. "Ontogenetically 
speaking, it seems that symbols are in the world first, and only later in the head" @. 370). 
To do full justice to the book, it is crucial to realize that internalized cognition is almost the exact 
opposite of internal cognition as it is conceived by other psychol~gists.'~ 
If you believe in internal 
processes, you can start with individual cognition, and then, by aggregation or implementation, you 
may reach the collective level or the material world. If you talk about internalized artifacts and if you 
observe the propagation of different media inside, there is no way you will ever be able to talk again 
about disembodied or individual cognition. You will be forced to start from collective tasks and 
cultural systems. Rephrasing the old sensualist motto, one could say that for Hutchins, "there is nothing 
in the mind that was not before in the sense," provided that "the senses" now mean shifts from one 
representational mediator to another one. 
Putting the question of the flexible constitution of functional systems first means approaching the study 
of cognition from adifferent starting point. It requires adiiferentview of cognition, and it demands that 
our models of cognition be capable of different sorts of computations. This is a consequence of an 
attempt to build a theory of cog~tion 
that comes after, rather than before, a description of the cultural 
world in which human cognitive behavior is embedded. @. 291). 
The main interest of this definition of cognition as propagation through different media is that it 
gives a very original role not only to the artifacts, not only to internalized tasks, but also to the social 
structure of the Navy and to the local groups. Usually, when groups and societies are brought in to 
psychology, it is with the worst consequences, producing the monster known as "social psychology" 
which cumulates the worst of both disciplines. This is not the case here, since Hutchins does not 
abandon cognition when talking about groups. He simply goes on distributing the tasks further, hence 
sentences that would make no sense either to an internalist psychologist or to a contextualist 
sociologist: 
When a problem has a deeply nested goal structure, a social hierarchy can provide a mechanism for 
distributing the attention to various parts of the goal structure. @. 203) 
Mind, Culture, and Activity 
Volume 3, No. 1 1996 
Downloaded by [Moskow State Univ Bibliote] at 06:15 29 October 2013 
The computational dependencies among the steps of the procedure for the individual watchstander are 
present as interpersonal dependencies among the members of the team. @. 282) 
The novices' understandimgs of the social relations of the workplace are a partial model of the 
computational dependencies of the task itself. (p. 283) 
Because society has a different architecture anddifferent wmmunicationproperties than the individual 
mind, it is possible that there are interpsychological functions that can never be internalized by any 
individual. @. 284) 
In the detailed analysis of the groupware - which I cannot even summarize in this brief note - 
Hutchins offers a very compelling extension of his propagation argument to the social relations.ll 
Exactly in the same way as internalized cognition reformats the tasks - so that they are not the same 
tasks as those outside -exactly in the same way as externalizedartifacts redefine the tasks -so that they 
are not the implementation of mental events - then the social organization modifies once again the 
representational media. The question is no longer to know whether cognition is in the mind, in the 
things, in the group, but what are the modifications in the formats of the tasks that are necessary at each 
point of the trajectory, which from now on forms the only observable content of cognition. 
But who is doing the coordination of all those shifting media? A very lightly equipped human 
agency, not defined by Hutchins as an individual mind endowed with consciousness and foresight, but 
more precisely, and more originally in my view, as being itself a mediator, a shifter, apropagator. That 
it is lightly equipped - like the actor of ethnomethodology strangely absent from the discussion - this 
is very clear from the deflation strategy of the book. Instead of cramming endless numbers of modular 
boxes and special purpose rules in the head, Hutchins, takes everything out and "render to Caesar what 
pertains to Caesar." The only clear definition of the human agency, the "most active integral parts" @. 
287), is this cryptic but decisive sentence: 
The thinker in this worldis avery specialmedim that can provide cmrdiMtion among many structured 
media - some internal, some external, some embodied in artifacts, some in ideas, and some in social 
relatiomhips. @. 3 16) 
This is the final dissolution of psychology since there is no agency left that could sustain apsyche 
at all. Instead of the huge crates and heavy luggage that was necessary before for the internal actor to 
carry around all the rules and boxes necessary to think about the world, Hutchins' thinking agent is 
more like the desk of a well organized executive: empty since everything else has been delegated 
outside to something or to someone else. 
After having summarized the setting and sketched the radical theory of the book, I would like to 
offer not so much objections as openings for what I hope will be a long lasting trail of field studies and 
discussion. 
In spite of the definition offered of cognition: 
I propose a broad notion of wgnition because I want to preserve a concept of wgnition as computation, 
and I want the sort of computation that cognition is to be as applicable to events that involve the 
interaction of humans with artifacts and with other humans as it is to events that are entirely internal 
to individual persons. (p. 1 18) 
Nothing, absolutely nothing of what is considered essential to the very existence of psychology 
is left in the book.I2 However, Hutchins seems convinced that it is a question of better study and that 
Review Symposium 
Bruno Latour 
Downloaded by [Moskow State Univ Bibliote] at 06:15 29 October 2013 
an alternative to psychology will be taken on board provided it is empirically grounded, productive 
and convincing. This looks. to me as overly naive. Psychology is not there to describe events but 
precisely to cram cognition inside an individual mind endowed with consciousness andresponsibility. 
This is one half of the modernist project - the other being on the nature side and the building of 
objectivity and that part of the dirty job is done by epistemology, which is as impervious to facts and 
empirical studies for the same reason. To believe that a better cognitive science will simply take over 
is to miss the anthropology of the modems and to underestimate the history that made the myth of 
internal state so essential to our Occidental life. 
I was equally disturbed by the idea, frequent in the book, that on one side there is the world and 
on the other cognitive skills. Distribution, in my view, does not go all the way. This leads Hutchins 
to make mistakes even in navigational matters. In a sentence like this one "the problem of identifying 
landmarks may be one of direct reconciliation of the chart and the world" (p. 136), the author obviously 
forgets his own attention to mediation. If there is a coordination that is far from "direct," it is that one. 
The pelorus operators are not reconciling the world with the map, they are reconciling readings on the 
compass with landmarks that have been put there at the tip of Point Loma because of the map and by 
the same body of nautical engineers and cartographers. As many mediations are required to transform 
the world into a map-like or a map-compatible shape as they are inside the ship and then inside the 
heads of the calculators. The common organization, which the ship, the sailors, the landmarks and the 
Nautical Instructions all inhabit is curiously absent from the book. This is even more telling with the 
Global Positioning System, which transforms the whole Earth in the inside of a laboratory - imitating, 
curiously enough, the strategy of the "primitive" islanders with their navigation system. In other 
words, Hutchins still hesitates between a menso-centrism that would pit a mind, albeit redistributed, 
against a world which is simply there, and a truly symmetric anthropology, symmetry meaning not 
only that between Trobrianders and Americans, but that between the world and cognition. A sentence 
such as the following indicates the hesitation of the author, sinceit advocates one thing and then exactly 
its opposite: 
Instead of conceiving the relation between person and environment in terms of moving coded 
information across a boundary, let us look for processes of entrainmenf coordination. and resonance 
among elements of a system that includes aperson and the person's surzound'ing (p. 288, my italics). 
The reason for this lapse of symmetry comes, in my view, from another disturbing feature of the 
book. Hutchins makes almost no use of the literature on history and sociology of science - except kind 
references to some of my work - which would have made such a strong complementary case on many 
of the same p~ints.'~ 
This is even stranger knowing that the Science Studies group at the University 
of California, San Diego is about 200 meters from the Cognitive Science Building! No doubt this is 
another case of the division of cognitive labor so well studied by him (for instance p. 178). This is all 
the more unfortunate since science studies would have allowed him toanswera strong objection to his 
point of view. He writes, cogently in my view: 
The system for ship navigation (. . .) is based on formal manipulation of numbers and of the symbols 
and lines drawn on chart. It is a system that exploits the powerful idea of formal operations in many 
ways. But not all the representations that are processed to produce the computational properties of this 
system are inside the heads of thequartermasters. Many of them are in the culturally constitutedmaterial 
environment that the quartermasters share with and produce for each other. (p 360) 
The objection from the traditional view would be that what is true for "mere" quartermasters is 
certainly not true for "higher minds," for example the Thales, Galileo, Mercator, andLe Verrier, whose 
work went into the fabrication of those artifacts. 
Mind, Culture, and Activity 
Volume 3, No. 1 1996 
Downloaded by [Moskow State Univ Bibliote] at 06:15 29 October 2013 
Hutchins should have countered the objection that there must be a huge difference in applying 
routine knowledge and producing new kn~wledge?~ 
Without the help of social history of science, the 
myth of "higher cognitive functions" would simply shift elsewhere and abandon the decks of 
helicopter carriers for the minds of scientific geniuses. The fascinating thing, in my eyes at least, is that, 
when turning to those "geniuses," many of the same results that Hutchins obtains with his sailors have 
been documented. Exactly in the same way as thinking is a property of the navigation team aboard the 
ship, so that there is no sense for any sailor to say "I compute," the making of major discoveries, 
according to the new history of science, is a property of whole subcultures of science and of their 
artifacts, so that there is no sense for an isolated scientists to exclaim "cogito!" or "eureka!" 
Laboratories think, communities discover, disciplines progress, instruments see, not individual minds. 
The lack of coordination - to use one of the fetish words of the book - between science studies and 
"wild" cognitive science, is all the more a pity since Hutchins' definition of the distribution of 
cognitive tasks and his understanding of context are much more sophisticated than most accounts in 
history of science. The groups of navigators, the artifacts, the work site, the requirements of the Navy, 
are not influencing or constraining the individual mind - as if we had to chose between the individual 
mind thinking freely beneath its skin, and a social entity, which would be endowed, somewhat 
mysteriously, with emergent cognitive abilities. Hutchins' point is to turn cognitive science inside out, 
but not to turn it into sociology. It is the very boundary between what goes inside and what goes outside 
that is at stake in the book. The individual mind endowed with internal states is certainly gone, but so 
is the "context" in which thinking was supposed to take place. The context is cognitive as well, and 
not composed of maligned and dark social forces foreign to thought and constraining it. Distributed 
intelligence is exactly that: distributed and intelligent. 
On the other hand, Hutchins would have benefited, in my view, from history of science in order 
to make more precise what exactly is propagated from one representational medium to the next. On 
the surface, Hutchins' vocabulary is very reminiscent of the one used in the sociology of scientific 
instruments, metrology, collections and centers of calculation in general. Mobility, immutability and 
connectability are crucial to all these media.15 But this is not the end of the story and immutable mobiles 
-to use my own wording - are typical of very fw cognitive trajectories. It is already clearly different 
when Hutchins tries to follow the legal requirements of all the same elements when they are used not 
to take bearings but to offset a litigation. Now that Hutchins has redefined cognition in terms of 
coordination of representational media, his responsibility is to specify the various modes of coordi- 
nation. Instead, he uses very weak and spongy metaphors sensing the difficulty but escaping it: 
Thepeople aretheglue that sticks thehardwaretogeth . . . Thecausalrelationshipis atissue of human 
relationships in which individual watchstanders consent to have their behavior constrained by others. 
who are themselves constrained by the meaningful states of representational technologies. (p. 202) 
And again, 
This permits the human component of the system to act as a malleable and adaptable coordinating 
tissue, the job of which is to see to it that the proper coordinating activities are carried out. (p. 219, my 
italics) 
Escaping from the traps and artifacts of cognitive science is one thing, and Hutchins does the job 
beautifully, but the tasks that lies ahead will not be easier for that. It would be a pity, in my eyes at least, 
if this revamped cognitive anthropology was not collaborating closely with those scholars in science 
studies who have the same interest, and many of the same enemies. 
Review S:ymposium 
Bruno Latour 
Downloaded by [Moskow State Univ Bibliote] at 06:15 29 October 2013 
I hope it is clear from the critical as well as from the positive remarks that this is aremarkable and 
foundational book.16 Let me add one personal note. When I published Science in Action, in 1987, I 
pmposed a "moratorium" on cognitive explanations, which had been so freely and cheaply entertained 
by epistemologists. I already knew Hutchins' work and made good use of his first book, but I did not 
know that I would be able to safely lift the ban, less than 10 years later, since in the meantime, cognitive 
explanations would have been dissolved beyond recognition by the very same Hutchins and made 
thoroughly compatible with the social explanations of science, technology and formalism devised by 
my colleagues and myself. Let us now exclaim together "cogito ergo sumus! . . ." 
Notes 
'The author seems, however, to ignore the work done on the history, sociology, materiality of formalism by 
scholars like Livingston, E. (1985). The Ethrnethodological Foundations of Mathemafical Practice. London: 
Routledge; or Wanvick, A. (1992). CambridgeMathernatics andCavendishPhysics: Cunningham, Campbell and 
Einstein's Relativity 1905-191 1. Part I: The Uses of Theory. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 625- 
656. More surprisingly, he seems unaware of the work of Leigh Star and her many colleagues on the work sites 
of computers, although much of his methods are entirely compatible with ethnomethodology -minus the jargon, 
Hutchins writes beautifully - and symbolic interactionism. 
ZHutchins, E. (1980). Culture cmd injkrence: A Trobriand case study. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 
curiously is not even referred to in this one! 
'The latter is not cited in the book although her work on the contradictions of Australian whites and aborigines 
is one of the very few instances of real symmetric field study. 
Traweek, S. (1988). Beam times and life times: The world of high energy physicists. Cambridge. MA: Harvard 
University Press, which is not cited, would have been extremely useful here because it describes physicists' 
environments producing new knowledge. 
The only overt reference to it is found on page 230 where it is named "the theory of computation by propagation 
of representational state." 
In intent, if not in method, this move £tom cognition in the subjects or m the objects, to trajectories is similar 
to the move advocated by A. Cussins - another San Diegan - with his notion of "trails," which are the new 
embodiment of cognitive virtue. See Cussins, A. (1992). Content, embodiment and objectivity: The theory of 
cognitive trails. Mind, 101(404), 651-688. 
7Norman, D. (1993). Thingsthatmake ussmart. New York: Addison Wesley, is only superficially in accordance 
with Hutchins' thesis, precisely because of the complete difference in the theory of mediation. 
Collins, H. (1990). Arfijiiial experts: Social knowledge and intelligent machines. Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press, which is not cited here, tackles many of the same issues, but with the opposite conclusions. 
It seems to me that his theory should have led Hutchins to differentiate himself on this point from Suchman's 
and from Goodwin's works, which are cited but not discussed. 
'O This also includes Roy D' Andrade's own brand of cognitive anthropology, which is totally opposite to that of 
Hutchins, hence the rather embarrassed praise for the book on the dust wver . . . "I think this is a great book." 
It is indeed, but one that will forever forbid to D'Andrade the use of "I think!" 
Mind, Culture, and Activity 
Volume 3, No. 1 1996 
Downloaded by [Moskow State Univ Bibliote] at 06:15 29 October 2013 
He also offers an amusing computer simulation of which type of social division of cognitive labor offers the 
best ability to contemplate alternative viewpoints. 
lZ Cognition is so broadly conceived that it seems to have no limits. There is only one brief allusion to the fact the 
writing would have been different if the author had paid attention to energy instead of cognition 
l3 He does not use Lynch, M. 
(1985). Art and artifact in laboratory science: A study of shop work and shop talk 
in a research laboratory. London: Routledge, whose descriptive stance. attention to details, and many of the 
conclusions are very much in resonance with his. 
l4 Law, J. Bi Lynch. M. (1990). Lists, field guides, and the descriptive organization of seeing: Birdwatching as 
an exemplary observational activity. Representation, in Scientifi Practice, edited by M .  Lynch & S. Woolgar 
@p. 267-300). Cambridge. MA: TheMlTPress, would have allowed him, for instance, to clearly state the different 
skills in recognizing that this bird is an instance of a mockingbird compared to the invention of the new 
mockingb'ird species. 
Is See for instance the crucial and classic piece by S. L. Star and J. Griesemer (1989). Institutional ecology, 
'translations' and boundary objects: Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 
1907-1939. Social Studies of Science. 19,387-420. 
16There are very few mistakes in this very nicely produced work. I noticed however the following: 2 lines from 
the bottom of page 110 "of' is missing; in the second paragraph of page 282 a "the" should be crossed; Figure 
1.7 on page 323 should be labeled 1.2; and on page 371 the reference date "in press" should be 1994. 
Review Symposium 
Bruno Latour 
Downloaded by [Moskow State Univ Bibliote] at 06:15 29 October 2013 
