W
e’re now well past 2001; where is
HAL? When Marvin Minsky
advised Arthur C. Clarke and
Stanley Kubrick, 40 years ago, it seemed
that achieving a full HAL-like AI by 2001
was every bit as likely as, well, commercial
Pan Am flights to the moon by 2001.1 As
Bill Rawley said, the future is just not what
it used to be:
When I was growing up in the 1950s we
all knew what the 1990s would be like. It
would be a time of great prosperity. We
would live in big homes in the suburbs.
There would be many labor-saving con-
veniences for the homemaker, and robots
would do the hard chores. We would com-
mute to work in our own helicopters. The
short workweek would mean lots of
leisure time that families (mom, dad and
the two kids) would enjoy as “quality
time” together. Space travel would be
common with people living on other
planets. Everyone would be happy living a
fulfilling life in a peaceful world.2
Why are we still so far from having
those household robots, so far from hav-
ing a HAL-like AI that could pass the Tur-
ing test? The answer to that has several
parts; I’ll discuss each one in turn.
For one thing, the test that Alan Turing
originally proposed in Mind in 1950 has
mutated into a much more difficult test
than he ever intended, a much higher bar
to clear than is needed for, for example,
HAL 
or 
household-chore-performing
robots. 
Turing test aside, we do expect and
want AIs (general ones or application-spe-
cific ones) to be capable of carrying on
back-and-forth clarification dialogues
with us, their human users. But for that to
be anywhere near as efficient as convers-
ing with another human being—for the
computer to not come off like an idiot
savant or idiot—requires its knowing a
vast panoply of facts (hot coffee is hot; jet
planes fly hundreds of miles per hour),
rules of thumb (if you fly into a small
town airport, you’re probably not con-
necting there to another ongoing flight),
shared experiences (what it feels like
when your ears plug up as the plane
descends), scripts (buckling a seatbelt),
and so on.
And finally, we in AI too often allow our
research vector to be deflected into some
rarified area of theory or else into some
short-term application. In both of those
extreme cases, what we end up doing
doesn’t have a large projection on what
we as a field could be doing, to bring real
AI into existence, so it shouldn’t come as
much of a surprise that it’s still not here
yet. 
If you read through the literature—say
all the IJCAI and AAAI proceedings and all
the AI Magazine and AI Journal articles—
their abstracts report a steady march of
significant research strides being made,
and their conclusions report great expec-
tations, blue skies, and fair weather ahead.
So much so, that when John Seely Brown
and I submitted an AI Journal manuscript
in 1983 about why some of our then-
recent machine-learning programs only
appeared to work—that is, on closer
analysis had more the veneer of intelli-
Articles
SUMMER 2008   11
Copyright © 2008, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. All rights reserved. ISSN 0738-4602
The Voice of the Turtle: 
Whatever Happened 
to AI?
Doug Lenat
I On March 27, 2006, I gave a light-
hearted and occasionally bittersweet pres-
entation on “Whatever Happened to AI?”
at the Stanford Spring Symposium presen-
tation—to a lively audience of active AI
researchers and formerly active ones
(whose current inaction could be various-
ly ascribed to their having aged, reformed,
given up, redefined the problem, and so
on). This article is a brief chronicling of
that talk, and I entreat the reader to take
it in that spirit: a textual snapshot of a
discussion with friends and colleagues,
rather than a scholarly article. I begin by
whining about the Turing test, but only for
a thankfully brief bit, and then get down
to my top-10 list of factors that have
retarded progress in our field, that have
delayed the emergence of a true strong AI.
AI Magazine Volume 29 Number 2 (2008) (© AAAI)
gence rather than some seed that would germinate,
some source of power that would scale up into true
AI—the reviewers didn’t know what to make of the
article, didn’t know if it even fit the criteria for
publication!3
Neutering Turing’s 
Imitation Game
Some of us treat the Turing test as a holy relic (Guc-
cione and Tamburrini 1988), and end up so close
to it—analytically pursuing some sub-sub-…-sub-
part of it—that we no longer see the real AI goal, a
world-altering functionality that Turing’s test was
merely a first thought of how to test for. Others of
us have turned our back on the Turing test and,
more generally, on the Big AI Dream, and we build
Roombas and knowledge management systems
and other AI “raisins.” Part of my message here is
that both of these courses are too extreme. We Eloi
and Morlocks (Wells 1895) can and should come
together, bound by the common goal to build a
real AI—not by 2001 or (now) 2010, not as a two-
year project, but at least in our lifetime. Okay, yes,
in particular in my lifetime.
Turing’s test was not (as many currently believe
it to be) to see if a (human) interrogator could tell
more than 50-50 whether they were talking with a
human or with a computer program. In his ver-
sion, “The Imitation Game,” the interrogator is
told that the interrogator is talking to a man and a
woman—not a person and a computer!—and that
the interrogator must decide which is the woman
and which is the man.
Let’s suppose that men are on average able to
fool the interrogator 30 percent of the time into
thinking they are the woman. Now we replace the
man with a computer, but the interrogator is still
told that he or she is talking to a man and a
woman, both of whom will claim to be the woman
during a brief online conversation, and the inter-
rogator’s job is to pick the woman. If we get a com-
puter that the interrogator picked (as being the
woman) 30 percent or more of the time, then (Tur-
ing concludes) that computer, as programmed,
would be intelligent. Well, at least as intelligent as
men, anyway.4As Judy Genova puts it (Genova
1994), Turing’s proposed game involves not a ques-
tion of species but one of gender. In the process of
making the test gender neutral, it has inadvertent-
ly been made vastly more difficult for programs to
pass. In today’s version, the interrogator can draw
on an array of facts, experiences, visual and aural
and olfactory and tactile capabilities, and so on, to
ask things he or she never would have asked under
Turing’s original test, when the interrogator
thought that he or she was trying to distinguish a
human man from a human woman through a tele-
type.
Even worse than this, and more subtle and more
interesting, is the fact that there are dozens of what
I call translogical behaviors that humans regularly
exhibit: illogical but predictable decisions that
most people make: incorrect but predictable
answers to queries. As a sort of hobby, I’ve collect-
ed articles distinguishing over three dozen separate
phenomena of this sort. 
Some of these are very obvious and heavy-hand-
ed, hence uninteresting, but still work a surprising
fraction of the time—“work” meaning, here, to
enable the interrogator to instantly unmask many
of the programs entered into a Turing test compe-
tition as programs and not human beings: slow
and errorful typing; 7 ± 2 short-term memory size;
forgetting (for example, what day of the week was
April 7, 1996? What day of the week was yester-
day?); wrong answers to math problems (some
wrong answers being more “human” than others:
93 – 25 = 78 is more understandable than if the
program pretends to get a wrong answer of 0 or –
9998 for that subtraction problem (Brown and van
Lehn 1980).
At the 2006 AAAI Spring Symposium, I went
through a dozen more sophisticated translogical
phenomena (Gleim 2001, Chapman and Malik
1995, Tversky and Kahneman 1983). While these
are not yet the stumbling blocks—our programs
are still stumbling over cruder ones—they may
become ways of distinguishing humans from com-
puters once those heavier-handed differences have
been taken care of. For example, asked to decide
which is more likely, “Fred S. just got lung cancer”
or “Fred S. smokes and just got lung cancer,” most
people say the latter. People worry more about
dying in a hijacked flight than the drive to the air-
port. They see the face on Mars. They hold onto a
losing stock too long because of ego. If a choice is
presented in terms of rewards, they opt for a dif-
ferent alternative than if it’s presented in terms of
risks. They are swayed by ads. European countries
that ask license applicants to “check this box to opt
in” have a 10 percent organ donor enrollment;
those whose form says “check to opt out” have 90
percent. 
The basic problem is that (1) most programs are
engineered to make choices as rationally as possi-
ble, whereas the early hominids were prerational
decision makers, for the most part, and that (2)
unfortunately, we are the early hominids. This
makes the task much more daunting than Tur-
ing’s original imitation game. One requirement of
the gender-neutral Turing test is that the comput-
er know more or less the totality of what humans
of a certain age group, culture, time period, and so
on would know. That takes us to our second
point: the sweeping panoply of knowledge
required for “real” natural language understand-
ing (NLU).
Articles
12
AI MAGAZINE
Holding Up One’s 
End of a Conversation
In the ancient cave-wall drawings by Winograd,
Schank, and others, anthropologists have found
numerous well-preserved examples where resolv-
ing ambiguous words, anaphoric reference, analo-
gy, prepositional phrase attachment, scope of
quantifiers, and so on, require some bit of real-
world knowledge and/or reasoning capability. For
example: 
Which meaning of “pen” is intended in “The pen is
in the box” versus “The box is in the pen”? 
What is the referent of “the fool” in each of these
sentences: “Joe saw his brother skiing on TV last
night, but the fool didn’t recognize him” and “Joe
saw his brother skiing on TV last night, but the fool
didn’t have a coat on.”
Since so many people have siblings, “Mary and Sue
are sisters” probably means they are each other’s sis-
ter, but if I say “Mary and Sue are mothers” it does-
n’t cross your mind even for an instant that I mean
that they are each other’s mother. Well, at least it
doesn’t cross your conscious mind.
People who never heard of nested quantifiers can
easily and correctly parse both “Every American has
a mother” and “Every American has a president.”
I won’t belabor this point here; it is the foundation
for the 24-year “detour” we took to do Cyc. That is,
the hypothesis that progress in natural language,
in speech (especially analyzing and synthesizing
prosody), in robotics … in practically all AI appli-
cations, and, more generally, almost all software
applications, will be very limited unless and until
there is a codification of a broad, detailed ontology
and a codification of assertions involving the terms
in the ontology, respectively, a skeleton and the
flesh on that skeleton. What, for the examples
above, it is important to know—the relative sizes of
writing pens, corrals, penitentiaries, various sorts
of boxes, and so on. Causes precede effects. Who
can see who, when x is watching y on television.
Skiing is a cold-weather outdoor activity. And so
on.5 Today most people look to the semantic web
as evolving, any year now, into that codification,
that interlingua. Not believing that any such grass-
roots effort would converge at any level deeper
than text (see Wikipedia) without some serious
priming of the knowledge pump ahead of time,
manually, by thoughtful design, this is why we
launched the Cyc project back in 1984 and have
labored at it continuously since then.
Succumbing to Temptation
Our third point was that almost everyone else in
the field has given in to some “lure” or other, and
is following a path at most tangentially related to
building a real HAL-like AI. At the 2006 Spring
Symposium, this was the most candid portion of
my talk, and the most controversial. I had quite a
bit of additional material prepared, but I never got
to it, because the audience began to, shall we say,
discuss this energetically with me and with each
other.
I started this “Succumbing to Temptation” sec-
tion as a sort of “Top 10 Reasons Why Real AI Is
Not Here Yet” list, although there are some extra
items on it now; I guess that’s still 10 in some base.
Let’s count down this list:
12. The Media and the Arts
The media and the arts aren’t always the bad guys,
but they continually bombard the public with
incorrect information about what computers can
and can’t do, what’s hard and what’s not, and so
on. On Star Trek, computers 200 years from now
can perfectly understand speech but not do a good
job synthesizing it (the same asymmetry is found
in Neal Stephenson’s The Diamond Age); Com-
mander Data could parse contractions but never
employ them. People think that HAL-like
machines already exist by now (it is after 2001 after
all) and are concerned about the well-known
inherent tendencies for almost all intelligent
machines to kill either (1) their creators, (2) inno-
cent bystanders, or (3) everyone.6 About every 20
years since world war II, premature announce-
ments sweep the media, announcements of about-
to-be-sold “home robots” that will cook the meals,
mind the baby, mow the lawn, and so on—for
example, Nolan Bushnell’s 1983 Androbot “prod-
uct” BOB (Brains On Board).7 There are frankly so
many examples of media hyperbole that to men-
tion any few of them is to understate the problem.
We in AI are sometimes guilty of feeding the
media’s hunger for extravagant prediction and
periodically pay the price of this by being the sub-
ject of media stories (often equally hyperbolic)
about how project x or approach y or field z is fail-
ing, precipitating periodic AI “winters,” after
which the climate thaws and the whole dysfunc-
tion cycle starts anew. 
Given that sad state of affairs, how has it imped-
ed progress in AI? Primarily in the form of subop-
timal AI research and development funding deci-
sions. Such decisions are sometimes made by
individuals who believe some of the overly positive
or overly negative misinformation, or individuals
who do indeed “know better” but still must answer
to the public—possibly answering indirectly, such
as funding agencies who answer to Congress
(Hulse 2003), whose members in turn answer to
the public, whose state of (mis)information is
shaped by arts and media. 
A charming example of media miscoverage was
mentioned to me the day I gave this talk (March
Articles
SUMMER 2008   13
27, 2006) by Manuela Veloso of Carnegie Mellon
University. Getting a team of robot dogs to play
soccer is an intensely difficult, very real-time
scene-understanding and interagent-coordination
problem that she has spent years tackling. But
what does the media inevitably show (CBS News
2005)? The little victory dance it took 20 minutes
to program (the dance that the goalie robot dog
does when it blocks a shot, getting up on its hind
legs and raising its paws into the air; see figure 1)!
11. Smurifitis
The Smurfs is a cartoon series in which a race of
tiny blue elves employ the word smurf here and
there, to stand in for almost any word—most often
a verb—mostly for cuteness. For example, “Papa,
smurf me up some supper!” In AI, we often become
just as enchanted with some word we’ve made up,
and we keep reusing that word to mean different
things. Some examples: frames, actors, scripts,
slots, facets, rules, agents, explanation, semantics
(this one is particularly ironic), ontology (this
would be the winner if not for semantics), and AI
(okay, perhaps this is actually the winner). In some
cases, we commit the converse mistake: inventing
new words for old concepts. And even worse, both
of these errors intermix: for example, some mean-
ings of actors are equivalent to some meanings of
agents.
Most fields, scientific and otherwise, quickly
learned the value of having the discipline of a
more or less stable sort of terminological base. In
medicine, for example, there are still discussions
and news articles appearing about the September
2000 change of the definition of the term myocar-
dial infarction—a decision deliberated on by and
announced by a joint committee of the American
College of Cardiology and the European Heart
Society. Without this sort of well-founded onto-
logical anchoring, AI research is adrift: researchers
are misled when (1) the same words mean different
things (in different articles), and (2) different
words mean the same (or almost the same) thing.
10. Cognitive Science
Sometimes it’s useful to have a concrete example of
a small, portable, physically embodied intelli-
gence—say, for example, me. Homo sapiens does
indeed stand as a compelling existence proof that
machine intelligence should be possible. Unless
you ascribe some sort of magical, religious, or
quantum-dynamical “soul” to people (and, per-
haps even more strangely, you deny such a thing
to computers). 
Sometimes this analogy is useful: we can be
inspired by biological or cognitive models and
design data structures and algorithms that are
more powerful than the ones we would have come
up with on our own. But at other times, this anal-
ogy is harmful to progress in AI. We take human
limitations too seriously, even when they are the
result of hardware limitations and evolutionary
kludges (as Marvin Minsky is fond of pointing
out). For example, having a short-term memory
size of 7 should not be a design goal for our soft-
ware; only being able to “burn” one fact into long-
term memory every several seconds should not be
a design goal. 
The various translogical phenomena that
humans more or less universally fall prey to,
described above, mostly fall into this category. 
Consider this parable: Aliens come to Earth and
observe a computer (the PC sitting on my desk,
say) as it solves a set of differential equations. They
want to build something that can solve the same
problems (for irony, let’s suppose their alien tech-
nology is mostly biological—tailoring organisms to
produce specialized new organisms that can be
used as tools, weapons, vessels, calculators, what-
ever). They carefully measure the sounds coming
out of the computer, the heat output, the strength
of the air flow from its vent, the specific set of but-
tons on the monitor and the CPU, the fact that the
computer seems to be composed of those two parts
with a flexible cable interconnecting them, and so
on, and they struggle to have all these properties
duplicated by their new organic creations. We
know it’s silly; those properties are merely artifac-
tual. In much the same way, it is quite likely that
many of the properties of the human brain and the
human information-processing system are just as
artifactual, just as beside the point. 
Articles
14
AI MAGAZINE
Courtesy M. Veloso, CMU.
Figure 1. Robocup Soccer Goalie Doing Victory Dance.
And yet so many hours, so many careers, of bril-
liant researchers like Allen Newell and Herb Simon
have been sacrificed to the altar of such verisimili-
tude. Generations of Carnegie Mellon University
graduate students built Pure Production Systems,
with the goal of duplicating the timing delays,
error rates, and so on, of humans (for example, see
Laird and Rosenbloom [1994]). Today we look back
with disdain at ancients who pursued similar sorts
of sympathetic magic rituals, but are we really that
much different? I fear that some of our practices in
faithfully duplicating human cognitive architec-
ture fall under what Richard Feynman dubbed car-
go cult science, with the same faith—part reverence
and part hope—as the deluded South Seas islanders
circa 1946 with their bamboo headphones, metic-
ulously duplicating the form but totally misunder-
standing the functionality, and the salience. 
There is a more serious error that many
researchers make, succumbing to the lure of analo-
gizing too closely to human development. To sum-
marize the reasoning behind that paradigm: sup-
pose we very carefully and faithfully model a
neonate; then that AI “baby” should be able to
learn and grow up just as a human baby does. The
Blue Fairy doesn’t need to intercede to turn it into
a real boy, it will just evolve that way, inevitably, à
la the robots in the movies such as AI and I, Robot. 
I’m not questioning here whether machines can
learn—I know firsthand that they can learn; see
AM and Eurisko (Lenat and Brown 1984). The
question is more one of placing a bet: how much
priming of the pump should go on, versus letting
the computer learn everything on its own? My
point here is that I fear that too many brilliant AI
researchers have placed that bet too far toward the
tabula rasa end of that spectrum, and as a result AI
is not as far along as it could have been by now.
I’ve been working at the opposite end—priming
the pump in the form of building Cyc—for 24 plus
years now, and after 900 person-years of such
effort, we finally, in the last couple years, have
been ready to use it as an inductive bias for learn-
ing. This has led to a dramatic shift in activity at
Cycorp: most of our effort these days goes into uti-
lizing Cyc for machine learning by discovery or by
language understanding and clarification dialogue,
not hand-coding assertions one by one. 
I’ll mention one more error of this analogy-to-
humans sort that has slowed down progress in AI:
an almost mystical worship of physical embodi-
ment. Putting our programs inside a robot with a
tangible, mobile body and seeing it interact with
the real world is great fun. It’s rewarding, like
watching your baby take its first step. There’s noth-
ing wrong with this “situatedness,” exactly—and it
will be required, for instance, when it’s time to
have real home robots that cook, clean, mind the
baby, mow the lawn, and so on—but it is yet one
more potential distraction until we get close to
that goal. 
When reporters visit Cycorp, they frequently ask
to see Cyc’s metallic “body” and are not satisfied
with the answer that it’s just software. They are
sure we are hiding Cyc’s robot body somewhere. As
we take them on a tour of the building, they often
surreptitiously snap photos of our air-conditioning
unit—it’s the only thing in the building that’s very
big, metallic, and has several blinking lights and
levers on it. 
In the 1950s, the term hacker used to refer to
model-railroading enthusiasts, forever tinkering
with their track layouts and engines and such;
there is a bit of that sort of “hacking” going on
with robotics still today. Great fun, but like model
railroading, perhaps best left for after work. Today
there is less of an AI brain drain into this sort of
Embodiment fetishism than there was 10–20 years
ago,8 but integrated out, that is still a serious loss
of forward progress due to this one attractive nui-
sance. 
9. Physics Envy
When I see physics students walking around with
T-shirts that have Maxwell’s Equations on them, or
TOE unified equations on them, I just get so jeal-
ous. Where the hell are our “Maxwell’s Equations
of Thought”? Computer scientists in general are
guilty of this sort of envy, not just AI scientists. If
Jerry Seinfeld ever gives a keynote talk for one of
our conferences, he could lead off with something
like: “Have you ever noticed how fields that are not
quite self-confident about the size of their own sci-
entific credibility often overcompensate by adding
the word science into their name: food science, mil-
itary science, political science, computer science.”
All kidding aside, there is a deeply ingrained belief
in almost all AI researchers that ultimately there
will be some sort of T-shirt with the AI “laws” writ
in large font on it. In recent years this faith in short
answers has been blunted a bit,9 as computing
power has made most mathematics proofs too long
(too many cases) for humans to really do, or even
read, by hand, as the Human Genome Project and
Wikipedia and the ESP game (van Ahn and Dab-
bish 2004) and other massive collaborative efforts
show the power of a vast amount of elbow grease
applied to some problems. But 50 years of “looking
under the lamppost” is the price that our field has
paid—that is, exploring the space of formal mod-
els that meet various academic criteria because
that’s where the light is. That’s what got published,
earned tenure, won awards. I’ll return to this later
on, but it’s one reason so many of us who have
worked on Cyc are either so old, like me, that they
don’t care about basking in that light any more or
so young that they don’t yet need it. 
Articles
SUMMER 2008   15
8. Jerks in Funding
The problem has not been the quality of the indi-
viduals making these decisions10 but rather the
inevitable up-and-down nature of the funding
streams themselves. As a former physics student, I
remember that the first, second, and third deriva-
tives of position with respect to time are termed
velocity, acceleration, and jerk.11 Not only are
there changes in funding of AI research and devel-
opment (velocity), and changes in the rate of
change of funding (acceleration), there are often
big changes in the rate of those accelerations year
by year—hence what I meant by jerks in funding. 
One of the unfortunate trends of the past 15
years is the gradual downward trend in many
funding streams (especially U.S. ones): smaller
awards, shorter awards, ones where the program
itself ends earlier than it was originally slated to,
and ones contingent on winning head-to-head
“bake-offs.” In general it’s good to have perform-
ance milestones, but coupled with the other
changes, this translates into a larger and larger frac-
tion of an investigator’s time going to keeping the
funding balls in the air. Many of the funding
sources have very targeted programs, which means
that if one’s goal is to build a general AI, one must
tack like a sailboat does with (or against) the fund-
ing winds. That is, only a fraction of the wind pow-
er—the funding dollars—for such a project is har-
nessed to move the research forward toward AI; the
other component moves it orthogonally to that
direction, orthogonally to progress toward Big AI.
Year after year.
7. Academic Inbreeding
Numerous AI paradigms formed—and persist—
with concomitant impact on everything from
funding decisions, to hiring and promotion deci-
sions, to peer review. Each paradigm collectively
and perhaps unconsciously decides what problems
are valid to work on, what data sets to use, what
methods are acceptable, and so on. These cliques
often run their own workshops and conferences,
hire each other’s students, accept each other’s
paper submissions, and conversely don’t do those
things with outsiders, with those not in that
clique. I could cite very concrete examples—okay,
yes some we are guilty of with Cyc, too—but my
point is that this is happening throughout AI and
to some extent throughout academia. Thomas
Kuhn (1962) and many others have bemoaned
this—it’s not a new phenomenon, but it remains
an albatross around our necks. Let me give one AI-
specific example.
In 1980, Bob Balzer and a few dozen of us came
together in a sort of “caucus” to form AAAI, to
combat the trend we were seeing at IJCAI confer-
ences: the trend where there would be so many
tracks that you never ended up hearing any pre-
sentations outside your subarea. One of our defin-
ing constraints was that there would only be one
track at an AAAI conference, ever, so everyone
could go to every talk and hear about the latest,
best work in every subfield of AI, in every paradigm
of every subfield. So what happened? Track creep.
Today there are multiple tracks at almost all the
large conferences, and there are a plethora of
small, specialized workshops and conferences, and
we as a field are back at the same degree of isola-
tion (among the subfields of AI) or worse than we
were in 1980.
Academe contributes another retarding factor
on achieving real AI, in the form of publication in
journals. This is a slow, “old-boy” process, but even
worse it often enables researchers to produce one
or two working examples, document them, and
then wave their hands about how this will gener-
alize, scale up, and so on. As I remarked earlier, this
leads to the strange situation where there are
10,000 peer-reviewed AI articles that talk about
how one or another technique is working and
great progress has been made, and yet year by year,
decade by decade, we still aren’t much closer to
producing a real AI. 
6. The Need for Individuation
Abraham Maslow might predict that after satisfy-
ing our survival and safety needs (like point 8) and
our belongingess needs (like point 7), we would
begin to work on satisfying our self-esteem needs—
the need for individuation, self-respect, and
respect of our peers—and then finally we would
turn to work on satisfying our self-actualization
need, the drive to bring real AI into existence. This
point, 6, is all about how frequently we get stuck
on the self-esteem needs and don’t get to the self-
actualization need. 
As an undergraduate or graduate student (at
least here in America), we each want and need to
distinguish ourself from our classmates. As a Ph.D.
student, we want our thesis to be clearly distin-
guished not only from other theses but from any
work going on more broadly by our advisor or at
our lab generally. As an assistant professor, we
want to publish enough, and have those articles be
clearly enough differentiated from everyone else’s
work, that we will get professional respect and
tenure. As a tenured professor or career researcher
within a company or agency, we want to publish
and run research teams and laboratories that have
their own unique character and focus, to enhance
our reputation, to garner more peer respect, and to
enable or facilitate continued funding.
The problem is that all these self-esteem urges
make it difficult to run large, coordinated AI proj-
ects: the students won’t be there too long and
don’t want to become a cog in a big machine. The
assistant professors can’t afford to work on projects
Articles
16
AI MAGAZINE
where they’ll publish just one article every decade
(even if it’s a seminal Gödelesque one) or else
they’ll be out of a job, so they had better work on
a project that will conclude or have a phase that
concludes and can be written up in months,
maybe one year tops. And so on up the line. 
That was okay when the world was young, in the
1960s and 1970s, when AI projects could pluck
low-hanging fruit (Feigenbaum and Feldman 1963,
Minsky 1968). Most AI doctoral theses took a year
or so of work and included the full source code as
an appendix—often just a few pages long. Those
small projects were exactly the right ones to do, at
the time. Since then, the projects driving progress
in AI have grown in size, so that they no longer fit
the “isolated Ph.D. student working for a year on
their thesis” model, or the “professor and two stu-
dents working for nine months” model. The mod-
els still persist, rather, but the optimality of the
projects that fit those models has declined. Take
this test: imagine you could work on any path to AI
you wanted, you could have any size staff, any
duration before you had to deliver something,
what would you choose? This is not just a case of
bigger is better, this is a case of us no longer work-
ing on the right problems, any more, to bring
about AI as expeditiously as possible. At least not
real AI, in our lifetime. In my lifetime.
5. Automated Evolution
And, more generally, the problem of Scaling Down
Too Much. There are several variations of “throw-
ing the baby out with the bathwater,” scaling
down so much that one may still appear to be—
and believe that one is—solving problem X but
actually is now solving problem Y. We’ll return to
this theme again in point 4 later on. 
One of the approaches that some researchers
have pursued, to get to an AI, is to let it emerge
through a generate-and-test process akin to bio-
logical evolution: the generator is random muta-
tion (of code, or of a feature vector that represents
the organism’s genome), and the test is natural
selection, competition with other mutant organ-
isms for resources in a simulated world. The muta-
tion process itself can be guided or constrained in
various ways; for example, the only offspring
allowed might be those that get half of their fea-
ture vector from one existing individual and the
other half from a second individual, thereby emu-
lating sexual reproduction. Or the mutation
process can involve duplicating feature elements
(akin to gene duplication) and then mutating the
new copy.
One of the earliest serious approaches of this
sort was done in the mid-1960s by Larry Fogel,
Alvin Owens, and Mike Walsh.12 An even earlier
attempt to get programs to evolve to meet an
input/output (I/O) “spec”13 was done at IBM in the
1950s by Robert Friedberg, in which 64-step
machine-language programs were mutated until
the resulting program met the I/O spec. The most
recent instances of this paradigm include of course
A-Life, genetic algorithms (for example, Holland
[1975]), simulated annealing, and all their descen-
dants.
One problem that many of these techniques suf-
fer from is that they tend to get stuck on local max-
ima. In the case of evolving a program to tell
whether a number is prime or not, the program
synthesis system that Cordell Green and I did in
1973 kept getting stuck on the local maximum of
storing small prime numbers and then saying No
for every other input. Friedberg found the same
annoying stumbling block: for many I/O specs, it
was faster to randomize the entire machine lan-
guage program until a solution was found than it
was to try to hill-climb to a solution by making one
small change after another!14
So why have I listed this as an impeding factor?
These programs show very promising behavior on
small examples, and this leads one to believe that
there will be some way for them to scale up. By a
“small example” here I mean one in which the
search space to evolve through is relatively small
and highly parameterized even though the scope
of the real-world problem might be enormous—
for example, combating a global pandemic. One
of the problems with many of these algorithms is
that their computational complexity goes up
exponentially with the length of the program, fea-
ture vector, and so on to be modified or learned.
More generally, many AI researchers pursue tech-
niques— whether they be in parsing, robotics,
machine learning—that work on small problems,
hence lead to great publishable papers, but just
won’t scale up.
As a graduate student, I saw firsthand several
robotics “solutions” of this sort: Is the robot’s hand
too shaky to put the nut on the bolt? File the bolts
to a point, so that level of shakiness or visual inac-
curacy can be overcome. Is the contrast not high
enough for the computer vision system to distin-
guish part A from part B? Paint them each a differ-
ent bright color. Is parallax not working well
enough? Draw a grid of known square sizes and ref-
erence marks on each part and on the table on
which they sit. Are the two robotic arms colliding
too much? Turn one off. Yes, these are extreme
examples, but they are also real examples, from
one single year, from one single famous lab. This
sort of scaling down and corner cutting happens
very often in AI, with the researchers (and their
students, reviewers, and so on) often not even real-
izing that they have transformed the problem into
one that superficially resembles the original task
but is in fact vastly simpler to solve. That brings us
to point 4.
Articles
SUMMER 2008   17
4. More Overscaling-Down: 
Automated Learning
One example of that unconscious transformation
of a hard problem into a simple one that appears
just as hard is the work done in machine learning,
and to be as harsh on myself as anyone else, I’ll
pick on the automated discovery work done in the
1970s and early 1980s. I had good company falling
into this trap—Tom Mitchell, Pat Langley (1977),
Herb Simon, and others. In Lenat and Brown
(1984), which I mentioned before, we analyzed the
sources of power that our programs were tapping
into. To the extent that such programs appear to
discover things, they are largely discharging poten-
tial energy that was stored in them (often uncon-
sciously) by their creator. Potential energy in the
form of a set of perfect data. Potential energy in the
form of a set of prechosen variables to try to find a
“law” interrelating. Potential energy in the form of
knowing before it even begins that the program
will succeed to find a “law” if it searches for a low-
order polynomial as the answer, as the form that
the law would take (a linear or quadratic or cubic
equation connecting that set of perfect data about
a perfectly selected set of variables). This changes
the search space from breathtakingly large and
impressive to, well, a bit small and shabby. It
changes the nature of what these learning pro-
grams did from recreating a monumental concep-
tual leap of science to something more like run-
ning a cubic spline curve-fitting algorithm. As
Michael Gorman (1987) says, this species of pro-
gram “merely searches for quantitative relation-
ships between arbitary terms supplied by the pro-
grammers, who interpret its results to be
‘discoveries’ of Kepler’s third law. One feels they
have missed the point of Kepler’s genius entirely.” 
Arthur Koestler and many others have observed
that learning occurs just at the fringe of what one
already knows. One learns a new thing, which is
an extension, combination, refinement of two or
three things that one already knows. To put this in
a positive way: the more one knows, the more one
can learn. This has certainly been the case at a soci-
etal level, in terms of technological progress. But
the negative way to think of this is: If you (a pro-
gram) know more or less nothing, then it’s going
to be a slow and painful process to learn almost
anything. To the extent that our programs (AM,
BACON, Eurisko, and others) knew—and AI pro-
grams today still know—next to nothing, the most
we could do is to get them to learn or appear to
learn very simple things indeed.
The reason that this is on the top-12 list is that
there is a kind of chicken-and-egg problem going
on here. On the one hand, we want to produce an
AI as automatically as possible; we want it to dis-
cover most of what it knows on its own, not be
hand-coded. On the other hand, since learning
occurs at the fringe of what the learner already
knows, if we start the learner out bereft of knowl-
edge then it isn’t going to get to human-level
knowledge and reasoning capabilities very quickly,
say before the recollapse or entropic heat death of
the universe, which is a special case of not getting
there in my lifetime.
3. Natural Language Understanding
The problem of understanding natural language
(NL) is another chicken-and-egg one. On the one
hand, our real AI must be able to surf the web, read
books, carry on conversations, tutor and be
tutorable, and so on—things that human beings
primarily do through natural language. On the
other hand, as we saw above (with numerous
examples involving resolving polysemy, anaphora,
ambiguous prepositional phrase attachment,
noun-noun phrases,15 interpreting metaphor and
analogy, recognizing irony and sarcasm, and so on)
understanding the next sentence one reads or
hears might require almost any piece (out of many
many millions) of prior presumed knowledge.16
One of the reasons this impediment is on my list
is that AI researchers—NL researchers—have
watered down the problem to the point where they
“succeed” on every project, and yet natural lan-
guage understanding of the sort we need is not
here, nor is it, frankly, just around the corner yet.
They talk about parsing an English sentence into
logical form, for example, but then turn out to
mean transforming it into something that struc-
turally, syntactically fits the definition of “in logi-
cal form.” As a caricature: add parentheses at the
very start and end of the sentence, and declare suc-
cess. So what do I17 mean for a set of English sen-
tences to be semantically represented in logical
form, then? I mean that a theorem prover could
produce the same set of answers (to queries whose
answers were entailed by those sentences) that a
person would, who has just read those sentences.
Or, if placed in a situation where some of that
knowledge could form (part of) a solution to a
problem, a program could deduce or induce that
relevance and correctly apply that knowledge to
that (sub)problem.18
The reason this is so near the number-1 spot on
my top-12 list is that the potential gain from solv-
ing this problem, from dragging this mattress out
of the road, is enormous. Given the Internet and
the ubiquity of cellular telephones and the propen-
sity for people to play games such as ESP (von Ahn
and Dabbish 2004), even by today’s technology
standards there is a huge amount of static text and
dialogue available. The long tail of the distribution
is here—the distribution of what an intelligent
program should either already know or, like us,
should be able to quickly find (and understand) on
the web. Peter Norvig and others have been point-
Articles
18
AI MAGAZINE
ing this out for years; let’s start listening to them.
2. We Can Live without It
This is in many ways the most insidious roadblock
to AI. Let me give a few examples.
When computer games like Adventure and Zork
and the Infocom games were developing, they
were a strong driving force for better and better
natural language understanding, a steady wind.
But then, game designers found that players would
settle for clicking on a small menu of possible dia-
logue responses. So that motive force—fiscal and
otherwise—atrophied. Game designers also found
that players could be seduced into playing games
where everyone around them had been killed,
turned into zombies, mysteriously vanished, or for
some other reason there was no one to talk with
in-game. It seems most video games today are of
this “everything is loot or prey or else has one
small menu of things to say” sort. Or they are mas-
sively multiplayer online role-playing games
(MMORPGs), where most of the characters one
encounters are avatars of other living, breathing
human beings—artificial artificial intelligence, like
the Mechanical Turk (both the 18th-century
“device” and the recently launched Amazon.com
microjob site). 
When a person goes to the web with some ques-
tion, that person would really like to be able to just
type it in and get back an answer. Period. But by
now the public has been conditioned to put up
with simple keyword searching (most people don’t
even use Boolean operators in their searches).
Some sites such as ask.com have recognized the
need to provide answers, not just hits, but even
they are still mostly just serving up keyword
matches. For example, if you ask “Is the Eiffel Tow-
er taller than the Space Needle?” you get a set of
pages that are relevant to the query, but you must
then go and read enough of them to figure out the
respective heights and do the arithmetic yourself
to answer the question.
Microsoft Word 2007 has lots of great new fea-
tures, but when I misspell a word like miss as moss,
or like as lake, it doesn’t catch that error. Later on,
I will talk about the history of the Boston Com-
puter Museum. Actually I don’t do that, but Word
doesn’t call my attention to this omission. Why
doesn’t Microsoft improve its spelling-checking, its
grammar- and style-checking, and add some sim-
ple content-checking (for blatant omissions and
inconsistencies)? Because it doesn’t have to: We all
buy and use Word, and we use it the way it is; we
can and do live without it even partially under-
standing what we’re writing in it, Just as we all can
and do live with keyword-matching search
engines. Just as we can and do live with “loot or
prey or small menu” game worlds.
The decades-away dreams of the future that
Arthur C. Clarke sculpted and Bill Rowley remi-
nisced about are still decades away, and to first
order I lay the blame right here, with impediment
2—that is, that we all just put up with it, we put up
with far less than cutting-edge machine intelli-
gence in our applications. 
1. There Is One Piece Missing
For decades, I’ve concluded this talk with a descrip-
tion of how all the various subfields of AI keep hit-
ting the same brick wall: no general ontology of
concepts, no general corpus of rules, assertions,
axioms, and so on about those concepts (and inter-
relating or defining or constraining them, attached
to that ontological skeleton). The main change
today compared to the 1984 version of this rant is
that these days I more rarely have to explain what
an ontology is. I usually conclude by talking about
how we’re putting our money and our profession-
al lives where our mouth is: leaving academe,
buckling down to “prime the pump” manually,
having a small army of logicians handcrafting Cyc
down in Texas.
In a way, this might sound like the counterargu-
ment to points 4 and 5; namely, here we are saying
that the world does have a lot of special cases in it,
worth treating specially—axiomatizing or writing
special-purpose reasoning modules for. Engineer-
ing is the key: the resolution of the apparent con-
tradiction between point 1 and points 4 and 5 is
that building an AI needs to be thought of as a
large-scale engineering project. As Shapiro and
Goker put it (in a private communication to me),
the lesson is that researchers should build systems,
and design approaches, that merge theory with
empirical data, that merge science with large-scale
engineering, that merge general methods with an
Articles
SUMMER 2008   19
12. The Media and the Arts
11. Smurifitis
10. Cognitive Science
9. Physics Envy
8. Jerks in Funding
7. Academic Inbreeding
6. The Need for Individuation
5. Automated Evolution
4. More Overscaling-Down: Automated Learning
3. Natural Language Understanding
2. We Can Live without It
1. There Is One Piece Missing
Top 12 Reasons Why Real AI Is Not Here Yet.
immense battery of special-case facts, rules of
thumb, and reasoners.
While Cyc is still far from complete, the good
news is that it is complete enough that it is worth
leveraging, and we have made it available at no
cost for research and development purposes as
ResearchCyc (courtesy of DARPA IPTO), and we
have made its underlying ontology available at no
cost even for commercial purposes as OpenCyc. If
you’ve read this far, you probably already know
what Cyc is, but if not, take a look at cyc.com. I’m
not going to talk about it more here. We’re far
enough along that we have a much smaller frac-
tion of logicians on our staff who are manually
extending Cyc and a much larger number of
researchers and developers on our staff who are
applying it and automatically extending it, using it
for natural language understanding and genera-
tion, and using its existing ontology and content
as an inductive bias in learning. 
In one of our current applications, Cyc is used to
help parse queries by medical researchers and to
answer those queries by integrating information
that originally was in separate databases (whose
schemas have been mapped to Cyc, an inherently
linear rather than quadratic process). We had
hoped that we could show that the number of gen-
eral preapplication Cyc assertions used in doing a
typical user query was at least 4 or 5; even we were
stunned to find that that number averaged 1,800. 
Conclusions
Building an AI of necessity means developing sev-
eral components of cognition, and it’s only natu-
ral for us as a field to pursue these in parallel. But
specialized AI workshops test the individual
strands, not so much whether we are making
progress towards AI—in effect they are one way we
avoid having to take that higher-order test. Telling
oneself that AI is too hard, and that the first order
results and application “raisins” are what matter, is
another way of avoiding taking the tests. I was
heartbroken to see the whole field retreat in about
Articles
20
AI MAGAZINE
You Recommended What?
John Riedl
S
ome years ago Net Perceptions was installing its recommender software in a major catalog retailer. Our top
lead consultant had been working with them for months to integrate the software into their back-end data-
bases and front-end call center software (no mean feat: these were Windows PCs simulating IBM “green
screens”!), and tuning the recommender to produce high quality recommendations that were successful against
historical sales data. The recommendations were designed to be delivered in real time to the call center agents
during live inbound calls. For instance, if the customer ordered the pink housecoat, the recommender might sug-
gest the fuzzy pink slippers to go with it, based on prior sales experience. 
The company was ready for a big test: our lead consultant was standing behind one of the call center agents,
watching her receive calls. Then the moment came: the IT folk at the company pushed the metaphoric big red
button and switched her over to the automated recommender system. The first call came in: a woman ordered
the complete two-week diet package: a self-contained package with all the powdered food you needed to eat and
drink to lose 10 pounds in just two weeks. Our consultant watched nervously as the agent entered the order. In
seconds, the recommendations came back. The top of the list was a a 5-pound tinned ham! The agent’s eyes were
wide as she looked at the screen. She looked back at our consultant with eyebrows raised: should I? He smiled
nervously, and gave her his best “I have no idea” shrug. 
After a couple of seconds of silence, her training kicked in: “Would you like a tinned ham with that?” With-
out missing a beat, the woman on the other end replied, “Sure, that would be great!” 
We eventually won the contract, probably in spite of recommending hams to customers who wanted to go
on a diet. 
John Riedl is a professor in the Department of Computer Science at the University of Minnesota.
1993 (Crevier 1993) from the “strong
AI” goal to weak echoes of it, to what
Patrick Hayes and Pat Winston and
Esther Dyson and others call the
“raisin bread” notion of AI: instead of
aiming high at human-level AI, aim at
something we can hit, like embedding
little tiny flickers of intelligence here
and there in applications like Room-
bas, where the AI is analogous to the
raisins in raisin bread. 
Don’t settle for that! We have
enough tools today—yes, they can be
improved, but stop tinkering with
them and start really using them. Let’s
build pieces that fit together to form
an AI(Lenat and Feigenbaum 1991)
(not write articles about components
that one day in the far future could in
theory fit together to form an AI). A
real AI could amplify humans’ intelli-
gence, and thereby humanity’s intelli-
gence, in much the same way—and to
the same degree if not more—than
electric power (and the ensuing stream
of appliances using it) amplified
human muscle power one century
ago. We all have access to virtually
limitless, fast machine cycles, virtually
limitless Internet (and online volun-
teers), and ResearchCyc. Use those
tools, recapture the dream that
brought you to AI, the dream that
brought me to AI, and let’s make it
happen. 
On the one hand, my message is: Be
persistent. Twenty-four years of per-
sistence with Cyc has brought it to the
point where it is just starting to be har-
nessed to do somewhat intelligent
things reliably and broadly. A similar
positive ant vs. grasshopper lesson
could be drawn from decades of work
on handwriting recognition, on rec-
ommender systems, and other blos-
soming components of AI. The other
part of the message is to take advan-
tage of what’s going on around you—
the web, semantic web, Wikipedia,
SNA, OpenCyc and ResearchCyc,
knowledge acquisition through games
(Matuszek 2005), and so on and so on
and so on. These are tools; ignoring
them, staying in your safe paradigm,
tinkering with yet one more tool, will
delay us getting to AI. In my lifetime.
Use them, and keep your eye out for
the next tools, so you can make use of
them as soon as possible.
Is what you’re working on going to
lead to the first real AI on this planet?
If not, try to recapture the dream that
got you into this field in the first place,
figure out what you can do to help
realize that dream, and do it.
Yes, I know, this has turned out to
be yet one more AI article with a hope-
ful, positive conclusion; don’t say I
didn’t warn you. 
Acknowledgements
I thank Ed Feigenbaum, Bruce
Buchanan, Alan Kay, Marvin Minsky,
John McCarthy, Allen Newell, Herb
Simon, and George Polya for shaping
my thinking about AI and instilling in
me the tenacity to keep pursuing one’s
hypotheses until and unless Nature—
empirical results—tells you that (and
how) you’re wrong. I thank Mehmet
Goker, Mary Shepherd, Dan Shapiro,
and Michael Witbrock for many wise
and useful comments on this article,
but they should not be held—what am
I saying, go ahead and give them a
hard time—for anything you don’t
like in it. 
Notes
1. As a gimmick, Pan American World Air-
lines (PanAm) and Trans World Airlines
(TWA) started taking reservations for those
2001 spaceflights back in 1968, shortly
after the Apollo 11 landing; as an American
teenager growing up in the midst of the
Space Race, I signed up right away. 
2. From “The Future Is Not What It Used to
Be” by Admiral William Rawley, 1995
(www.maxwell.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/
awc-ofut.htm).
3. It was accepted by and appeared in the AI
Journal in 1984 as “Why AM and EURISKO
Appear to Work.” 
4. Turing’s original motivation for this was
probably the “game” of Allied and Axis
pilots and ground stations each trying to
fool the enemy into thinking they were
friendlies in World War II. Somewhat
creepily, many humans today in effect play
this game each day: men trying to “crash”
women-only chatrooms, pedophiles pre-
tending online to be 10-year-olds, and so
on. 
5. Not a footnote; Etc. to the fifth power,
for dramatic emphasis, given the many
millions of additional bits of knowledge
that are needed to understand a single text,
for example this morning’s entire New York
Times.
Articles
SUMMER 2008   21
6. Most people who’ve read or watched
2001: A Space Odyssey—even most AI
researchers—don’t know that Marvin Min-
sky and Arthur C. Clarke made HAL’s
actions be logical, understandable, and
hence tragic in the dramatic sense. HAL
had been ordered to never lie to the crew,
but then (just before launch) it was given
the contradictory order to lie to the Jupiter
crew about their true mission. Tragically,
HAL deduced a mathematically elegant
solution: just kill the entire Jupiter crew,
after which HAL would neither have to lie
to them nor not lie to them! HAL just had-
n’t been told that killing someone is worse
than lying to them.
7. See the poignant brochures and the var-
ious “in the media” links at www.smallro-
bot.com/androbot.html. 
8. See www.geocities.com/fastiland/embo-
di ment.html for examples of several flavors
of this belief. For example,  from Seitz
(2000): “We do not simply inhabit our bod-
ies; we literally use them to think with.”
9. Today’s variant of this is to believe that
even if the answer is not short and simple, a
short, simple, elegant algorithm plus fast
enough hardware will lead to AI. Then we
can at least fit that algorithm on the T-shirt.
10. Though to borrow from one of my
favorite Dan Quayle-isms, a cynic might
point out that half of all the people
involved in making AI funding decisions
are below the median! But so are the
researchers…. 
11. The fourth derivative is called snap,
which has no relevance to this discussion
but could go on some sort of T-shirt no
doubt. The fifth and sixth are called crack-
le and pop, a joke because the fourth deriv-
ative is called snap. 
12. As they said, “Computer technology is
now entering a new phase, one in which it
will no longer be necessary to specify exact-
ly how the problem is to be solved. Instead,
it will only be necessary to provide an exact
statement of the problem in terms of a
‘goal’ and the ‘allowable expenditure,’ in
order to allow the evolution of a best pro-
gram by the available computation facili-
ty.” For a good survey of recent work in this
paradigm, see Evolutionary Computation by
Larry’s son David Fogel.
13. Given a specification of {(3, 13.5) (1,
0.5) (10, 500)}, one “very fit” program
cubes its input and divides by 2.
14. Simulated annealing was an attempt to
recover from this bad situation, by occa-
sionally making large leaps from (hopeful-
ly) one “hill” to a separate and possibly
higher “hill.”
15. For example, is a “computer doctor”
someone who diagnoses and fixes comput-
ers or an automated physician?
1966. Artificial Intelligence through Simulated
Evolution. New York: Wiley.
Friedberg, R. M. 1958. A Learning Machine.
IBM Journal of Research and Development
2(1): 2–13.
Genova, J. 1994. Turing’s Sexual Guessing
Game. Journal of Social Epistemology 8(4):
313–326.
Gorman, M. E. 1987. Will the Next Kepler
Be a Computer? Science & Technology Studies
5(2): 63–65.
Guccione, S., and Tamburrini, G. 1988. Tur-
ing’s Test Revisited. In Proceedings of the
1998 IEEE International Conference on Sys-
tems, Man and Cybernetics, Vol. 1. Beijing
and Shenyang, China, 38–41. Piscataway,
NJ: Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers.
Holland, J. H. 1975. Adaptation in Natural
and Artificial Systems: An Introductory Analy-
sis with Applications to Biology, Control, and
Artificial Intelligence. Ann Arbor, MI: Uni-
versity of Michigan Press.
Hulse, C. 2003. Pentagon Abandons Plan
for Futures Market on Terror. The New York
Times, Washington Section, July 29.
(www.nytimes.com/2003/07/29/politics/2
9WIRE-PENT.html?ex=1374897600&en=
61db3b09007fa0a3&ei=5007).
Kuhn, T. 1962. The Structure of Scientific Rev-
olutions. Chicago, Il.: University of Chicago
Press.
Laird, J. E., and Rosenbloom, P. 1994. The
Evolution of the Soar Cognitive Architec-
ture. In Mind Matters: A Tribute to Allen
Newell, ed. D. Steir and T. Mitchell. Mah-
wah, NJ: Erlbaum and Associates.
Langley, P. 1977. BACON: A Production
System That Discovers Empirical Laws. In
Proceedings of the Fifth International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Cam-
bridge. Los Altos, CA: William Kaufmann
Inc.
Lenat, D. B., and Brown, J. S. 1984. Why
AM and EURISKO Appear to Work. Artificial
Intelligence 23(3): 269–294
Lenat, D. B., and Feigenbaum, E. A. 1991.
On the Threshold of Knowledge. Artificial
Intelligence 47(1): 185–250.
Matuszek, C.; Witbrock, M.; Kahlert, R.;
Cabral, J.; Schneider, D.; Shah, P.; and
Lenat, D. B. 2005. Searching for Common
Sense: Populating Cyc from the Web. In
Proceedings of the Twentieth National Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, Pittsburgh.
Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press.
Minsky, M., ed. 1968. Semantic Information
Processing. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Rosenschein, S. J., and Shieber, S. M. 1982.
Translating English into Logical Form. In
Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Meeting
on Association For Computational Linguistics.
Toronto: University of Toronto.
Seitz, J. 2000. The Bodily Basis of Thought.
New Ideas in Psychology: An International
Journal of Innovative Theory in Psychology
18(1): 23–40.
Stork, D., ed. 1996 HAL’s Legacy: 2001’s
Computer as Dream and Reality. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Turing, A. M. 1950. Computing Machinery
and Intelligence. Mind 59(236): 433–460.
(www.loebner.net/Prizef/TuringArticle.html). 
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. 1983.
Extensional Versus Intuitive Reasoning:
The Conjunction Fallacy in Probability
Judgment. Psychological Review 90(4): 293–
315.
Wells, H. G. 1895. The Time Machine: An
Invention. London: Heinemann.
Doug Lenat has worked in diverse parts of
AI—natural language understanding and
generation, automatic program synthesis,
expert systems, machine learning, and so
on—for going on 40 years now, just long
enough to dare to write this article. His
1976 Stanford Ph.D. dissertation, AM,
demonstrated that creative discoveries in
mathematics could be produced by a com-
puter program (a theorem proposer, rather
than a theorem prover) guided by a corpus
of hundreds of heuristic rules for deciding
which experiments to perform and judging
“interestingness” of their outcomes. That
work earned him the IJCAI Computers and
Thought Award and sparked a renaissance
in machine-learning research. Lenat was on
the computer science faculties at Carnegie
Mellon University and Stanford, was one of
the founders of Teknowledge, and was in
the first batch of AAAI Fellows. He worked
with Bill Gates and Nathan Myhrvold to
launch Microsoft Research Labs, and to this
day he remains the only person to have
served on the technical advisory boards of
both Apple and Microsoft. Since 1984, he
and his team have been constructing,
experimenting with, and applying a broad
real-world knowledge base and reasoning
engine, collectively “Cyc.” For 10 years he
did this as the principal scientist of the
Microelectronics and Computer Technolo-
gy Corporation (MCC) and since 1994 as
the chief executive officer of Cycorp. He is
on the technical advisory board of TTI Van-
guard, and his interest and experience in
national security has led him to regularly
consult for several U.S. agencies and the
White House. He edits the Journal of Applied
Artificial Intelligence and the Journal of
Applied Ontology and has authored three
books, almost 100 refereed articles, and one
almost-refereed article, namely this one. 
16. By prior presumed knowledge, I mean
something that the speaker or author can
reasonably expect the listener or reader to
already know because it has recently been
discussed, because of the intended audi-
ence, because of personal knowledge they
have about the listener or reader such as
their age, job, place of birth, having a Texas
driver’s license, being a Gold member of
the American Airlines Advantage program,
standing at a bus stop, wearing a Cubs base-
ball cap, and so on. This also includes more
or less all of what is called common sense—
if you turn your glass of water upside
down, the water will fall out, for example.
17. Others have said similar things far more
diplomatically. See for example Rosen-
schein and Shieber (1982). 
18. This is one place where vast amounts of
raw computational cycles, as is going on in
your brain as you read this sentence, might
turn out to be a necessity, not a luxury.
Thus hardware might be a limiting factor
to AI. But not a simple 1000x speedup, else
where is the “real AI” that functions in
1000x real-time today?
1. In a private communication to me in
2007.
References
Ahn, L. v., and Dabbish, L. 2004. Labeling
Images with a Computer Game. In Proceed-
ings of the 2004 Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, CHI 2004, Vienna,
Austria. New York: Association for Com-
puting Machinery.
Brown, J. S., and Van Lehn, K. 1980. Repair
Theory: A Generative Theory of Bugs in
Procedural Skills. Cognitive Science 4(4):
379–426.
CBS News. 2005. “Pentagon Goes to the
Robotic Dogs,” July 21. (www.cbsnews.
com/stories/2005/07/21/eveningnews/mai
n710795.shtml).
Chapman, G. B., and Malik, M. 1995. The
Attraction Effect in Prescribing Decisions
and Consumer Choice. Medical Decision
Making 15: 414ff. 
Crevier, D. 1993. The Tumultuous History of
the Search for Artificial Intelligence. New
York: Basic Books. 
Gleim, V. 2001. New Definition May
Increase Number of Heart Attack Cases.
The University Record, University of Michi-
gan, Ann Arbor, MI. (www.umich.edu/~
urecord/0001/Apr02_01/13.htm).
Feigenbaum, E., and Feldman, J., eds. 1963.
Computers 
and 
Thought. 
New 
York:
McGraw-Hill.
Fogel, D. 2005 Evolutionary Computation:
Toward a New Philosophy of Machine Intelli-
gence. New York: Wiley.
Fogel, L. J., Owens, A. J., and Walsh, M. J.
Articles
22
AI MAGAZINE
