XIV/1
Interactive Information Processing,
Retrieval, 
and Transfer
J.C.R. Licklider
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This paper was prepared under the aegis of Project MAC, 
supported by the Advanced Research
Projects Agency through the Office of Naval Research under Contract Nonr-4102 (01). 
In addition to
some of the work of Project MAC, the paper describes some of the work of Project TIP and Project INTREX.
Project TIP is supported by the National Science Foundation under Research Grant GN-589. 
Project
INTREX is supported in part by a grant from the Carnegie Corporation, in part by Contract NSF-C472
from the National Science Foundation, and in part by the Council on Library Resources, Inc.
INTERACTIVE INFORMATION PROCESSING
By far the greatest part of the experience in interacting directly with computers comes not from
experiments in information retrieval or transfer but from use of computers in preparing computer
programs and in solving scientific and engineering problems. 
The earliest digital computers were
programmed on line, and there has always been a bit of on-line-programming and "debugging"
(elimination o-ý program errors), but not until the advent of multi-access computing, based on the
technique of "time sharing", was it possible for large numbers of people to work as a matter of course,
day after day, at somputer consoles. 
Now there are several hundred experienced console users at M.I.T.
and many times thLt number elsewhere.
The most widely usad interactive computer systems are two almost identical systems using IBM 7094
computers and a supervisory program called the 'Compatible Time-Sharing System". 
Connected through a
telephone switchboard to the 7094 computers are about 2C0 consoles. 
Most of the consoles are merely
typewriters, 
I shall assume that your console is a typewriter. 
What you do first depends upon the
kind of work you have before you. 
The most trivial thing to do --- 
and therefore a good .ntroductory
task --- 
is to write a memorandum. 
The computer will make it easy for you to correct typing mistakes
and to effect editorial corrections, and then type out a "clean copy" of your memo.
You call the writing and editing program tyset by typing "typset", and then you type the name
you want to give the file you are going to create --- for example, "jsmith".
The computer then types '"W1720.2" (whicn means "Wait a moment." and "It is now 2/10 of a second
past 17:20 o'clock.") and then "ROCOO.2+CCO.1" 
(which means "Ready" and "You have thus far used 2/10
second of processor time and 1/10 second of drum-core transfer tine.") and then "Intit" (which means
"I am r-ady for input from you.") 
You start to type the memorandums
To: 
J. 11. 
SmittA
.space
Subjczk:
@Subject: 
Plans for Improvement of planning Strategy
.space
Next Tuesday is the last day for J##to submit your ideas
Tha character :/) ordinarily means to erase a character. 
The character (@) ordinarily means to
erase a line. 
The control word ".space" means to skip a line. 
Your memorandum therefor stands ass
To: 
J. R. Smith
Subject: 
Plans for Improvement of )lanning Strategy
Next Tuesday is the last doy to submit your ideas
You notice that you forgot to give the date and that you need to capitalize the "p" in "planning".
i'o go into "edit mode", you press the carriage return key twice. 
The computer thereupon types "Edit".
You are supposed, of course, to know the control words (or characters), only a few of which appear in
this example. 
You type; 
"1 Dates 
June 15, 
1968" (the "%' meaning "insert"), press the carriage-
return key, and then, for format control, type ".space". 
Then, realizing that ye' want to center the
date, vo'i type "t" (for "go to the top of the file") and".center" (for "center the next line").
In order to capitalize the "p" in "planning", you type "I plan" (for "%ocate the character string
'plan'") and "c /plan/Flan" (which changes "planning" to "Planning") and presb the carriage-return
kay twice to )o back to the input asdoe and complete your memo.
And when you have completed the typing --- 
and have corrected all your mistakes --- 
you file the
memo by typiri 
"file Jbsmith". 
The computer types "Wl735.1" and thar. `RC113 + XA,." 
You type
"runoff 
sasith", 
The computer waits for Yov to put a fresh sheet of paper into the typewriter.
You press tna carriage-return key. 
ccmp.-'ter types the memo perfectly at 15 characters per secori.
-
.. 
.
.
.
-- 
-t.-.... ..... 
.
• 
.
... 
. - ~.~ 
-.... 
. .
.
. .
-• 
' 
''" 
t
xIv/2
Such are the mechanics. 
They are very convenient if you want to prepare a long paper and don't
type well.
One of the main aims of Project MAC has been to see what kind of a community would grow up around
malti-access computers with rich and growing software resources. 
The system now has over a million
words of public programs and over 6 million wo.ds of private programs. 
Let me illustrate with a few
examples: 
A Mathematical Assistance Program mbkes transformations, and solves equations for you.
It handles algebra, trigonometry, differential equations, Fourier and Laplace transforms, and so on.
It plots graphs. 
You do not have to know all about it to use it: 
it asks you questions until it
"understands" your problem.
Another program solves even quite complex problems in symbolic integration.
ADMINS facilitates the preparation, maintenance, 
and use of data bases.
TEACH teaches computer programming.
UPS is a large system of programs for interactive, incremental simulation and modelling. 
It
provides a language in which you can defino objects or entities and specify their properties and the
relations. 
It lets you set into mo ion the situation thus described and make its behaviour unfold.
It records the history and prepares summaries. 
It lets you intervene at any time to modify anything
you like.
The On-Line Community
The foregoing paragraphs described a few of the hundreds of programs of the accumulated software
resource. 
By using their programs, each user of CTSS can take advantage in his own work of pertinent
efforts of his predecessors and his colleagues. 
An accumulative process is beginning to operate also
in the domain of data.
Through computer-facilitated human interactions, a new kind of research community is arising at
M.I.T. 
It is of course only in an early, formative stage, but there is little doubt that something
significant is happening.
As the local cn-line community has emerged from concept into actuality, the idea of a broader,
geographically distributed community has taken form in the minds of several people. 
This idea involves
ir.ter-cornecting several multi-access computer systems and combining their communities of users into
a super-community. 
When geographically distributed computers and information networks come into
being, their impact upon the process of information transfer may be great.
Some Conclusions Based on Project MAC's Experience
During its five years of operation, Project MAC has explored more fields than I can sumnmarize,
but let me, nevertheless, attempt •o state some conclusions pertinent to information storage and
retrieval:
(1) 
The computer turns information into a dynamic, living thing.
(2) 
Everything one does in an active informational environment is "complexity limited".
(3) 
Man-computer interaction is the most hopeful approach to the mastery of informational
complexity.
(4) 
Even with the help of on-line interaction, it will take cooperative on-line teamwork to
achieve significant solutions to the "big" problems of science, technology, industries, cities, nations,
and alliances.
(5) 
The basic thing in the user's concept of an interactive informatlon system is the "name space"
of the filing (i.e., memory or storage) system.
(6) 
Although the term "time sharing" has achieved wide currency, the sharing of processor time
is not fundamentally important. 
Much more important are memory sharing and communication. 
The aim
of multi-access design should not be to make each user think he has a computer ill to himself; 
it
should be to i~mrse each user In a cooperative, 'nteractive, 
computer-tbased community.
(7) 
The importance of controlled access to files can hardly be overstated.
(8) 
The importance of fast interaction makes itself felt when a problem gets comolex.
(9) 
In a community with many interests, the "general-purposeness" of the general-purpose multi-
access computer system has real meaning and significince. 
The system must lend itself to a great
variety of applications and serve as ready. host to diverse subsystems. 
Generality and open-endedness
cost something, of course, but Pirojet 4AC's experience indicates they are well worth it.
5 
(10) 
Reliable operation is vital and --- 
since the reliability will not be perfect --- effective
"bocx-up" arrangecants and recovery procedures are vital, also. 
Before they will invest their main
!ntellectual capital in, or entrust it 
to, a multi-access computer system, people have to be confident
t. 
that tho %yvteo.o will be aviilable when they want it 
and that it will not lose their valuable programs
ai.d data.
XIV/3
Interactive Information Retrieval
Project TIP uses the facilities of the 7094-CTSS multi-access systems. 
The main TIP data base
is a growing collection of bibliographic data, presently from almost 100,000 journal papers in the
field of physics. 
The TIP programs are programs for processing the data in ways formulated by the
user during his interaction with the system. 
Using TIP, you type in lower case and the computer
types back to you in all capitals. 
To explain what some of TIP's abbreviations mean, I shall insert
comments in parenthezqs.
tip (You type "tip" to evoke the TIP progranr
W1019.5 (Wat. 
It 
is 10:19 and a half.)
TYPE YOUR REQUESTS.
search annals of physics v.26 to v.28
find title pion not aLhor boyl'ng J.b.(Find all articles with titles containing "pion"
except those by J.B. Boyling, whose work you already know.)
output print title a i and 1 (One-letter abbreviations are adequate for the TIP words
such as "author", "identification", and "location". 
You could just as well have typed
" o p t a 1 1" to instruct TIP to type as output the specified information about the items found.)
go (Go to work, TIP.)
ANNALS OF PHYSICS
VOLUME 26
VOLUME 27
J384 V027 P0C79
DEUTERON PHOTODISINTEGRATION AND N-P
CAPTURE BELOW PION PRODUCTION THRESHOLD
PARTOVI F.
CAMBRIDGE, 
MASSACHUSETTS
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
LABORATORY FOR NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND
PHYSICS DEPARTMENT
VOLUME 28
J384 V028 Poo34
,ANALYSIS OF THE PHOTOPRODUCTION OF POSITIVE PIlONS
HCHLER G.
SCHMIDT We
GERMANY
TECHNISCHE HOCHSCHULE KARLSRUHE
INSTITUT THEORETISCHE KERNPHYSIK
(No article meeting the specification was found in Volume 26. 
One was found in volume 27. 
One was
feund in volume 28. 
"J384" stands for "IANNALS OF PHYSICS". 
If you ask for "pion you will find "pions",
also --- 
but ,.ot if you ask for "pion*".)
The examples exercised only a few of the TIP commands, but it may have conveyed a notion of how
one works with TIP. 
The TIP commands may be combined in many different patterns. 
Users develop
ingenious strategies for filtering out irrelevant articles without losing the ones they want.
While some TIP programs make searches and print lists, other TIP programs take notes on how the
system is used. 
The data thus collected are periodically analyzed, and modifications and adjustments
are continually made. 
TIP has developed through a process of guided evolution.
A bibliography, two review articles, and a catalog of the books in the Student Center Library
have been prepared with the aid of TIP, and it is now being used to prepare a catalog of the journal
and periodical holdings of the M.I.T. libraries.
Most of the work done thus far with TIP has been hampered by the slow pace of typewriter output.
,e are looking forward eagerly to cathode-ray displays.
Interactive Information Transfer
The purpose of Project INTREX is to conduct experiments that will clarify design objectives,
methods, 
and techniqlues for information-transfer systems of about 1975. 
Emphasis is placed on the
word "experiments".
Experiments have been planned in four main areas:
1. bibliographic access,
2. 
physical access,
3. fact retrieval, and
4. 
network integration.
Thus far the project has concentrated on the first and second.
A|
Bibliographic Access
The purpose of "bibliographic access", of course, is to take the user from a nebulous idea of
what he wants to the accession numbers (or equivalent identifiers) of the documents that will satisfy
his requirements. 
Most of the INTREX effort towards that end is centered upon a computer-based
'augmented catalog" that will approximately contain 50 "fields" of information about e9,ch of approxi-
mately 10,000 documents in materials science and engineerings 
journal articles, theses, and reports
as well as books. 
With so many kinds of information it should be possible to deternmine which kinds
are helpxul enough to warrant inclusion in an operational system. 
Much of the work of selection of
the 10,0W0 documents is being done by the research people and will serve in the planned experiments.
Consoles will be located in the Materials Science and Engineering Center and the Engineering Library,
and the experiments will be conducted within the context of actual use.
Physical Access
Bibliographic access must of course lead directly to physical access. 
Limitations of the present
technology make digital storage and processing of a library-sized corpus uneconomic. 
The course being
followed by Project INTREX is therefore to hold the substantive documents themselves in a non-digital
microform storage system associated with the computer, and to use the computer to execute their
delivery to the user. 
Images of the pages of the 10,000 documents are being made in microfiche, and
a computer-controlled subsystem for picking out and scanning selected pages is being constructed.
Plans call for experimental investigation of such interrelated factors as the speed, the form, the
resolution, and the cost of physical access. 
By varying the parameters and making measurements of
preference and performance under conditions of actual use, optimal engineering compromises will be
approached and design objectives for operational systems will be formulated.
Advanced Experiments in a Library Context
Looking beyond the experiments with the 10, COO-ite=i collection in materials science and
engineering, 
Project INTREX is conducting design studies that postulate a corpus of a million
documents. 
At the same time, the M.I.T. Engineering Library is being reconstructed in such a way as
to provide for simultaneous operations in conventional and computer-based modes. 
Card catalogs, book
stacks, reading tables, microform equipment, and computer consoles will be brought together in an
arrangement designed for advanced experiments in an operational library setting.
Synthesis and Prospect
Throughout MAC, TIP, and INTREX, 
and indeed throughout M.I.T., there is a feeling that a great
and fundamental change is taking place in the way men relate to information. 
The force behind the
change is the computer, of course, but it 
is not the same computer we have known these last 20 years.
It is the computer cast in the new role of the moldable and retentive yet dynamic medium --- the medium
within which one can create and preserve the most complex and subtle patterns and through which he can
make those patterns operate (as programs) upon other patterns (data) derived from nature or the works
of other men. 
In that role, the computer will change the very nature of libraries and information
systems.
