Marshall McLuhan Intervew from Playboy, 1969
The following is the The Playboy Interview: Marshall McLuhan, Playboy Magazine, March 1969,
c⃝1994. It has been modestly redacted and slightly edited (by me, Phillip Rogaway) for use in UC
Davis’ ECS 188, “Ethics in an Age of Technology.”
In 1961, the name of Marshall McLuhan was unknown to everyone but his English students at the
University of Toronto–and a coterie of academic admirers who followed his abstruse articles in small-
circulation quarterlies. But then came two remarkable books—“The Gutenberg Galaxy” (1962)
and “Understanding Media” (1964)—and the graying professor from Canada’s western hinterlands
soon found himself characterized by the San Francisco Chronicle as “the hottest academic property
around.”
He has since won a world-wide following for his brilliant—and frequently baﬄing—
theories about the impact of the media on man; and his name has entered the French language as
mucluhanisme, a synonym for the world of pop culture.
Though his books are written in a diﬃcult style—at once enigmatic, epigrammatic and over-
grown with arcane literary and historic allusions—the revolutionary ideas lurking in them have
made McLuhan a best-selling author. Despite protests from a legion of outraged scholastics and
old-guard humanists who claim that McLuhan’s ideas range from demented to dangerous, his free-
for-all theorizing has attracted the attention of top executives at General Motors (who paid him
a handsome fee to inform them that automobiles were a thing of the past), Bell Telephone (to
whom he explained that they didn’t really understand the function of the telephone) and a leading
package-design house (which was told that packages will soon be obsolete). Anteing up $5000, an-
other huge corporation asked him to predict–via closed-circuit television—what their own products
will be used for in the future; and Canada’s turned-on Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau engages him
in monthly bull sessions designed to improve his television image.
McLuhan’s observations—“probes,” he prefers to call them—are riddled with such ﬂamboyantly
undecipherable aphorisms as “The electric light is pure information” and “People don’t actually
read newspapers—they get into them every morning like a hot bath.” Of his own work, McLuhan
has remarked: “I don’t pretend to understand it. After all, my stuﬀis very diﬃcult.” Despite his
convoluted syntax, ﬂashy metaphors and word-playful one-liners, however, McLuhan’s basic thesis
is relatively simple.
McLuhan contends that all media—in and of themselves and regardless of the messages they
communicate—exert a compelling inﬂuence on man and society. Prehistoric, or tribal, man existed
in a harmonious balance of the senses, perceiving the world equally through hearing, smell, touch,
sight and taste. But technological innovations are extensions of human abilities and senses that
alter this sensory balance—an alteration that, in turn, inexorably reshapes the society that created
the technology. According to McLuhan, there have been three basic technological innovations: the
invention of the phonetic alphabet, which jolted tribal man out of his sensory balance and gave
dominance to the eye; the introduction of movable type in the 16th Century, which accelerated this
process; and the invention of the telegraph in 1844, which heralded an electronics revolution that
will ultimately retribalize man by restoring his sensory balance. McLuhan has made it his business
to explain and extrapolate the repercussions of this electronic revolution.
For his eﬀorts, critics have dubbed him “the Dr.
Spock of pop culture,” “the guru of the
boob tube,” a “Canadian Nkrumah who has joined the assault on reason,” a “metaphysical wizard
1
possessed by a spatial sense of madness,” and “the high priest of popthink who conducts a Black
Mass for dilettantes before the altar of historical determinism.” Amherst professor Benjamin De-
Mott observed: “He’s swinging, switched on, with it and NOW. And wrong.”
But as Tom Wolfe has aptly inquired, “What if he is right? Suppose he is what he sounds like—
the most important thinker since Newton, Darwin, Freud, Einstein and Pavlov?” Social historian
Richard Kostelanetz contends that “the most extraordinary quality of McLuhan’s mind is that it
discerns signiﬁcance where others see only data, or nothing; he tells us how to measure phenomena
previously unmeasurable.”
The unperturbed subject of this controversy was born in Edmonton, Alberta, on July 21,
1911. The son of a former actress and a real-estate salesman, McLuhan entered the University
of Manitoba intending to become an engineer, but matriculated in 1934 with an M.A. in English
literature.
Next came a stint as an oarsman and graduate student at Cambridge, followed by
McLuhan’s ﬁrst teaching job—at the University of Wisconsin. It was a pivotal experience. “I was
confronted with young Americans I was incapable of understanding,” he has since remarked. “I
felt an urgent need to study their popular culture in order to get through.” With the seeds sown,
McLuhan let them germinate while earning a Ph.D., then taught at Catholic universities. (He is a
devout Roman Catholic convert.)
His publishing career began with a number of articles on standard academic fare; but by the
mid-Forties, his interest in popular culture surfaced, and true McLuhan eﬀorts such as “The Psy-
chopathology of Time and Life” began to appear.
They hit book length for the ﬁrst time in
1951 with the publication of “The Mechanical Bride”—an analysis of the social and psychological
pressures generated by the press, radio, movies and advertising—and McLuhan was on his way.
Though the book attracted little public notice, it won him the chairmanship of a Ford Foundation
seminar on culture and communications and a $40,000 grant, with part of which he started “Explo-
rations,” a small periodical outlet for the seminar’s ﬁndings. By the late Fifties, his reputation had
trickled down to Washington: In 1959, he became director of the Media Project of the National
Association of Educational Broadcasters and the United States Oﬃce of Education, and the report
resulting from this post became the ﬁrst draft of “Understanding Media.” Since 1963, McLuhan
has headed the University of Toronto’s Center for Culture and Technology, which until recently
consisted entirely of McLuhan’s oﬃce, but now includes a six-room campus building.
Apart from his teaching, lecturing and administrative duties, McLuhan has become a sort
of minor communication industry unto himself.
Each month he issues to subscribers a mixed-
media report called “he McLuhan Dew-Line”; and, punning on that title, he has also originated a
series of recordings called “The Marshall McLuhan Dew-Line Plattertudes.” McLuhan contributed
a characteristically mind-expanding essay about the media—“The Reversal of the Overheated-
Image”—to our December 1968 issue. Also a compulsive collaborator, his literary eﬀorts in tandem
with colleagues have included a high school textbook and an analysis of the function of space in
poetry and painting. “Counterblast,” his next book, is a manically graphic trip through the land
of his theories.
In order to provide our readers with a map of this labyrinthine terra incognita, PLAYBOY
assigned interviewer Eric Norden to visit McLuhan at his spacious new home in the wealthy
Toronto suburb of Wychwood Park, where he lives with his wife, Corinne, and ﬁve of his six
children. (His eldest son lives in New York, where he is completing a book on James Joyce, one
of his father’s heroes.) Norden reports: “Tall, gray and gangly, with a thin but mobile mouth and
an otherwise eminently forgettable face, McLuhan was dressed in an ill-ﬁtting brown tweed suit,
black shoes and a clip-on necktie. As we talked on into the night before a crackling ﬁre, McLuhan
expressed his reservations about the interview—indeed, about the printed word itself—as a means
of communication, suggesting that the question-and-answer format might impede the in-depth ﬂow
2
of his ideas. I assured him that he would have as much time—and space—as he wished to develop
his thoughts.”
The result has considerably more lucidity and clarity than McLuhan’s readers are accustomed
to–perhaps because the Q. and A. format serves to pin him down by counteracting his habit of
mercurially changing the subject in mid-stream of consciousness. It is also, we think, a protean
and provocative distillation not only of McLuhan’s original theories about human progress and
social institutions but of his almost immobilizingly intricate style–described by novelist George
P. Elliott as “deliberately antilogical, circular, repetitious, unqualiﬁed, gnomic, outrageous” and,
even less charitably, by critic Christopher Ricks as “a viscous fog through which loom stumbling
metaphors.” But other authorities contend that McLuhan’s stylistic medium is part and parcel of
his message—that the tightly structured “linear” modes of traditional thought and discourse are
obsolescent in the new “postliterate” age of the electric media. Norden began the interview with
an allusion to McLuhan’s favorite electric medium: television. The Interview:
Interviewer: To borrow Henry Gibson’s oft-repeated one-line poem on Rowan and Martin’s
Laugh-In—“Marshall McLuhan, what are you doin’?”
McLuhan: Sometimes I wonder. I’m making explorations. I don’t know where they’re going to
take me. My work is designed for the pragmatic purpose of trying to understand our technological
environment and its psychic and social consequences. But my books constitute the process rather
than the completed product of discovery; my purpose is to employ facts as tentative probes, as
means of insight, of pattern recognition, rather than to use them in the traditional and sterile
sense of classiﬁed data, categories, containers. I want to map new terrain rather than chart old
landmarks.
But I’ve never presented such explorations as revealed truth. As an investigator, I have no ﬁxed
point of view, no commitment to any theory–my own or anyone else’s. As a matter of fact, I’m
completely ready to junk any statement I’ve ever made about any subject if events don’t bear me
out, or if I discover it isn’t contributing to an understanding of the problem. The better part of
my work on media is actually somewhat like a safe-cracker’s. I don’t know what’s inside; maybe
it’s nothing. I just sit down and start to work. I grope, I listen, I test, I accept and discard; I try
out diﬀerent sequences–until the tumblers fall and the doors spring open.
Interviewer: Isn’t such a methodology somewhat erratic and inconsistent–if not, as your critics
would maintain, eccentric?
McLuhan: Any approach to environmental problems must be suﬃciently ﬂexible and adaptable to
encompass the entire environmental matrix, which is in constant ﬂux. I consider myself a generalist,
not a specialist who has staked out a tiny plot of study as his intellectual turf and is oblivious to
everything else. Actually, my work is a depth operation, the accepted practice in most modern
disciplines from psychiatry to metallurgy and structural analysis. Eﬀective study of the media
deals not only with the content of the media but with the media themselves and the total cultural
environment within which the media function.
Only by standing aside from any phenomenon
and taking an overview can you discover its operative principles and lines of force. There’s really
nothing inherently startling or radical about this study–except that for some reason few have had
the vision to undertake it. For the past 3500 years of the Western world, the eﬀects of media–
whether it’s speech, writing, printing, photography, radio or television–have been systematically
overlooked by social observers. Even in today’s revolutionary electronic age, scholars evidence few
signs of modifying this traditional stance of ostrichlike disregard.
3
Interviewer: Why?
McLuhan: Because all media, from the phonetic alphabet to the computer, are extensions of man
that cause deep and lasting changes in him and transform his environment. Such an extension is
an intensiﬁcation, an ampliﬁcation of an organ, sense or function, and whenever it takes place, the
central nervous system appears to institute a self-protective numbing of the aﬀected area, insulating
and anesthetizing it from conscious awareness of what’s happening to it. It’s a process rather like
that which occurs to the body under shock or stress conditions, or to the mind in line with the
Freudian concept of repression.
I call this peculiar form of self-hypnosis Narcissus narcosis, a
syndrome whereby man remains as unaware of the psychic and social eﬀects of his new technology
as a ﬁsh of the water it swims in. As a result, precisely at the point where a new media-induced
environment becomes all pervasive and transmogriﬁes our sensory balance, it also becomes invisible.
This problem is doubly acute today because man must, as a simple survival strategy, become
aware of what is happening to him, despite the attendant pain of such comprehension. The fact
that he has not done so in this age of electronics is what has made this also the age of anxiety, which
in turn has been transformed into its Doppelgnger–the therapeutically reactive age of anomie and
apathy. But despite our self-protective escape mechanisms, the total-ﬁeld awareness engendered
by electronic media is enabling us–indeed, compelling us–to grope toward a consciousness of the
unconscious, toward a realization that technology is an extension of our own bodies. We live in
the ﬁrst age when change occurs suﬃciently rapidly to make such pattern recognition possible for
society at large. Until the present era, this awareness has always been reﬂected ﬁrst by the artist,
who has had the power–and courage–of the seer to read the language of the outer world and relate
it to the inner world.
Interviewer: Why should it be the artist rather than the scientist who perceives these relationships
and foresees these trends?
McLuhan: Because inherent in the artist’s creative inspiration is the process of subliminally
sniﬃng out environmental change. It’s always been the artist who perceives the alterations in man
caused by a new medium, who recognizes that the future is the present, and uses his work to prepare
the ground for it. But most people, from truck drivers to the literary Brahmins, are still blissfully
ignorant of what the media do to them; unaware that because of their pervasive eﬀects on man, it
is the medium itself that is the message, not the content, and unaware that the medium is also the
message–that, all puns aside, it literally works over and saturates and molds and transforms every
sense ratio. The content or message of any particular medium has about as much importance as the
stenciling on the casing of an atomic bomb. But the ability to perceive media-induced extensions
of man, once the province of the artist, is now being expanded as the new environment of electric
information makes possible a new degree of perception and critical awareness by nonartists.
Interviewer: Is the public, then, at last beginning to perceive the “invisible” contours of these
new technological environments
McLuhan: People are beginning to understand the nature of their new technology, but not yet
nearly enough of them–and not nearly well enough.
Most people, as I indicated, still cling to
what I call the rearview-mirror view of their world. By this I mean to say that because of the
invisibility of any environment during the period of its innovation, man is only consciously aware
of the environment that has preceded it; in other words, an environment becomes fully visible only
when it has been superseded by a new environment; thus we are always one step behind in our view
of the world. Because we are benumbed by any new technology–which in turn creates a totally new
4
environment–we tend to make the old environment more visible; we do so by turning it into an art
form and by attaching ourselves to the objects and atmosphere that characterized it, just as we’ve
done with jazz, and as we’re now doing with the garbage of the mechanical environment via pop
art.
The present is always invisible because it’s environmental and saturates the whole ﬁeld of
attention so overwhelmingly; thus everyone but the artist, the man of integral awareness, is alive
in an earlier day. In the midst of the electronic age of software, of instant information movement,
we still believe we’re living in the mechanical age of hardware. At the height of the mechanical
age, man turned back to earlier centuries in search of “pastoral” values. The Renaissance and the
Middle Ages were completely oriented toward Rome; Rome was oriented toward Greece, and the
Greeks were oriented toward the pre-Homeric primitives. We reverse the old educational dictum
of learning by proceeding from the familiar to the unfamiliar by going from the unfamiliar to the
familiar, which is nothing more or less than the numbing mechanism that takes place whenever
new media drastically extend our senses.
Interviewer: If this “numbing” eﬀect performs a beneﬁcial role by protecting man from the psychic
pain caused by the extensions of his nervous system that you attribute to the media, why are you
attempting to dispel it and alert man to the changes in his environment?
McLuhan: In the past, the eﬀects of media were experienced more gradually, allowing the indi-
vidual and society to absorb and cushion their impact to some degree. Today, in the electronic
age of instantaneous communication, I believe that our survival, and at the very least our comfort
and happiness, is predicated on understanding the nature of our new environment, because unlike
previous environmental changes, the electric media constitute a total and near-instantaneous trans-
formation of culture, values and attitudes. This upheaval generates great pain and identity loss,
which can be ameliorated only through a conscious awareness of its dynamics. If we understand
the revolutionary transformations caused by new media, we can anticipate and control them; but
if we continue in our self-induced subliminal trance, we will be their slaves.
Because of today’s terriﬁc speed-up of information moving, we have a chance to apprehend,
predict and inﬂuence the environmental forces shaping us–and thus win back control of our own
destinies. The new extensions of man and the environment they generate are the central manifes-
tations of the evolutionary process, and yet we still cannot free ourselves of the delusion that it is
how a medium is used that counts, rather than what it does to us and with us. This is the zombie
stance of the technological idiot. It’s to escape this Narcissus trance that I’ve tried to trace and
reveal the impact of media on man, from the beginning of recorded time to the present.
Interviewer: Will you trace that impact for us–in condensed form?
McLuhan: It’s diﬃcult to condense into the format of an interview such as this, but I’ll try to give
you a brief rundown of the basic media breakthroughs. You’ve got to remember that my deﬁnition
of media is broad; it includes any technology whatever that creates extensions of the human body
and senses, from clothing to the computer. And a vital point I must stress again is that societies
have always been shaped more by the nature of the media with which men communicate than by
the content of the communication. All technology has the property of the Midas touch; whenever
a society develops an extension of itself, all other functions of that society tend to be transmuted
to accommodate that new form; once any new technology penetrates a society, it saturates every
institution of that society. New technology is thus a revolutionizing agent. We see this today with
the electric media and we saw it several thousand years ago with the invention of the phonetic
5
alphabet, which was just as far-reaching an innovation–and had just as profound consequences for
man.
Interviewer: What were they?
McLuhan: Before the invention of the phonetic alphabet, man lived in a world where all the
senses were balanced and simultaneous, a closed world of tribal depth and resonance, an oral
culture structured by a dominant auditory sense of life.
The ear, as opposed to the cool and
neutral eye, is sensitive, hyperaesthetic and all-inclusive, and contributes to the seamless web of
tribal kinship and interdependence in which all members of the group existed in harmony. The
primary medium of communication was speech, and thus no man knew appreciably more or less
than any other–which meant that there was little individualism and specialization, the hallmarks of
“civilized” Western man. Tribal cultures even today simply cannot comprehend the concept of the
individual or of the separate and independent citizen. Oral cultures act and react simultaneously,
whereas the capacity to act without reacting, without involvement, is the special gift of “detached”
literate man. Another basic characteristic distinguishing tribal man from his literate successors is
that he lived in a world of acoustic space, which gave him a radically diﬀerent concept of time-space
relationships.
Interviewer: What do you mean by “acoustic space”?
McLuhan: I mean space that has no center and no margin, unlike strictly visual space, which
is an extension and intensiﬁcation of the eye. Acoustic space is organic and integral, perceived
through the simultaneous interplay of all the senses; whereas “rational” or pictorial space is uni-
form, sequential and continuous and creates a closed world with none of the rich resonance of the
tribal echoland. Our own Western time-space concepts derive from the environment created by
the discovery of phonetic writing, as does our entire concept of Western civilization. The man of
the tribal world led a complex, kaleidoscopic life precisely because the ear, unlike the eye, cannot
be focused and is synaesthetic rather than analytical and linear. Speech is an utterance, or more
precisely, an outering, of all our senses at once; the auditory ﬁeld is simultaneous, the visual suc-
cessive. The models of life of nonliterate people were implicit, simultaneous and discontinuous, and
also far richer than those of literate man. By their dependence on the spoken word for information,
people were drawn together into a tribal mesh; and since the spoken word is more emotionally laden
than the written–conveying by intonation such rich emotions as anger, joy, sorrow, fear–tribal man
was more spontaneous and passionately volatile. Audile-tactile tribal man partook of the collective
unconscious, lived in a magical integral world patterned by myth and ritual, its values divine and
unchallenged, whereas literate or visual man creates an environment that is strongly fragmented,
individualistic, explicit, logical, specialized and detached.
Interviewer: Was it phonetic literacy alone that precipitated this profound shift of values from
tribal involvement to “civilized” detachment?
McLuhan: Yes, it was. Any culture is an order of sensory preferences, and in the tribal world,
the senses of touch, taste, hearing and smell were developed, for very practical reasons, to a much
higher level than the strictly visual. Into this world, the phonetic alphabet fell like a bombshell,
installing sight at the head of the hierarchy of senses.
Literacy propelled man from the tribe,
gave him an eye for an ear and replaced his integral in-depth communal interplay with visual
linear values and fragmented consciousness. As an intensiﬁcation and ampliﬁcation of the visual
function, the phonetic alphabet diminished the role of the senses of hearing and touch and taste
6
and smell, permeating the discontinuous culture of tribal man and translating its organic harmony
and complex synaesthesia into the uniform, connected and visual mode that we still consider the
norm of “rational” existence. The whole man became fragmented man; the alphabet shattered the
charmed circle and resonating magic of the tribal world, exploding man into an agglomeration of
specialized and psychically impoverished “individuals,” or units, functioning in a world of linear
time and Euclidean space.
Interviewer: But literate societies existed in the ancient world long before the phonetic alphabet.
Why weren’t they detribalized?
McLuhan: The phonetic alphabet did not change or extend man so drastically just because it
enabled him to read; as you point out, tribal culture had already coexisted with other written
languages for thousands of years. But the phonetic alphabet was radically diﬀerent from the older
and richer hieroglyphic or ideogrammic cultures. The writings of Egyptian, Babylonian, Mayan and
Chinese cultures were an extension of the senses in that they gave pictorial expression to reality,
and they demanded many signs to cover the wide range of data in their societies–unlike phonetic
writing, which uses semantically meaningless letters to correspond to semantically meaningless
sounds and is able, with only a handful of letters, to encompass all meanings and all languages.
This achievement demanded the separation of both sights and sounds from their semantic and
dramatic meanings in order to render visible the actual sound of speech, thus placing a barrier
between men and objects and creating a dualism between sight and sound. It divorced the visual
function from the interplay with the other senses and thus led to the rejection from consciousness
of vital areas of our sensory experience and to the resultant atrophy of the unconscious.
The
balance of the sensorium–or Gestalt interplay of all the senses–and the psychic and social harmony
it engendered was disrupted, and the visual function was overdeveloped. This was true of no other
writing system.
Interviewer: How can you be so sure that this all occurred solely because of phonetic literacy–or,
in fact, if it occurred at all?
McLuhan: You don’t have to go back 3000 or 4000 years to see this process at work; in Africa
today, a single generation of alphabetic literacy is enough to wrench the individual from the tribal
web. When tribal man becomes phonetically literate, he may have an improved abstract intellectual
grasp of the world, but most of the deeply emotional corporate family feeling is excised from his
relationship with his social milieu. This division of sight and sound and meaning causes deep psy-
chological eﬀects, and he suﬀers a corresponding separation and impoverishment of his imaginative,
emotional and sensory life. He begins reasoning in a sequential linear fashion; he begins categorizing
and classifying data. As knowledge is extended in alphabetic form, it is localized and fragmented
into specialties, creating division of function, of social classes, of nations and of knowledge–and in
the process, the rich interplay of all the senses that characterized the tribal society is sacriﬁced.
Interviewer: But aren’t there corresponding gains in insight, understanding and cultural diversity
to compensate detribalized man for the loss of his communal values?
McLuhan: Your question reﬂects all the institutionalized biases of literate man. Literacy, contrary
to the popular view of the “civilizing” process you’ve just echoed, creates people who are much
less complex and diverse than those who develop in the intricate web of oral-tribal societies. Tribal
man, unlike homogenized Western man, was not diﬀerentiated by his specialist talents or his visible
characteristics, but by his unique emotional blends. The internal world of the tribal man was a
7
creative mix of complex emotions and feelings that literate men of the Western world have allowed
to wither or have suppressed in the name of eﬃciency and practicality. The alphabet served to
neutralize all these rich divergencies of tribal cultures by translating their complexities into simple
visual forms; and the visual sense, remember, is the only one that allows us to detach; all other senses
involve us, but the detachment bred by literacy disinvolves and detribalizes man. He separates from
the tribe as a predominantly visual man who shares standardized attitudes, habits and rights with
other civilized men. But he is also given a tremendous advantage over the nonliterate tribal man
who, today as in ancient times, is hamstrung by cultural pluralism, uniqueness and discontinuity–
values that make the African as easy prey for the European colonialist as the barbarian was for the
Greeks and Romans. Only alphabetic cultures have ever succeeded in mastering connected linear
sequences as a means of social and psychic organization; the separation of all kinds of experiences
into uniform and continuous units in order to generate accelerated action and alteration of form–in
other words, applied knowledge–has been the secret of Western man’s ascendancy over other men
as well as over his environment.
Interviewer: Isn’t the thrust of your argument, then, that the introduction of the phonetic al-
phabet was not progress, as has generally been assumed, but a psychic and social disaster?
McLuhan: It was both. It try to avoid value judgments in these areas, but there is much evidence
to suggest that man may have paid too dear a price for his new environment of specialist technology
and values. Schizophrenia and alienation may be the inevitable consequences of phonetic literacy.
It’s metaphorically signiﬁcant, I suspect, that the old Greek myth has Cadmus, who brought the
alphabet to man, sowing dragon’s teeth that sprang up from the earth as armed men. Whenever
the dragon’s teeth of technological change are sown, we reap a whirlwind of violence. We saw this
clearly in classical times, although it was somewhat moderated because phonetic literacy did not
win an overnight victory over primitive values and institutions; rather, it permeated ancient society
in a gradual, if inexorable, evolutionary process.
Interviewer: How long did the old tribal culture endure?
McLuhan: In isolated pockets, it held on until the invention of printing in the 16th Century,
which was a vastly important qualitative extension of phonetic literacy. If the phonetic alphabet
fell like a bombshell on tribal man, the printing press hit him like a 100-megaton H-bomb. The
printing press was the ultimate extension of phonetic literacy: Books could be reproduced in
inﬁnite numbers; universal literacy was at last fully possible, if gradually realized; and books
became portable individual possessions. Type, the prototype of all machines, ensured the primacy
of the visual bias and ﬁnally sealed the doom of tribal man. The new medium of linear, uniform,
repeatable type reproduced information in unlimited quantities and at hitherto-impossible speeds,
thus assuring the eye a position of total predominance in man’s sensorium. As a drastic extension
of man, it shaped and transformed his entire environment, psychic and social, and was directly
responsible for the rise of such disparate phenomena as nationalism, the Reformation, the assembly
line and its oﬀspring, the Industrial Revolution, the whole concept of causality, Cartesian and
Newtonian concepts of the universe, perspective in art, narrative chronology in literature and
a psychological mode of introspection or inner direction that greatly intensiﬁed the tendencies
toward individualism and specialization engendered 2000 years before by phonetic literacy. The
schism between thought and action was institutionalized, and fragmented man, ﬁrst sundered by
the alphabet, was at last diced into bite-sized tidbits.
From that point on, Western man was
Gutenberg man.
8
Interviewer: Even accepting the principle that technological innovations generate far-reaching
environmental changes, many of your readers ﬁnd it diﬃcult to understand how you can hold the
development of printing responsible for such apparently unrelated phenomena as nationalism and
industrialism.
McLuhan: The key word is “apparently.” Look a bit closer at both nationalism and industrialism
and you’ll see that both derived directly from the explosion of print technology in the 16th Century.
Nationalism didn’t exist in Europe until the Renaissance, when typography enabled every literate
man to see his mother tongue analytically as a uniform entity. The printing press, by spreading
mass-produced books and printed matter across Europe, turned the vernacular regional languages
of the day into uniform closed systems of national languages–just another variant of what we call
mass media–and gave birth to the entire concept of nationalism.
The individual newly homogenized by print saw the nation concept as an intense and beguiling
image of group destiny and status. With print, the homogeneity of money, markets and transport
also became possible for the ﬁrst time, thus creating economic as well as political unity and trig-
gering all the dynamic centralizing energies of contemporary nationalism. By creating a speed of
information movement unthinkable before printing, the Gutenberg revolution thus produced a new
type of visual centralized national entity that was gradually merged with commercial expansion
until Europe was a network of states.
By fostering continuity and competition within homogeneous and contiguous territory, nation-
alism not only forged new nations but sealed the doom of the old corporate, noncompetitive and
discontinuous medieval order of guilds and family-structured social organization; print demanded
both personal fragmentation and social uniformity, the natural expression of which was the nation-
state. Literate nationalism’s tremendous speed-up of information movement accelerated the spe-
cialist function that was nurtured by phonetic literacy and nourished by Gutenberg, and rendered
obsolete such generalist encyclopedic ﬁgures as Benvenuto Cellini, the goldsmith-cum-condottiere-
cum-painter-cum-sculptor-cum -writer; it was the Renaissance that destroyed Renaissance Man.
Interviewer: Why do you feel that Gutenberg also laid the groundwork for the Industrial Revo-
lution?
McLuhan: The two go hand in hand. Printing, remember, was the ﬁrst mechanization of a complex
handicraft; by creating an analytic sequence of step-by-step processes, it became the blue-print of
all mechanization to follow. The most important quality of print is its repeatability; it is a visual
statement that can be reproduced indeﬁnitely, and repeatability is the root of the mechanical
principle that has transformed the world since Gutenberg. Typography, by producing the ﬁrst
uniformly repeatable commodity, also created Henry Ford, the ﬁrst assembly line and the ﬁrst mass
production. Movable type was archetype and prototype for all subsequent industrial development.
Without phonetic literacy and the printing press, modern industrialism would be impossible. It
is necessary to recognize literacy as typographic technology, shaping not only production and
marketing procedures but all other areas of life, from education to city planning.
Interviewer: You seem to be contending that practically every aspect of modern life is a direct
consequence of Gutenberg’s invention of the printing press.
McLuhan: Every aspect of Western mechanical culture was shaped by print technology, but the
modern age is the age of the electric media, which forge environments and cultures antithetical to
the mechanical consumer society derived from print. Print tore man out of his traditional cultural
matrix while showing him how to pile individual upon individual into a massive agglomeration of
9
national and industrial power, and the typographic trance of the West has endured until today,
when the electronic media are at last demesmerizing us. The Gutenberg Galaxy is being eclipsed
by the constellation of Marconi.
Interviewer: You’ve discussed that constellation in general terms, but what precisely are the
electric media that you contend have supplanted the old mechanical technology?
McLuhan: The electric media are the telegraph, radio, ﬁlms, telephone, computer and television,
all of which have not only extended a single sense or function as the old mechanical media did–
i.e., the wheel as an extension of the foot, clothing as an extension of the skin, the phonetic
alphabet as an extension of the eye–but have enhanced and externalized our entire central nervous
systems, thus transforming all aspects of our social and psychic existence. The use of the electronic
media constitutes a break boundary between fragmented Gutenberg man and integral man, just as
phonetic literacy was a break boundary between oral-tribal man and visual man.
In fact, today we can look back at 3000 years of diﬀering degrees of visualization, atomization
and mechanization and at last recognize the mechanical age as an interlude between two great
organic eras of culture. The age of print, which held sway from approximately 1500 to 1900, had
its obituary tapped out by the telegraph, the ﬁrst of the new electric media, and further obsequies
were registered by the perception of “curved space” and non-Euclidean mathematics in the early
years of the century, which revived tribal man’s discontinuous time-space concepts–and which
even Spengler dimly perceived as the death knell of Western literate values. The development of
telephone, radio, ﬁlm, television and the computer have driven further nails into the coﬃn. Today,
television is the most signiﬁcant of the electric media because it permeates nearly every home in the
country, extending the central nervous system of every viewer as it works over and molds the entire
sensorium with the ultimate message. It is television that is primarily responsible for ending the
visual supremacy that characterized all mechanical technology, although each of the other electric
media have played contributing roles.
Interviewer: But isn’t television itself a primarily visual medium?
McLuhan: No, it’s quite the opposite, although the idea that TV is a visual extension is an
understandable mistake.
Unlike ﬁlm or photograph, television is primarily an extension of the
sense of touch rather than of sight, and it is the tactile sense that demands the greatest interplay
of all the senses. The secret of TV’s tactile power is that the video image is one of low intensity or
deﬁnition and thus, unlike either photograph or ﬁlm, oﬀers no detailed information about speciﬁc
objects but instead involves the active participation of the viewer. The TV image is a mosaic mesh
not only of horizontal lines but of millions of tiny dots, of which the viewer is physiologically able
to pick up only 50 or 60 from which he shapes the image; thus he is constantly ﬁlling in vague
and blurry images, bringing himself into in-depth involvement with the screen and acting out a
constant creative dialog with the iconoscope. The contours of the resultant cartoonlike image are
ﬂeshed out within the imagination of the viewer, which necessitates great personal involvement
and participation; the viewer, in fact, becomes the screen, whereas in ﬁlm he becomes the camera.
By requiring us to constantly ﬁll in the spaces of the mosaic mesh, the iconoscope is tattooing its
message directly on our skins. Each viewer is thus an unconscious pointillist painter like Seurat,
limning new shapes and images as the iconoscope washes over his entire body. Since the point of
focus for a TV set is the viewer, television is Orientalizing us by causing us all to begin to look within
ourselves. The essence of TV viewing is, in short, intense participation and low deﬁnition–what I
call a “cool” experience, as opposed to an essentially “hot,” or high deﬁnition-low participation,
medium like radio.
10
Interviewer: A good deal of the perplexity surrounding your theories is related to this postulation
of hot and cool media. Could you give us a brief deﬁnition of each?
McLuhan: Basically, a hot medium excludes and a cool medium includes; hot media are low in
participation, or completion, by the audience and cool media are high in participation. A hot
medium is one that extends a single sense with high deﬁnition. High deﬁnition means a complete
ﬁlling in of data by the medium without intense audience participation. A photograph, for example,
is high deﬁnition or hot; whereas a cartoon is low deﬁnition or cool, because the rough outline
drawing provides very little visual data and requires the viewer to ﬁll in or complete the image
himself. The telephone, which gives the ear relatively little data, is thus cool, as is speech; both
demand considerable ﬁlling in by the listener. On the other hand, radio is a hot medium because
it sharply and intensely provides great amounts of high-deﬁnition auditory information that leaves
little or nothing to be ﬁlled in by the audience. A lecture, by the same token, is hot, but a seminar
is cool; a book is hot, but a conversation or bull session is cool.
In a cool medium, the audience is an active constituent of the viewing or listening experience. A
girl wearing open-mesh silk stockings or glasses is inherently cool and sensual because the eye acts
as a surrogate hand in ﬁlling in the low-deﬁnition image thus engendered. Which is why boys make
passes at girls who wear glasses. In any case, the overwhelming majority of our technologies and
entertainments since the introduction of print technology have been hot, fragmented and exclusive,
but in the age of television we see a return to cool values and the inclusive in-depth involvement
and participation they engender. This is, of course, just one more reason why the medium is the
message, rather than the content; it is the participatory nature of the TV experience itself that is
important, rather than the content of the particular TV image that is being invisibly and indelibly
inscribed on our skins.
Interviewer: Even if, as you contend, the medium is the ultimate message, how can you entirely
discount the importance of content? Didn’t the content of Hitler’s radio speeches, for example,
have some eﬀect on the Germans?
McLuhan: By stressing that the medium is the message rather than the content, I’m not suggesting
that content plays no role—merely that it plays a distinctly subordinate role. Even if Hitler had
delivered botany lectures, some other demagog would have used the radio to retribalize the Germans
and rekindle the dark atavistic side of the tribal nature that created European fascism in the
Twenties and Thirties. By placing all the stress on content and practically none on the medium,
we lose all chance of perceiving and inﬂuencing the impact of new technologies on man, and thus we
are always dumfounded by—and unprepared for—the revolutionary environmental transformations
induced by new media. Buﬀeted by environmental changes he cannot comprehend, man echoes the
last plaintive cry of his tribal ancestor, Tarzan, as he plummeted to earth: “Who greased my vine?”
The German Jew victimized by the Nazis because his old tribalism clashed with their new tribalism
could no more understand why his world was turned upside down than the American today can
understand the reconﬁguration of social and political institutions caused by the electric media in
general and television in particular.
Interviewer: How is television reshaping our political institutions?
McLuhan: TV is revolutionizing every political system in the Western world. For one thing,
it’s creating a totally new type of national leader, a man who is much more of a tribal chieftain
than a politician. Castro is a good example of the new tribal chieftain who rules his country by
a mass-participational TV dialog and feedback; he governs his country on camera, by giving the
11
Cuban people the experience of being directly and intimately involved in the process of collective
decision making. Castro’s adroit blend of political education, propaganda and avuncular guidance
is the pattern for tribal chieftains in other countries. The new political showman has to literally
as well as ﬁguratively put on his audience as he would a suit of clothes and become a corporate
tribal image—like Mussolini, Hitler and F.D.R. in the days of radio, and Jack Kennedy in the
television era. All these men were tribal emperors on a scale theretofore unknown in the world,
because they all mastered their media. . . . The overhauling of our traditional political system is
only one manifestation of the retribalizing process wrought by the electric media, which is turning
the planet into a global village.
Interviewer: Would you describe this retribalizing process in more detail?
McLuhan: The electronically induced technological extensions of our central nervous systems,
which I spoke of earlier, are immersing us in a world-pool of information movement and are thus
enabling man to incorporate within himself the whole of mankind. The aloof and dissociated role
of the literate man of the Western world is succumbing to the new, intense depth participation
engendered by the electronic media and bringing us back in touch with ourselves as well as with
one another. But the instant nature of electric-information movement is decentralizing—rather
than enlarging—the family of man into a new state of multitudinous tribal existences. Particularly
in countries where literate values are deeply institutionalized, this is a highly traumatic process,
since the clash of the old segmented visual culture and the new integral electronic culture creates
a crisis of identity, a vacuum of the self, which generates tremendous violence—violence that is
simply an identity quest, private or corporate, social or commercial.
Interviewer: Do you relate this identity crisis to the current social unrest and violence in the
United States?
McLuhan: Yes, and to the booming business psychiatrists are doing.
All our alienation and
atomization are reﬂected in the crumbling of such time-honored social values as the right of privacy
and the sanctity of the individual; as they yield to the intensities of the new technology’s electric
circus, it seems to the average citizen that the sky is falling in. As man is tribally metamorphosed
by the electric media, we all become Chicken Littles, scurrying around frantically in search of our
former identities, and in the process unleash tremendous violence. As the preliterate confronts the
literate in the postliterate arena, as new information patterns inundate and uproot the old, mental
breakdowns of varying degrees—including the collective nervous breakdowns of whole societies
unable to resolve their crises of identity—will become very common.
It is not an easy period in which to live, especially for the television-conditioned young who,
unlike their literate elders, cannot take refuge in the zombie trance of Narcissus narcosis that
numbs the state of psychic shock induced by the impact of the new media. From Tokyo to Paris to
Columbia, youth mindlessly acts out its identity quest in the theater of the streets, searching not
for goals but for roles, striving for an identity that eludes them.
Interviewer: Why do you think they aren’t ﬁnding it within the educational system?
McLuhan: Because education, which should be helping youth to understand and adapt to their
revolutionary new environments, is instead being used merely as an instrument of cultural aggres-
sion, imposing upon retribalized youth the obsolescent visual values of the dying literate age. Our
entire educational system is reactionary, oriented to past values and past technologies, and will
likely continue so until the old generation relinquishes power. The generation gap is actually a
12
chasm, separating not two age groups but two vastly divergent cultures. I can understand the
ferment in our schools, because our educational system is totally rearview mirror. It’s a dying and
outdated system founded on literate values and fragmented and classiﬁed data totally unsuited to
the needs of the ﬁrst television generation.
Interviewer: How do you think the educational system can be adapted to accommodate the needs
of this television generation?
McLuhan: Well, before we can start doing things the right way, we’ve got to recognize that we’ve
been doing them the wrong way—which most pedagogs and administrators and even most parents
still refuse to accept. Today’s child is growing up absurd because he is suspended between two
worlds and two value systems, neither of which inclines him to maturity because he belongs wholly
to neither but exists in a hybrid limbo of constantly conﬂicting values. The challenge of the new
era is simply the total creative process of growing up—and mere teaching and repetition of facts
are as irrelevant to this process as a dowser to a nuclear power plant. To expect a “turned on”
child of the electric age to respond to the old education modes is rather like expecting an eagle to
swim. It’s simply not within his environment, and therefore incomprehensible.
The TV child ﬁnds if diﬃcult if not impossible to adjust to the fragmented, visual goals of
our education after having had all his senses involved by the electric media; he craves in-depth
involvement, not linear detachment and uniform sequential patterns. But suddenly and without
preparation, he is snatched from the cool, inclusive womb of television and exposed—within a vast
bureaucratic structure of courses and credits—to the hot medium of print. His natural instinct,
conditioned by the electric media, is to bring all his senses to bear on the book he’s instructed to
read, and print resolutely rejects that approach, demanding an isolated visual attitude to learning
rather than the Gestalt approach of the uniﬁed sensorium. The reading postures of children in ele-
mentary school are a pathetic testimonial to the eﬀects of television; children of the TV generation
separate book from eye by an average distance of four and a half inches, attempting psychomimet-
ically to bring to the printed page the all-inclusive sensory experience of TV. They are becoming
Cyclops, desperately seeking to wallow in the book as they do in the TV screen.
Interviewer: Might it be possible for the “TV child” to make the adjustment to his educational
environment by synthesizing traditional literate-visual forms with the insights of his own electric
culture—or must the medium of print be totally unassimilable for him?
McLuhan: Such a synthesis is entirely possible, and could create a creative blend of the two
cultures—if the educational establishment was aware that there is an electric culture.
In the
absence of such elementary awareness, I’m afraid that the television child has no future in our
schools. You must remember that the TV child has been relentlessly exposed to all the “adult”
news of the modern world—war, racial discrimination, rioting, crime, inﬂation, sexual revolution.
The war in Vietnam has written its bloody message on his skin; he has witnessed the assassinations
and funerals of the nation’s leaders; he’s been orbited through the TV screen into the astronaut’s
dance in space, been inundated by information transmitted via radio, telephone, ﬁlms, recordings
and other people. His parents plopped him down in front of a TV set at the age of two to tranquilize
him, and by the time he enters kindergarten, he’s clocked as much as 4000 hours of television. As
an IBM executive told me, “My children had lived several lifetimes compared to their grandparents
when they began grade one.”
Interviewer: If you had children young enough to belong to the TV generation, how would you
educate them?
13
McLuhan: Certainly not in our current schools, which are intellectual penal institutions.
In
today’s world, to paraphrase Jeﬀerson, the least education is the best education, since very few
young minds can survive the intellectual tortures of our educational system. The mosaic image of
the TV screen generates a depth-involving nowness and simultaneity in the lives of children that
makes them scorn the distant visualized goals of traditional education as unreal, irrelevant and
puerile. Another basic problem is that in our schools there is simply too much to learn by the
traditional analytic methods; this is an age of information overload. The only way to make the
schools other than prisons without bars is to start fresh with new techniques and values. . . .
Interviewer: [You have indicated that the United States as a nation is doomed.] On what do you
base your prediction that the United States will disintegrate?
McLuhan: Actually, in this case as in most of my work, I’m “predicting” what has already
happened and merely extrapolating a current process to its logical conclusion. The Balkanization
of the United States as a continental political structure has been going on for some years now,
and racial chaos is merely one of several catalysts for change. This isn’t a peculiarly American
phenomenon; as I pointed out earlier, the electric media always produce psychically integrating
and socially decentralizing eﬀects, and this aﬀects not only political institutions within the existing
state but the national entities themselves.
All over the world, we can see how the electric media are stimulating the rise of ministates: In
Great Britain, Welsh and Scottish nationalism are recrudescing powerfully; in Spain, the Basques
are demanding autonomy; in Belgium, the Flemings insist on separation from the Walloons; in my
own country, the Quebecois are in the ﬁrst stages of a war of independence; and in Africa, we’ve
witnessed the germination of several ministates and the collapse of several ambitiously unrealistic
schemes for regional confederation. These ministates are just the opposite of the traditional cen-
tralizing nationalisms of the past that forged mass states that homogenized disparate ethnic and
linguistic groups within one national boundary. The new ministates are decentralized tribal ag-
glomerates of those same ethnic and linguistic groups. Though their creation may be accompanied
by violence, they will not remain hostile or competitive armed camps but will eventually discover
that their tribal bonds transcend their diﬀerences and will thereafter live in harmony and cultural
cross-fertilization with one another.
This pattern of decentralized ministates will be repeated in the United States, although I realize
that most Americans still ﬁnd the thought of the Union’s dissolution inconceivable. The U.S., which
was the ﬁrst nation in history to begin its national existence as a centralized and literate political
entity, will now play the historical ﬁlm backward, reeling into a multiplicity of decentralized Negro
states, Indian states, regional states, linguistic and ethnic states, etc. Decentralism is today the
burning issue in the 50 states, from the school crisis in New York City to the demands of the
retribalized young that the oppressive multiversities be reduced to a human scale and the mass state
be debureaucratized. The tribes and the bureaucracy are antithetical means of social organization
and can never coexist peacefully; one must destroy and supplant the other, or neither will survive.
Interviewer: Accepting, for the moment, your contention that the United States will be “Balka-
nized” into an assortment of ethnic and linguistic ministates, isn’t it likely that the results would
be social chaos and internecine warfare?
McLuhan: Not necessarily. Violence can be avoided if we comprehend the process of decentralism
and retribalization, and accept its outcome while moving to control and modify the dynamics of
change. In any case, the day of the stupor state is over; as men not only in the U.S. but throughout
14
the world are united into a single tribe, they will forge a diversity of viable decentralized political
and social institutions.
Interviewer: Along what lines?
McLuhan: It will be a totally retribalized world of depth involvements. Through radio, TV and
the computer, we are already entering a global theater in which the entire world is a Happening. Our
whole cultural habitat, which we once viewed as a mere container of people, is being transformed by
these media and by space satellites into a living organism, itself contained within a new macrocosm
or connubium of a supraterrestrial nature. The day of the individualist, of privacy, of fragmented
or “applied” knowledge, of “points of view” and specialist goals is being replaced by the over-
all awareness of a mosaic world in which space and time are overcome by television, jets and
computers—a simultaneous, “all-at-once” world in which everything resonates with everything else
as in a total electrical ﬁeld, a world in which energy is generated and perceived not by the traditional
connections that create linear, causative thought processes, but by the intervals, or gaps, which
Linus Pauling grasps as the languages of cells, and which create synaesthetic discontinuous integral
consciousness.
The open society, the visual oﬀspring of phonetic literacy, is irrelevant to today’s retribalized
youth; and the closed society, the product of speech, drum and ear technologies, is thus being reborn.
After centuries of dissociated sensibilities, modern awareness is once more becoming integral and
inclusive, as the entire human family is sealed to a single universal membrane. The compressional,
implosive nature of the new electric technology is retrogressing Western man back from the open
plateaus of literate values and into the heart of tribal darkness, into what Joseph Conrad termed
“the Africa within.”
Interviewer: Many critics feel that your own “Africa within” promises to be a rigidly conformist
hive world in which the individual is totally subordinate to the group and personal freedom is
unknown.
McLuhan: Individual talents and perspectives don’t have to shrivel within a retribalized society;
they merely interact within a group consciousness that has the potential for releasing far more
creativity than the old atomized culture. Literate man is alienated, impoverished man; retribalized
man can lead a far richer and more fulﬁlling life—not the life of a mindless drone but of the
participant in a seamless web of interdependence and harmony. The implosion of electric technology
is transmogrifying literate, fragmented man into a complex and depth-structured human being
with a deep emotional awareness of his complete interdependence with all of humanity. The old
“individualistic” print society was one where the individual was “free” only to be alienated and
dissociated, a rootless outsider bereft of tribal dreams; our new electronic environment compels
commitment and participation, and fulﬁlls man’s psychic and social needs at profound levels.
The tribe, you see, is not conformist just because it’s inclusive; after all, there is far more
diversity and less conformity within a family group than there is within an urban conglomerate
housing thousands of families. It’s in the village where eccentricity lingers, in the big city where
uniformity and impersonality are the milieu. The global-village conditions being forged by the
electric technology stimulate more discontinuity and diversity and division than the old mechanical,
standardized society; in fact, the global village makes maximum disagreement and creative dialog
inevitable. Uniformity and tranquillity are not hallmarks of the global village; far more likely are
conﬂict and discord as well as love and harmony—the customary life mode of any tribal people.
15
Interviewer: Despite what you’ve said, haven’t literate cultures been the only ones to value
the concepts of individual freedom, and haven’t tribal societies traditionally imposed rigid social
taboos—as you suggested earlier in regard to sexual behavior—and ruthlessly punished all who do
not conform to tribal values?
McLuhan: We confront a basic paradox whenever we discuss personal freedom in literate and
tribal cultures.
Literate mechanical society separated the individual from the group in space,
engendering privacy; in thought, engendering point of view; and in work, engendering specialism—
thus forging all the values associated with individualism. But at the same time, print technology
has homogenized man, creating mass militarism, mass mind and mass uniformity; print gave man
private habits of individualism and a public role of absolute conformity. That is why the young
today welcome their retribalization, however dimly they perceive it, as a release from the unifor-
mity, alienation and dehumanization of literate society. Print centralizes socially and fragments
psychically, whereas the electric media bring man together in a tribal village that is a rich and
creative mix, where there is actually more room for creative diversity than within the homogenized
mass urban society of Western man.
Interviewer: Are you claiming, now, that there will be no taboos in the world tribal society you
envision?
McLuhan: No, I’m not saying that, and I’m not claiming that freedom will be absolute—merely
that it will be less restricted than your question implies. The world tribe will be essentially con-
servative, it’s true, like all iconic and inclusive societies; a mythic environment lives beyond time
and space and thus generates little radical social change. All technology becomes part of a shared
ritual that the tribe desperately strives to keep stabilized and permanent; by its very nature, an
oral-tribal society—such as Pharaonic Egypt—is far more stable and enduring than any fragmented
visual society. The oral and auditory tribal society is patterned by acoustic space, a total and si-
multaneous ﬁeld of relations alien to the visual world, in which points of view and goals make social
change an inevitable and constant by product. An electrically imploded tribal society discards the
linear forward-motion of “progress.” We can see in our own time how, as we begin to react in depth
to the challenges of the global village, we all become reactionaries.
Interviewer: That can hardly be said of the young, whom you claim are leading the process of
retribalization, and according to most estimates are also the most radical generation in our history.
McLuhan: Ah, but you’re talking about politics, about goals and issues, which are really quite
irrelevant. I’m saying that the result, not the current process, of retribalization makes us reactionary
in our basic attitudes and values. Once we are enmeshed in the magical resonance of the tribal
echo chamber, the debunking of myths and legends is replaced by their religious study. Within the
consensual framework of tribal values, there will be unending diversity—but there will be few if
any rebels who challenge the tribe itself.
The instant involvement that accompanies instant technologies triggers a conservative, stabi-
lizing, gyroscopic function in man, as reﬂected by the second-grader who, when requested by her
teacher to compose a poem after the ﬁrst Sputnik was launched into orbit, wrote: “The stars are
so big / The earth is so small / Stay as you are.” The little girl who wrote those lines is part of the
new tribal society; she lives in a world inﬁnitely more complex, vast and eternal than any scientist
has instruments to measure or imagination to describe.
16
Interviewer: If personal freedom will still exist—although restricted by certain consensual taboos—
in this new tribal world, what about the political system most closely associated with individual
freedom: democracy? Will it, too, survive the transition to your global village?
McLuhan: No, it will not. The day of political democracy as we know it today is ﬁnished. Let
me stress again that individual freedom itself will not be submerged in the new tribal society, but
it will certainly assume diﬀerent and more complex dimensions. The ballot box, for example, is the
product of literate Western culture—a hot box in a cool world—and thus obsolescent. The tribal
will is consensually expressed through the simultaneous interplay of all members of a community
that is deeply interrelated and involved, and would thus consider the casting of a “private” ballot in
a shrouded polling booth a ludicrous anachronism. The TV networks’ computers, by “projecting”
a victor in a Presidential race while the polls are still open, have already rendered the traditional
electoral process obsolescent.
In our software world of instant electric communications movement, politics is shifting from the
old patterns of political representation by electoral delegation to a new form of spontaneous and
instantaneous communal involvement in all areas of decision making. In a tribal all-at-once culture,
the idea of the “public” as a diﬀerentiated agglomerate of fragmented individuals, all dissimilar but
all capable of acting in basically the same way, like interchangeable mechanical cogs in a production
line, is supplanted by a mass society in which personal diversity is encouraged while at the same
time everybody reacts and interacts simultaneously to every stimulus. The election as we know it
today will be meaningless in such a society.
Interviewer: How will the popular will be registered in the new tribal society if elections are pass?
McLuhan: The electric media open up totally new means of registering popular opinion. The
old concept of the plebiscite, for example, may take on new relevance; TV could conduct daily
plebiscites by presenting facts to 200,000,000 people and providing a computerized feedback of
the popular will. But voting, in the traditional sense, is through as we leave the age of political
parties, political issues and political goals, and enter an age where the collective tribal image and
the iconic image of the tribal chieftain is the overriding political reality. But that’s only one of
countless new realities we’ll be confronted with in the tribal village. We must understand that a
totally new society is coming into being, one that rejects all our old values, conditioned responses,
attitudes and institutions. If you have diﬃculty envisioning something as trivial as the imminent
end of elections, you’ll be totally unprepared to cope with the prospect of the forthcoming demise
of spoken language and its replacement by a global consciousness.
Interviewer: You’re right.
McLuhan: Let me help you.
Tribal man is tightly sealed in an integral collective awareness
that transcends conventional boundaries of time and space. As such, the new society will be one
mythic integration, a resonating world akin to the old tribal echo chamber where magic will live
again: a world of ESP. The current interest of youth in astrology, clairvoyance and the occult
is no coincidence. Electric technology, you see, does not require words any more than a digital
computer requires numbers. Electricity makes possible—and not in the distant future, either—an
ampliﬁcation of human consciousness on a world scale, without any verbalization at all.
Interviewer: Are you talking about global telepathy?
McLuhan: Precisely. Already, computers oﬀer the potential of instantaneous translation of any
code or language into any other code or language.
If a data feedback is possible through the
17
computer, why not a feed-forward of thought whereby a world consciousness links into a world
computer? Via the computer, we could logically proceed from translating languages to bypassing
them entirely in favor of an integral cosmic unconsciousness somewhat similar to the collective
unconscious envisioned by Bergson. The computer thus holds out the promise of a technologically
engendered state of universal understanding and unity, a state of absorption in the logos that could
knit mankind into one family and create a perpetuity of collective harmony and peace. This is
the real use of the computer, not to expedite marketing or solve technical problems but to speed
the process of discovery and orchestrate terrestrial—and eventually galactic—-nvironments and
energies. Psychic communal integration, made possible at last by the electronic media, could create
the universality of consciousness foreseen by Dante when he predicted that men would continue
as no more than broken fragments until they were uniﬁed into an inclusive consciousness. In a
Christian sense, this is merely a new interpretation of the mystical body of Christ; and Christ,
after all, is the ultimate extension of man.
Interviewer: Isn’t this projection of an electronically induced world consciousness more mystical
than technological?
McLuhan: Yes—as mystical as the most advanced theories of modern nuclear physics. Mysticism
is just tomorrow’s science dreamed today.
Interviewer: You said a few minutes ago that all of contemporary man’s traditional values,
attitudes and institutions are going to be destroyed and replaced in and by the new electric age.
That’s a pretty sweeping generalization.
Apart from the complex psychosocial metamorphoses
you’ve mentioned, would you explain in more detail some of the speciﬁc changes you foresee?
McLuhan: The transformations are taking place everywhere around us. As the old value systems
crumble, so do all the institutional clothing and garb-age they fashioned. The cities, corporate
extensions of our physical organs, are withering and being translated along with all other such
extensions into information systems, as television and the jet—by compressing time and space—
make all the world one village and destroy the old city-country dichotomy. New York, Chicago,
Los Angeles—all will disappear like the dinosaur. The automobile, too, will soon be as obsolete as
the cities it is currently strangling, replaced by new antigravitational technology. The marketing
systems and the stock market as we know them today will soon be dead as the dodo, and automation
will end the traditional concept of the job, replacing it with a role, and giving men the breath of
leisure. The electric media will create a world of dropouts from the old fragmented society, with
its neatly compartmentalized analytic functions, and cause people to drop in to the new integrated
global-village community.
All these convulsive changes, as I’ve already noted, carry with them attendant pain, violence
and war—the normal stigmata of the identity quest—but the new society is springing so quickly
from the ashes of the old that I believe it will be possible to avoid the transitional anarchy many
predict. Automation and cybernation can play an essential role in smoothing the transition to the
new society.
Interviewer: How?
McLuhan: The computer can be used to direct a network of global thermostats to pattern life
in ways that will optimize human awareness. Already, it’s technologically feasible to employ the
computer to program societies in beneﬁcial ways.
18
Interviewer: How do you program an entire society—beneﬁcially or otherwise?
McLuhan: There’s nothing at all diﬃcult about putting computers in the position where they
will be able to conduct carefully orchestrated programing of the sensory life of whole populations. I
know it sounds rather science-ﬁctional, but if you understood cybernetics you’d realize we could do
it today. The computer could program the media to determine the given messages a people should
hear in terms of their over-all needs, creating a total media experience absorbed and patterned
by all the senses.
We could program ﬁve hours less of TV in Italy to promote the reading of
newspapers during an election, or lay on an additional 25 hours of TV in Venezuela to cool down
the tribal temperature raised by radio the preceding month. By such orchestrated interplay of all
media, whole cultures could now be programed in order to improve and stabilize their emotional
climate, just as we are beginning to learn how to maintain equilibrium among the world’s competing
economies.
Interviewer: How does such environmental programing, however enlightened in intent, diﬀer from
Pavlovian brainwashing?
McLuhan: Your question reﬂects the usual panic of people confronted with unexplored technolo-
gies. I’m not saying such panic isn’t justiﬁed, or that such environmental programing couldn’t be
brainwashing, or far worse—merely that such reactions are useless and distracting. Though I think
the programing of societies could actually be conducted quite constructively and humanistically, I
don’t want to be in the position of a Hiroshima physicist extolling the potential of nuclear energy
in the ﬁrst days of August 1945. But an understanding of media’s eﬀects constitutes a civil defense
against media fallout.
The alarm of so many people, however, at the prospect of corporate programing’s creation
of a complete service environment on this planet is rather like fearing that a municipal lighting
system will deprive the individual of the right to adjust each light to his own favorite level of
intensity. Computer technology can—and doubtless will—program entire environments to fulﬁll the
social needs and sensory preferences of communities and nations. The content of that programing,
however, depends on the nature of future societies—but that is in our own hands.
Interviewer: Is it really in our hands—or, by seeming to advocate the use of computers to
manipulate the future of entire cultures, aren’t you actually encouraging man to abdicate control
over his destiny?
McLuhan: First of all—and I’m sorry to have to repeat this disclaimer—I’m not advocating
anything; I’m merely probing and predicting trends. Even if I opposed them or thought them
disastrous, I couldn’t stop them, so why waste my time lamenting? As Carlyle said of author
Margaret Fuller after she remarked, “I accept the Universe”: “She’d better.” I see no possibility of
a worldwide Luddite rebellion that will smash all machinery to bits, so we might as well sit back
and see what is happening and what will happen to us in a cybernetic world. Resenting a new
technology will not halt its progress.
The point to remember here is that whenever we use or perceive any technological extension
of ourselves, we necessarily embrace it. Whenever we watch a TV screen or read a book, we are
absorbing these extensions of ourselves into our individual system and experiencing an automatic
“closure” or displacement of perception; we can’t escape this perpetual embrace of our daily tech-
nology unless we escape the technology itself and ﬂee to a hermit’s cave. By consistently embracing
all these technologies, we inevitably relate ourselves to them as servomechanisms. Thus, in order
to make use of them at all, we must serve them as we do gods. The Eskimo is a servomechanism of
19
his kayak, the cowboy of his horse, the businessman of his clock, the cyberneticist—and soon the
entire world—of his computer. In other words, to the spoils belongs the victor. This continuous
modiﬁcation of man by his own technology stimulates him to ﬁnd continuous means of modifying
it; man thus becomes the sex organs of the machine world just as the bee is of the plant world,
permitting it to reproduce and constantly evolve to higher forms. The machine world reciprocates
man’s devotion by rewarding him with goods and services and bounty. Man’s relationship with his
machinery is thus inherently symbiotic. This has always been the case; it’s only in the electric age
that man has an opportunity to recognize this marriage to his own technology. Electric technology
is a qualitative extension of this age-old man-machine relationship; 20th Century man’s relation-
ship to the computer is not by nature very diﬀerent from prehistoric man’s relationship to his boat
or to his wheel—with the important diﬀerence that all previous technologies or extensions of man
were partial and fragmentary, whereas the electric is total and inclusive. Now man is beginning to
wear his brain outside his skull and his nerves outside his skin; new technology breeds new man.
A recent cartoon portrayed a little boy telling his nonplused mother: “I’m going to be a computer
when I grow up.” Humor is often prophecy.
Interviewer: If man can’t prevent this transformation of himself by technology—or into technology—
how can he control and direct the process of change?
McLuhan: The ﬁrst and most vital step of all, as I said at the outset, is simply to understand media
and its revolutionary eﬀects on all psychic and social values and institutions. Understanding is half
the battle. The central purpose of all my work is to convey this message, that by understanding
media as they extend man, we gain a measure of control over them. And this is a vital task, because
the immediate interface between audile-tactile and visual perception is taking place everywhere
around us. No civilian can escape this environmental blitzkrieg, for there is, quite literally, no
place to hide. But if we diagnose what is happening to us, we can reduce the ferocity of the winds
of change and bring the best elements of the old visual culture, during this transitional period, into
peaceful coexistence with the new retribalized society.
If we persist, however, in our conventional rearview-mirror approach to these cataclysmic devel-
opments, all of Western culture will be destroyed and swept into the dustbin of history. If literate
Western man were really interested in preserving the most creative aspects of his civilization, he
would not cower in his ivory tower bemoaning change but would plunge himself into the vortex of
electric technology and, by understanding it, dictate his new environment—turn ivory tower into
control tower. But I can understand his hostile attitude, because I once shared his visual bias.
Interviewer: What changed your mind?
McLuhan: Experience. For many years, until I wrote my ﬁrst book, The Mechanical Bride, I
adopted an extremely moralistic approach to all environmental technology. I loathed machinery, I
abominated cities, I equated the Industrial Revolution with original sin and mass media with the
Fall. In short, I rejected almost every element of modern life in favor of a Rousseauvian utopianism.
But gradually I perceived how sterile and useless this attitude was, and I began to realize that the
greatest artists of the 20th Century—Yeats, Pound. Joyce, Eliot—had discovered a totally diﬀerent
approach, based on the identity of the processes of cognition and creation. I realized that artistic
creation is the playback of ordinary experience—from trash to treasures. I ceased being a moralist
and became a student.
As someone committed to literature and the traditions of literacy, I began to study the new
environment that imperiled literary values, and I soon realized that they could not be dismissed
20
by moral outrage or pious indignation. Study showed that a totally new approach was required,
both to save what deserved saving in our Western heritage and to help man adopt a new survival
strategy. I adapted some of this new approach in The Mechanical Bride by attempting to immerse
myself in the advertising media in order to apprehend its impact on man, but even there some of
my old literate “point of view” bias crept in. The book, in any case, appeared just as television
was making all its major points irrelevant.
I soon realized that recognizing the symptoms of change was not enough; one must under-
stand the cause of change, for without comprehending causes, the social any psychic eﬀects of new
technology cannot be counteracted or modiﬁed. But I recognized also that one individual cannot
accomplish these self-protective modiﬁcations; they must be the collective eﬀort of society, be-
cause they aﬀect all of society; the individual is helpless against the pervasiveness of environmental
change: the new garbage—or mess-age—induced by new technologies. Only the social organism,
united and recognizing the challenge, can move to meet it.
Unfortunately, no society in history has ever known enough about the forces that shape and
transform it to take action to control and direct new technologies as they extend and transform
man. But today, change proceeds so instantaneously through the new media that it may be possible
to institute a global education program that will enable us to seize the reins of our destiny—but to
do this we must ﬁrst recognize the kind of therapy that’s needed for the eﬀects of the new media.
In such an eﬀort, indignation against those who perceive the nature of those eﬀects is no substitute
for awareness and insight.
Interviewer: Are you referring to the critical attacks to which you’ve been subjected for some of
your theories and predictions?
McLuhan: I am. But I don’t want to sound uncharitable about my critics. Indeed, I appreciate
their attention. After all, a man’s detractors work for him tirelessly and for free. It’s as good as
being banned in Boston. But as I’ve said, I can understand their hostile attitude toward environ-
mental change, having once shared it. Theirs is the customary human reaction when confronted
with innovation: to ﬂounder about attempting to adapt old responses to new situations or to sim-
ply condemn or ignore the harbingers of change—a practice reﬁned by the Chinese emperors, who
used to execute messengers bringing bad news. The new technological environments generate the
most pain among those least prepared to alter their old value structures. The literati ﬁnd the new
electronic environment far more threatening than do those less committed to literacy as a way of
life. When an individual or social group feels that its whole identity is jeopardized by social or
psychic change, its natural reaction is to lash out in defensive fury. But for all their lamentations,
the revolution has already taken place.
Interviewer: You’ve explained why you avoid approving or disapproving of this revolution in your
work, but you must have a private opinion. What is it?
McLuhan: I don’t like to tell people what I think is good or bad about the social and psychic
changes caused by new media, but if you insist on pinning me down about my own subjective
reactions as I observe the reprimitivization of our culture, I would have to say that I view such
upheavals with total personal dislike and dissatisfaction. I do see the prospect of a rich and creative
retribalized society—free of the fragmentation and alienation of the mechanical age—emerging from
this traumatic period of culture clash; but I have nothing but distaste for the process of change.
As a man molded within the literate Western tradition, I do not personally cheer the dissolution
of that tradition through the electric involvement of all the senses: I don’t enjoy the destruction of
21
neighborhoods by high-rises or revel in the pain of identity quest. No one could be less enthusiastic
about these radical changes than myself. I am not, by temperament or conviction, a revolutionary;
I would prefer a stable, changeless environment of modest services and human scale. TV and all
the electric media are unraveling the entire fabric of our society, and as a man who is forced by
circumstances to live within that society, I do not take delight in its disintegration.
You see, I am not a crusader; I imagine I would be most happy living in a secure preliterate
environment; I would never attempt to change my world, for better or worse. Thus I derive no
joy from observing the traumatic eﬀects of media on man, although I do obtain satisfaction from
grasping their modes of operation. Such comprehension is inherently cool, since it is simultane-
ously involvement and detachment. This posture is essential in studying media. One must begin by
becoming extraenvironmental, putting oneself beyond the battle in order to study and understand
the conﬁguration of forces. It’s vital to adopt a posture of arrogant superiority; instead of scurrying
into a corner and wailing about what media are doing to us, one should charge straight ahead and
kick them in the electrodes. They respond beautifully to such resolute treatment and soon become
servants rather than masters. But without this detached involvement, I could never objectively
observe media; it would be like an octopus grappling with the Empire State Building. So I em-
ploy the greatest boon of literate culture: the power of man to act without reaction—the sort of
specialization by dissociation that has been the driving motive force behind Western civilization.
The Western world is being revolutionized by the electric media as rapidly as the East is being
Westernized, and although the society that eventually emerges may be superior to our own, the
process of change is agonizing. I must move through this pain-wracked transitional era as a scientist
would move through a world of disease; once a surgeon becomes personally involved and disturbed
about the condition of his patient, he loses the power to help that patient. Clinical detachment is
not some kind of haughty pose I aﬀect—nor does it reﬂect any lack of compassion on my part; it’s
simply a survival strategy. The world we are living in is not one I would have created on my own
drawing board, but it’s the one in which I must live, and in which the students I teach must live. If
nothing else, I owe it to them to avoid the luxury of moral indignation or the troglodytic security
of the ivory tower and to get down into the junk yard of environmental change and steam-shovel
my way through to a comprehension of its contents and its lines of force—in order to understand
how and why it is metamorphosing man.
Interviewer: Despite your personal distaste for the upheavals induced by the new electric tech-
nology, you seem to feel that if we understand and inﬂuence its eﬀects on us, a less alienated and
fragmented society may emerge from it. Is it thus accurate to say that you are essentially optimistic
about the future?
McLuhan: There are grounds for both optimism and pessimism. The extensions of man’s con-
sciousness induced by the electric media could conceivably usher in the millennium, but it also
holds the potential for realizing the Anti-Christ—Yeats’ rough beast, its hour come round at last,
slouching toward Bethlehem to be born. Cataclysmic environmental changes such as these are, in
and of themselves, morally neutral; it is how we perceive them and react to them that will deter-
mine their ultimate psychic and social consequences. If we refuse to see them at all, we will become
their servants. It’s inevitable that the world-pool of electronic information movement will toss us
all about like corks on a stormy sea, but if we keep our cool during the descent into the maelstrom,
studying the process as it happens to us and what we can do about it, we can come through.
Personally, I have a great faith in the resiliency and adaptability of man, and I tend to look to
our tomorrows with a surge of excitement and hope. I feel that we’re standing on the threshold
of a liberating and exhilarating world in which the human tribe can become truly one family and
22
man’s consciousness can be freed from the shackles of mechanical culture and enabled to roam
the cosmos. I have a deep and abiding belief in man’s potential to grow and learn, to plumb the
depths of his own being and to learn the secret songs that orchestrate the universe. We live in a
transitional era of profound pain and tragic identity quest, but the agony of our age is the labor
pain of rebirth.
I expect to see the coming decades transform the planet into an art form; the new man, linked
in a cosmic harmony that transcends time and space, will sensuously caress and mold and pattern
every facet of the terrestrial artifact as if it were a work of art, and man himself will become an
organic art form. There is a long road ahead, and the stars are only way stations, but we have
begun the journey. To be born in this age is a precious gift, and I regret the prospect of my own
death only because I will leave so many pages of man’s destiny—if you will excuse the Gutenbergian
image—tantalizingly unread. But perhaps, as I’ve tried to demonstrate in my examination of the
postliterate culture, the story begins only when the book closes.
23
