MeadInterview
1
Fi le : 1 Carver .doe
10/00
CARVER MEAD INTERVIEW
By : Gene Youngblood
(Document 1 of 4 of Mead Interview)
GENE : The progression toward a speed/power inversion has been happening cont inuously since 1959 when
the integrated ci rcui t was invented and yet today we st i l l can' t bui ld a supercomputer that doesn' t requi re
acres of f reon tubes for cool ing.
CARVER : Oh yes you can . I t 's just they' re not doing i t . You see the probl em has been twofold. One, as the
technology developed the big computer people -- the Amdhahls and the Crays -- stayed wi th the older bipolar gate
array technology . They haven' t par t icipated in the revolut ion . Now the semiconductor guys don' t know much about
computers so they've copied a bunch of ancient archi tectures . So what we have in the personal computers is creaky
old archi tectures wi th this wonder ful technology . So the people dr iving the technology don' t know anything about
systems and the people who have bui l t t radi t ional large computer systems haven' t par t icipated in the technology
revolut ion . Supercomputers are an ext remely inef f icient use of power and space . They just brute- forced i t . They said
we' re not going to use any cleverness at al l , we' re just going to pour the coal to i t and see how fast we can make i t
run . So they just turn up the knob and go for i t . And you end up wi th these giant steam engines that blow of f al l this
heat . I t doesn' t make any sense at al l f rom any point of view . But , you see, the si tuat ion is actual ly much bet ter than
that . And that 's the par t nobody counts . I mean i f you take today's techno- logy and use i t to do a real ly novel
archi tecture you can get a factor of 10,000 r ight now . Today . But you don' t do i t by running the clock that fast . You
do i t through paral lel ism . There's a lot more to be ga ined through archi tecture than there is in clock speed . You can
get 10 GHz out of a paral lel array of 10 MHz clocks .
GENE : But aren' t there ser ious probl ems wi th sof tware for paral lel archi tectures? There seems to be
cont roversy whether schemes l ike dataf low and funct ional programming can actual ly overcome the
communi cat ion probl ems .
CARVER : As long as you' re talking sof tware you' re missing the point . Because you' re thinking of something
programmabl e . And those schemes wi l l never work out in terms of enormous paral lel ism . That 's why I think this
super -computer thing wi l l turn out to be a net loss to our count ry . Because they' re st i l l cl inging to the bel ief that
we' re going to make programmabl e highly paral lel machines . I worked on that for a long t ime and f inal ly came to
the conclusion that i t just wasn' t going to make i t . You were going to get factors of ten or a hundred and that was the
end of i t . We l l that 's not enough . We need eight or nine orders of magni tude to do the kinds of things we want to do
wi th computers today . There's factors of a mi l l ion there i f you do i t r ight . But for that you can' t separate the
archi tecture f rom the algor i thm . You have to bui ld that algor i thm in si l icon, not program i t somehow . I think they'd
bet ter be facing st raight into the fact that there are dedicated archi tectures for these enormous tasks .
GENE : What do you cal l the k ind of archi tecture you' re talking about?
CARVER : I cal l them si l icon algor i thms . You just map the appl icat ion r ight into si l icon . And the technology for
doing that we understand pret ty wel l . I don' t mean we've work- ed i t al l out . But we've developed the technology for
taking high- level descr ipt ions and put t ing them on si l icon . I t 's cal led si l icon compi lat ion, which is the obvious next
step . You need to compi le things r ight down into the chip instead of compi l ing them into some code that you feed to
this giant mass of chips that gr inds away on i t t rying to interpret i t .
GENE : So the si l icon compi ler solves not only the complexi ty probl em but also the probl em of massive ly
paral lel archi tectures by al lowing us to exper iment wi th the dedicated hardware that a lone can real i ze the ful l
potent ial of that archi tecture .
CARVER : You bet . Otherwise there's no hope. Because then you' re stuck . I f i t takes f ive years to design a chip
nobody's going to exper iment wi th algor i thms in si l icon, r ight? Because i t takes years to get anyplace. And that 's in
ser ies wi th your learning curve . So you have to have a technology for exper iment ing wi th designs in si l icon more
rapidly than that .
ASL
MeadInterview
2
Fi le : 1 Carver .doc
GENE : Then microelect ronics and computer science have become synonymous.
CARVER : They have to . You see, the thing that a l lowed people to separate the machinery of comput ing f rom the
pract ice of comput ing -- hardware f rom sof tware, i f you l ike -- was the idea that what computers did was a
sequent ial process . The old Tur ing or Von Neumann idea. Once you start to do things in a highly concurrent way
you can' t separate the algor i thm f rom the archi tecture any more . You' re conf ronted wi th the necessi ty of mapping
classes of appl icat ions di rect ly into si l icon . There's no such thing any more as the general purpose programmabl e
machine when i t comes to real ly high bandwidth comput ing -- which is the only reason you need concurrent
processing in the f i rst place . So that doesn' t mean Von Neumann machines wi l l go away; they' l l be used as general
purpose cont rol lers for these special purpose inst ruments. The user has to talk to something that 's coherent , that has
a language and an operat ing system and so for th . But instead of that poor l i t t le thing t rying to execute al l those
inst ruct ions, you' re going to have special -purpose engines i t cal ls upon to do these enormous tasks . So you can think
of the dedicated chips as ext remely capable inst ruct ions that you cal l f rom your personal computer .
GENE : Would a persona l computer based on one of the new 32-bi t microprocessors be power ful enough to
cont rol a such a high speed engine?
CARVER : Oh sure . The very f i rst one of those on the market is the Si l icon Graphics I r is machine wi th the
Geomet ry Engine in i t that Jim Clark designed. I t 's got a 68000 that cont rols an enormous graphics pipel ine wi th at
least 100 t imes more computat ion capabi l i ty, which never theless is a slave to the microprocessor . The reason, of
course, is that one smal l inst ruct ion can cause an enormous amount of work to get done . So the microprocessor is
used to update the picture .
GENE : Even wi th dedicated hardware there's a communi cat ion probl em in any massive ly paral lel
archi tecture . So people star t talking about wafer -sca le integrat ion . Is wafer scale technology necessary for
highly concurrent machines?
CARVER : I t 's not essent ial but i t would help a lot . There are many dimensions to the problem . But essent ial ly
you' re r ight that every t ime you come of f the chip and have to dr ive a big wi re instead of the k ind of wi res you have
on the chip, you pay for that in speed. So to the extent that you can put the wi r ing on a wafer instead of on a ci rcui t
board, the thing wi l l run that much faster and be that much more cost ef fect ive . The problem is nobody has yet come
up wi th a viable scheme for tolerat ing the faul ts that a lways occur . None of the redundancy schemes are viable yet in
terms of ef f icient use of the technology . I t has not at t racted the magni tude of research ef fort that i t 's wor th . I think
i t 's a very exci t ing area . But as an al ternat ive to wafer-scale integrat ion you can arrange the chips as islands of
computat ion where the l inks between them aren' t too huge. I t depends ent i rely on the nature of the algor i thm . How
t ight ly connected are the c lumps of computat ion? You could, for example, arrange the islands to be synchronous and
where they' re not connected too t ight ly use an asynchronous protocol so you don' t have to lock al l the clocks
together . You'd st i l l have a fai r ly smal l box . So even i f you have to go of f chip you arrange i t so everything that 's on
the chip is t ight ly connected . That 's the whole game of mak ing concurrent archi tectures whether you' re on a wafer or
not . I t has to be based on local i ty . Otherwise the wi r ing mess just gets completely out of hand . Incidental ly, the brain
has the same problem . Your cor tex is basical ly two-dimensiona l . I t 's only a mi l l imeter thick . That 's a lot thicker than
a chip but i t 's by no means a ful ly connected three-dimensional volume . People think that because the brain is
encased in this l i t t le round thing i t 's three-dimensional . I t 's not . I t 's two-dimensional , and i t 's wi red in a two-
dimensional way . In fact there are two layers . There's the gray mat ter on top of the cor tex which is where the
processing happens, and there's the whi te mat ter on the bot tom hal f of the cor tex which is where the wi res are -- a
sol id mat of wi res about hal f or one- thi rd as thick as the cor tex . That 's exact ly what we have in si l icon except we
don' t have qui te as many layers of thickness . But i t doesn' t qual i tat ively change the nature of the problem . And we' re
get t ing more layers faster than the brain is . So the whole idea of put t ing pr ior i ty on local i ty is as t rue in the brain as
in a chip .
GENE : Are si l icon compi lers based on ar t i f icial intel l igence? Are they exper t systems?
CARVER : You could think of them as exper t systems, i f you l ike, in the sense that they capture the exper t ise of the
designers, but they don' t do i t by being art i f icial intel l igensia ; they do i t because some real ly smar t people worked
the probl em. Si l icon compi lers are based on ordinary, old- fashioned, good systems design . That 's a whole di f ferent
ASL
MeadInterview
3
Fi le : 1 Carver .doe
game . In my opinion, art i f icial intel l igence has done absolutely nothing that ever he lped anyone to do a chip design .
They may help in the future but so far they haven' t .
GENE : Wi l l the si l icon compi ler become the universal method of chip design?
CARVER : Yes, for highly concurrent archi tectures.
GENE : Regardless of the complexi ty of the chip?
CARVER : We l l you simply can' t implement most of these algor i thms wi thout the complexi ty . There has to be a
cer tain scale of integrat ion before i t makes sense. But yes, you' re going to need a si l icon compi ler to design even a
Von Neumann-style chip at the complexi ty level of VLSI But once you have VLSI what 's to stop you f rom doing
something a whole lot more interest ing than a Von Neumann computer? That 's real ly the point . People talk about the
complexi ty as though i t were a problem . I t 's not ; i t 's an oppor tuni ty . We have to think about i t as an oppor tuni ty for
new ideas, not as a probl em that has to be overcome so we can make one more Von Neumann computer . That 's a
terr ible waste of a very beaut i ful technology . And that 's what we' re seeing r ight now . The si tuat ion is analogous to
what happened in nineteenth century Engl and af ter Farraday demonst rated that you could make electr ic generators
and motors . The factor ies of that day were long sheds wi th huge steam engines that drove a rotat ing shaf t that ran
along under the r idge pole of the roof wi th big pul leys on i t and bel ts down to al l the machines. I f you wanted to stop
a lathe you sl id the bel t f rom the dr ive pul ley onto an idler . Wel l , when they bui l t the f i rst electr ic motors they bui l t
enormous motors and used them in place of the steam engine . You st i l l had the shaf t and pul leys and bel ts . They
could not conceptual i ze that they real ly ought to have f ract ional horsepower motors dist r ibuted around -- what we
now cal l the paral lel processing approach . But the other thing was that of course they couldn' t af ford to change
everything . We look at that today and say wel l that was real ly dumb . But i f you were l iving back then you'd
probably have a thousand arguments for why i t was the only sensible thing to do . That 's where we are today in
computer science . We have this wonder ful technology and we' re bui lding one monol i thic computer . And i f that turns
out to be inef f icient we' l l make a big one on a chip . So they talk about microma inf rames . I t reminds me of a car toon
of the board of di rectors in Det roi t and one of the di rectors is saying "We l l , i f we have to make a compact , we' l l
make the biggest compact in the indust ry! "
CARVER : The reason I got into the whole sordid af fai r f i f teen years ago is that we as a cul ture were stal led . The
real ly smar t innovators, who are a lways the l i t t le guys, were unable to get at the technology . And that 's cr iminal .
And of course the big companies l iked i t that way . Because i t 's fat lazy comfor table, r ight? Whi ch is why they don' t
l ike me . I 'm rocking the boat . But the impor tant thing that has happened is that the l i t t le guy l ike Jim Clark, one guy,
can get at i t and turn the whole market upside down . That Geomet ry Engine that Jim Clark bui l t is a di f ferent
archi tecture but the same idea that I proposed to Dave Evans [of Evans and Suther land] in 1975 as precisely the
r ight thing to do wi th the technology, name ly to do the t ransformat ion and cl ipping stuf f . Here was the company that
was supposed to be leading the way in graphics unwi l l ing to do anything about i t . They could sel l these megabuck
boxes, why did they need a cheap one that did the same thing? Final ly Jim Clark did i t, six years later .
GENE : As ear ly as 1972 you were saying we'd soon reach the l imi ts of Von Neumann archi tecture . And yet
even today several more orders of magni tude in per formance can st i l l be got ten out of that archi tecture
through submi cron scal ing and increased compact ion.
CARVER : But you see the Von Neumann machine doesn' t take very good advantage of that . For one thing i t treats
al l memory as i f i t were equidistant . I t makes everything as hard to get to as everything else . They t ry to compensate
wi th things l ike caches, where they put some memory closer to the processor , but that 's af ter the fact . I t 's not bui l t
into the archi tecture. So as a resul t Von Neumann archi tecture actual ly works against increased compact ion at the
chip level . I t doesn' t scale wel l at al l . I t 's not a way you'd ever design a computer i f you had VLSI technology in
mind . I f you want to get the ful l benef i t of this marve lous new technology -- this new medium, i f you wi l l -- you
need a whole new way of thinking about computer archi tecture. Everybody viewed this technology as a cost
reduct ion mechanism for t radi t ional designs instead of as a new medium wi th which to real i ze new classes of
archi tecture. I 've spent the last f i f teen years of my l i fe t rying to get people to think in a f resh new way . And they
haven' t been doing that . The sol id fundamenta l work that 's necessary even to understand what 's sensible to do isn' t
being pursued in very many places . I mean the fundamenta l l imi tat ions work f rom an archi tectural and algor i thmic
standpoint , not f rom a technology point of view . We' re in pret ty good shape technological ly . There's a lot of depth
ASL
MeadInterview
4
Fi le : 1 Carver .doc
there across the board . But i t 's not paral leled by simi lar depth in the leading-edge systems area . We don' t have good
people in every ma jor depar tment at every ma jor universi ty doing excel lent work on the cut t ing edge of archi tecture
as we do in device physics and mater ials research . Basical ly that 's just star t ing to happen now. There have been
some signs of l i fe recent ly, but that 's af ter f i f teen years of beat ing on i t .
GENE : You said in 1977 that there was an e ight -order -of -magni tude possibi l i ty in compact ion of integrated
ci rcui ts -- potent ial ly 100 mi l l ion t ransistors on a chip . How do those ear ly project ions look to you today?
CARVER : The or iginal analysis we did in 1972 of how smal l you could make devices -- one quar ter of a micron --
is holding up remarkably wel l . The chip sizes have also been going up, al though slowly . In that 1977 repor t we were
thinking of a chip about a square cent imeter , approximately what they are today . So i f you scale the devices to a
quar ter-micron and enlarge the chip area a l i t t le more you can get a hundred-mi l l ion t ransistors on a chip . That 's
wi th the technology that 's known today . There's not a single step in there that hasn' t been proven feasible . You'd use
ion-beam dry etching and X- ray l i thography . That wi l l be done in the next decade . There should be people doing i t
now.
GENE : How much more comput ing power is avai lable beyond today's technology just by scal ing everything
to the l imi ts?
CARVER : I t depends on what you count . You can count computat ion per uni t power or uni t area. I think the fai rest
thing is computat ion per dol lar . What are you going to get for your money in terms of cycles per second of real
computat ion? From now on that number is going to go roughly l ike the square of the scal ing . Ideal ly, when you
scale everything the speed/power product goes l ike the cube : swi tching speed increases l inear ly as you scale down
and densi ty goes up as the square . I f i t 's two to one in dimension i t 's four to one in densi ty -- i f you reduce a
t ransistor by a factor of two on each side, four l i t t le t ransistors now f i t where the big one used to be . But in addi t ion
to that they' re running twice as fast . So every t ime you go down a factor of two in si ze you get a factor of eight -- a
factor of four in the number of gates and a factor of two in speed . That says gate cycles per uni t area goes l ike the
cube also . But as you approach physical l imi ts you don' t qui te get that ful l cube law anymore, which is why I say
that f rom now on i t 's going to go l ike the square . So i f we scale f rom, say, 1 .25 down to .25 micron, that 's f ive to
one, which is 125 t imes in gate cycles per uni t area and also 125 t imes in how much computat ion you get per uni t
power ; i t 's probably not qui te that good due to approaching physical l imi ts, but we' l l cer tainly get a factor of 100 .
And remember we' re not real ly at 1 .25 micron yet . I t 's real ly a 1 .5 process today, and that 's only the leading edge ;
three microns is the standard product ion process in today's commerc ia l wor ld . So that means we' re talking about
chips a thousand t imes faster than the ones in today's personal computer once we reach al l those l imi ts . And that 's
not count ing concurrent operat ion . A computer wi th a thousand of those chips running concurrent ly would be a
mi l l ion t imes faster than today's machine.
GENE : What about three-dimensiona l chips?
CARVER : These things are bui l t up in layers and in pr inciple you could keep going . Everybody knows how to do
that . For example, SOI -- si l icon on insulator -- is probably the most promising way to start stacking things . But
there are other ways . The problem is that the yield -- the overal l probabi l i ty that the thing works -- goes down
exponent ial ly wi th the number of layers in the process, even i f i t 's just an insulat ion layer or a layer of wi r ing . And
exponent ials are deadly things. Af ter a whi le they real ly get you . And i t 's not just the yield problem . As you make
things smal ler they also become much more suscept ible to things l ike cosmic rays and al l kinds of other mechanisms
of fai lure .
GENE : Compound mater ials l ike ga l l ium arsenide are supposed to be less vulnerable to sof t errors .
CARVER : Every technology has i ts own horr ible problems and that includes gal l ium arsenide . There's no magi c.
The number of elect rons created by ioni z ing par t icles isn' t t remendously di f ferent between mater ials, not by huge
orders of magni tude . I t 's real ly a si ze quest ion, a st raight - forward scal ing issue -- how many elect rons represent your
signal versus how many elect rons are created when you put an ioni z ing par t icle through the mater ial? As you scale
down there are fewer elect rons per device, so i t becomes easier for a random par t icle to swi tch the t ransistor for the
same reason i t 's easier for you to swi tch i t .
MeadInterview
5
Fi le : 1 Carver .doe
CARVER : I bel ieve that the vision of the or iginal founders of AI -- the Minskys and McCar thys -- was ext remely
correct . But when they got into i t they discovered that what they were real ly headed for took eight or nine orders of
magni tude more computat ion than you could get out of a regular computer . And so there came to be two groups : one
went looking for that eight or nine orders of magni tude ; the other just punted and faked i t -- and that 's the vast
major i ty of the AI communi ty today . I 'm one of the people who's of f t rying to f ind that eight or nine orders of
magni tude .
GENE : I 've heard cel lular automata used as a genera l term for massive ly paral lel archi tectures .
CARVER : Cel lular automata are an invent ion of Von Neumann, st rangely enough . He descr ibed them back in the
fort ies . I t was the f i rst ul t ra-concurrent archi tecture, a real ly good f i rst step in what 's now become a large class of
things. For example, you can view Kung's systol ic algor i thms as an extension of cel lular automata . And i f you look
at i t that way,
i t 's a very natural evolut ion . But in fact a cel lular automaton is an ext remely precise thing -- an
interconnected set of f ini te automata . Tradi t ional cel lular automata have only been connected to neighbors, and as
such they represent only very local computat ions. Any such local computat ion can be expressed as a cel lular
automaton but i t 's of ten not relevant to do so . Very few algor i thms map wel l into that doma in . So they've k ind of
boxed themselves out of a lot of the more interest ing views of computat ion .
GENE : What about the demarcat ions between levels of integrat ion, l ike SSI , MSI , and so for th?
CARVER : To me the di f ferences aren' t so much in t ransistor count as in the level of funct ional i ty, that is, how you
have to think about i t in terms of what i t 's doing . The f i rst integrated ci rcui t in 1959 had one gate or one f l ip- f lop, so
you could think of them as elementary logic elements . Medium-sca le chips had things l ike counters and registers .
Now people could start thinking at a higher level than just gates . That was in the middle sixt ies . The next real step
happened when memor i es and microprocessors were integrated on the chip around 1971 . That 's when LSI begins for
me, not because of the number of t ransistors but because now i t was a complete system- level funct ion . Those ear ly
micros only had about three thousand t ransistors but they were a processor never theless and they changed the way
people thought . Now actual ly i f you look at the Intel 286 today, i t isn' t real ly more capable -- or not very much --
than those ear ly chips . I t 's got a lot more t ransistors but the archi tecture's pret ty much the same; the inst ruct ion set 's
pret ty much the same . So I don' t put i t in a di f ferent class f rom the 8008 . Also, according to this view the gate-array
business represents a throwback : gate arrays are the SSI level and standard cel ls are the MSI level .
GENE : I f 32-bi t microprocessors aren' t qual i tat ively di f ferent f rom 8-bi t versions, then when does VLSI
begin?
CARVER : I 'm looking forward to the machine that ' l l do ray- t racing in real t ime . I t 's not beyond our capabi l i ty r ight
now. Provided you compi led the algor i thms into si l icon in a massive array . I don' t bel ieve that polygonal
representat ion for shapes is the r ight one . I think stuf f l ike superquadr ics is a whole lot more sensible -- maybe not
exact ly that representat ion, but something that has some nice mathemat ica l proper t ies when i t comes to ray- t racing .
So i f you' re going to use .CP10 a ray- t racing algor i thm you'd bet ter use something other than polygons . In fact , you
have to invent the representat ion and the algor i thm together . That 's why nobody's going to do i t unless they get thei r
head around the whol e probl em.
CARVER : My own work is concerned wi th music . As you know, i f you t ry to simulate even one musical inst rument
you' re in for at least 10 MIPs wor th of computat ion for a single voice -- one st r ing on a gui tar or whatever . In some
cases you get a whole inst rument l ike a f lute, but i f you t ry to do a piano you've got to have a huge number of
processors . So you get into the gigaops very quickly to simulate any reasonable ensemble at al l . A whole orchest ra is
a lot of gigaops . And i t turns out you can do that . We' re r ight now looking at about 10 MIPS per chip for doing
music . A speci f ic archi tecture for doing music, not good for anything else, and you can make some of the most
beaut i ful voices you've ever heard in your l i fe . We' l l be able to simulate a very convincing orchest ra. Now I 'm not
saying we' re ever going to replace a real orchest ra, but there's a set of things you can do i f you have the abi l i ty to
create your own orchest ra . This is what the synthesi zer guys ought to be doing and can' t ; and the reason they can' t is
that you need four or f ive more orders of computat ion than is avai lable today . That 's what prevents them f rom t rue
orchest ral simulat ion . A standard synthesi zer sounds l ike hel l and i t doesn' t have to, but you've got to f ind that four
or four or f ive orders of magni tude -- in this case i t isn' t eight or nine, only four or f ive, but i t 's st i l l a lot . And we can
put i t in a personal workstat ion for use by composers . I bel ieve that 's the way composi t ion wi l l be done . Composers
ASL
MeadInterview
6
Fi le : 1 Carver .doc
simply cannot af ford to exper iment . You can' t af ford to pay a hundred union musicians to fool around. So
composers are real ly stuck, just be- cause they need that four or f ive orders of magni tude . We' re st i l l in the very
ear ly exper imental stages but we can al ready mix amaz ing voices . Most people say i t sounds l ike a real inst rument ,
not l ike a computer . Except you can t ransform i t and move i t into di f ferent spaces . We can simulate a mar imba bar
that would have to be 27 feet long .
End of document I
MeadInterview2
1
Fi le : 2 Carver .doc
10/00
CARVER MEAD INTERVIEW PART TWO
Document 2 of 4 of Mead Interview
By : Gene Youngblood
CARVER : Ful l custom handcraf ted chips typical ly take three years . What that means is that
people hand design cer tain pieces and then they use some k ind of computer aid to help them put
the stuf f together . Nobody si ts down and draws the whole chip on one giant sheet of mylar any
more l ike they used to . That 's impossible. At least ten years ago people began using simple CAD
systems to help place the pieces they'd draf ted by hand . That 's just plain common sense . Even the
old k ind of design aids he lped . And there's been this cont inual evolut ion of things that made that
easier to do . So any chip done in the last ten years, nobody sat down and drew the whole thing on
one piece of paper . They drew pieces of i t and then they plot ted i t and then they drew some more,
and so on . You can get there that way but i t 's an enormous amount of ef fort . I f you have a good
methodology and good people that understand the design you can do some pret ty ambi t ious chips
using not very advanced tools, i f you've thought the thing through .
GENE : By what factor does a si l icon compi ler reduce design t ime?
CARVER : Maybe 75% or an order of magni tude . From several weeks to several months . I t
depends on what you count ; a lot of design goes into just conceptual i z ing what you need . One
thing a si l icon compi ler al lows you to do which we never could do before is exploratory
archi tecture, where you can actual ly t ry a design and see how i t comes out ; i f i t doesn' t work you
t ry something else . We could never that before because the amount of energy to implement a
design is so high that once you get on an approach you force i t to f inish, even i f i t 's a horr ible chip
when you' re done . And there's a lot of examples on the market . They got f inished because
economical ly i t 's not feasible to scrap them and start over .
GENE : Wi l l design t ime ever be independent of chip complexi ty?
CARVER : I t depends on what you mean by complexi ty . I t 's cer tainly not a di rect funct ion of the
number of t ransistors ; i t 's a funct ion of how much the designer has to think about the design .
That 's qui te a di f ferent mat ter . That has not been a dimension along which people have measured
things very much . So design t ime wi l l indeed become independent of raw t ransistor count , but
people wi l l f igure out conceptual ly more compl ex things and then i t ' l l take them longer to get
those f igured out . What a si l icon compi ler does is make the implementat ion tr ivial . I t doesn' t mean
get t ing the idea is any easier .
GENE : Wi l l something equiva lent to supercomputer power be necessary for si l icon
compi lat ion as we approach the mul t imi l l ion- t ransistor level of complexi ty? Even now Cray
is a l ready promot ing i ts machines for VLSI design.
CARVER : What people think of when they say supercomputer is going to change . I al ready
showed you a chip that ' l l do about 600 VAXes wor th of computat ion . The actual numbers of adds
and mul t ipl ies are only maybe f ive or ten mi l l ion per second; that sounds l ike maybe ten VAXes .
But by the t ime you get done shuf f l ing al l the data around and get t ing everything in the r ight place
and al l that , i t ends up being a few hundreds t imes real t ime instead of a few tens t imes real t ime .
most of what goes on in a standard computer is just data shuf f l ing . And that doesn' t change wi th a
supercomputer . I t 's the same problem . So people are going to reconceptual i ze what they think
about supercomputers . I t 's going to be paral lel archi tectures and a lot of special -purpose
archi tecture. Sure, there' l l be some standard "general -purpose" archi tectures but the big
breakthroughs wi l l be in special purpose archi tectures . The whole not ion of supercomput ing is
going to change . The people in that business don' t want i t to change, because they' re in that
ASL
MeadInterview2
2
Fi le : 2 Carver .doc
business .
GENE : Wel l , let us say then, wi l l power in the supercomputer range, no mat ter how i t 's
achieved, be necessary for VLSI design?
CARVER : Sure. But what 's real ly going to happen is that instead of doing a supercomputer people
wi l l bui ld special l i t t le accelerators to do pieces of the problem . There' l l be a l i t t le simulat ion
engine that runs simulat ions l ike crazy. These var ious things that do the par t icular computat ions,
and you' l l plug those boards into your workstat ion .
GENE : Why is the si l icon compi ler die si ze larger than hand-craf ted chips?
CARVER : There are a lot of approaches to si l icon compi lat ion today. The one I worked on, the
chip si ze for a given funct ion is much smal ler than gate arrays or standard cel ls but st i l l larger than
hand design of course, because that 's what hand design does -- i f you see some space you pack
some stuf f into i t . In a very funny way i t does get to the point where that 's compensated. What
real ly happens is people redo the archi tecture to make the chip more ef f icient . So actual ly for a
given funct ion they can get things that are actual ly smal ler than hand designs by explor ing the
archi tectural approaches . But i f you took any one of those once you' re f inished and redesigned i t
by hand i t would be smal ler . But you can' t af ford to do that in VLSI . So the whole thing is real ly
decept ive because what a si l icon compi ler al lows you to do is exper iment wi th the archi tecture
unt i l you f ind the most ef f icient archi tecture, and you can never do that in hand design . People wi l l
look at a given chip and say " Oh, I could make that smal ler by hand, " but they never would have
got ten there by hand. So you' re work ing a di f ferent end of the problem ; you' re let t ing people
exper iment on the archi tectural end . Then of course i f they wanted to take that par t icular
archi tecture and repack i t by hand you can a lways get i t physical ly smal ler . I t 's a lways t rue that
star t ing wi th something that exists you can a lways make i t bet ter by work ing on i t . What the
si l icon compi ler does is let you start f rom scratch and get to something that exists that 's real ly
qui te ef f icient .
GENE :
Is " ful l custom" synonymous wi th si l icon a lgor i thms?
CARVER : I t means hand craf ted . I t 's not synonymous wi th a dedicated archi tecture . Histor ical ly,
" ful l custom" has meant that you give the thing to somebody in a l i t t le design shop and they do a
hand-craf ted design for that purpose.
GENE : In the l i terature they only say that si l icon compi lers are for ful l custom chips ; they
don' t speci f ical ly talk about dedicated archi tectures. That 's incredible, given the fact that
everyone would acknowl edge that dedicated archi tectures are inherent ly faster than general
ones, and the only histor ical barr ier to doing that has been the design t ime, and now you
have a technology that can do i t and they don' t even remark that achievement .
CARVER : I t 's a lways t rue when you have a new technology that the only terms in which people
can discuss i t are the old terms . So i t 's real ly di f f icul t to explain to people how things have to work
when you have a new technology . The only thing people can do is compare wi th what they know.
The only thing they know is that histor ical ly people have hand-craf ted some designs .
GENE : There's the issue of who speci f ies the archi tecture, the designers or the compi ler .
Today we' re not yet at the point where the computer simply doesn' t have the intel l igence to
do that . So the designer speci f ies the archi tecture and then exper iments wi th i t through the
si l icon compi ler . But apparent ly there are people pursuing the AI approach or exper t
systems approach where the compi ler would have suf f icient intel l igence to actual ly make
archi tectural decisions .
CARVER : We l l the AI people haven' t done anything yet so i t 's hard to make comments about i t .
That doesn' t mean they won' t . There's cer tainly room for heur ist ics in helping wi th the process, to
ASL
MeadInterview2
3
Fi le : 2 Carver .doc
the extent that what we mean by AI is a heur ist ic approach to opt imi zat ion -- of course there's
room for that and everybody's going to be doing that . But there's another thing going on that you
need to know about . What a lot of people mean by automat ic archi tecture is f ixed archi tecture .
They have picked the archi tecture ahead of t ime and they compi le a chip in that class . And al l the
ear ly si l icon compi lers were l ike that . I wrote one myse l f in 1971 that was l ike that . i t only did one
l i t t le archi tecture . And i t did al l the si l icon compi l ing things -- i t took in the thing and generated
the simulat ion f rom the same source that generated the ar twork, but i t only did this one l i t t le t iny
archi tecture. And then when Dave Johannsen did his thing he did a wider class of archi tecture .
And a lot of people now are doing an even wider class of archi tectures, but they' re st i l l wi thin
l imi ts . There's nothing wrong wi th that i f that archi tecture f i ts what you want to do, but i t doesn' t
al low you to do archi tectural explorat ion, which is one of the dimensions of si l icon compi lat ion
that 's real ly highly impor tant . The approach that the Si l icon Compi ler Inc . people tool -- which is
Dave Johannsen and his people -- is to bui ld a tool for people to do general archi tecture work. So
they bui l t a tool for archi tects ; i t does implementat ions of systems for people who want to do
archi tecture -- to bui ld algor i thms in si l icon, i f you l ike . that isn' t the only thing that needs to be
done . A couple of companies back east have bui l t si l icon compi lers for bui lding microcode
engines . That 's going to have an impact on people who want to bui ld microcode engines -- that 's a
data path wi th a set of f ini te-state machines that sequences i t . Our own ear ly si l icon compi lers
were basical ly a imed at that thing too . since then they've become general i zed . And of course once
you have a general tool you can a lways put a layer on top of i t that has a higher level
representat ion and al lows you then to generate the input for the general chip compi ler . So the way
I look at the actual evolut ion of the indust ry is there wi l l be a few real ly general chip compi lers, a
bunch of f ront -ends for those that al low people to take a special thinking process or heur ist ic
programs or whatever and generate input for that , then there wi l l be some honest - to-god special -
purpose si l icon compi lers .
GENE : Can we achieve VLSI densi ty wi thout sacr i f icing clock speed? For example, bipolar
and CMOS are converging today and people say CMOS wi l l outper form bipolar . So wi l l be
we able to carry a 100 MHz clock into VLSI?
CARVER : Oh sure . The problem wi th that is not that you can' t make dense things that run at high
clock rates, i t 's that you' re not going to have the ent i re chip completely lockstep at those clock
rates . Because just dist r ibut ing a clock at those f requencies means that you' re going to lose the
synchrony over the chip . You should ask Chuck Sei tz about the fact that di f ferent pieces of the
chip are going to have to be able to operate autonomously. And you couple them in such a way
that thei r clocks don' t have to be absolutely in phase . You run pieces of the chip on very fast
clocks and you communi cate between them wi th some other f requency .
GENE :
I f you think of any machine as be ing a clock, in the norma l human-sca l ed wor ld
there seems to be a constant rule whi ch says the fastest clock has to use the most energy, and
the one uses the most energy usual ly has some si ze const raints on i t in order to dissipate that
heat . Therefore, in the norma l physical human wor ld the fastest c lock that would also use
the least amount of energy is an impossible clock . But when you get down to the submi cron
doma in you have an impossible clock, because in order to achieve both high speed and high
densi ty compact ion, i t has to use the least amount of energy comparat ive ly speak ing .
CARVER : Wel l , remember that what you said in the beginning is real ly t rue : i f you t ry to take a
whole VLSI chip and clock i t at 100 MHz i t wi l l indeed dissipate an impossible amount of energy .
But you don' t have to run the whole chip at the same clock rate and you don' t have to clock every
element every t ime -- there are a lot of ways you can get the ef fect of that speed wi thout having
this global thing that 's just pumping al l that charge al l the t ime. That 's just physics . I f you have
every e lement in there swi tching every t ime, then there's just the amount of stored energy t imes
the f requency, and that doesn' t change depending upon how many elements . You make the
elements smal ler , there are more of them, so in that sense you can run more things faster wi th the
same power ; but the basic physics doesn' t change . Pumping things up and down at a fast rate takes
a huge amount of energy and the faster the rate and the more things, the more energy . That par t
ASL
MeadInterview2
4
Fi le : 2 Carver .doc
doesn' t change . I t 's real ly the area: how much area do you pump? Think of the chip as a big
capaci tor and you' re just pumping charge in and out of i t , and every t ime you pump i t i t 's one-hal f
CV squared that you lose in energy ; so the power is one-hal f CV squared t imes the f requency .
Per iod. Capac i tance t imes V-squared hasn' t been changing a lot wi th chip evolut ion ; capaci tance
has been get t ing a l i t t le bigger , the vol tage a l i t t le lower ; i t 's get t ing a l i t t le bet ter but basical ly
that 's one of those things that doesn' t change much . What 's real ly going on is that we can make
individual pieces of the ci rcui t ext remely fast and then you do something to not have to run the
whole ci rcui t that fast . For example, communicat ions cont rol lers have to decode stuf f coming in
of f of , say, a local -area network at 10 MHz ; that means you've got to have some mul t iple of that in
your resolut ion of things, so that 's got to be fast on the f ront -end and for error-correct ing, but then
you get i t in and you go into some paral lel thing that can run a lot slower , so you do most of your
processing at a lot slower rate, but in paral lel . So your high clock rates are pr imar i ly for
inter facing the chip wi th the outside wor ld . I f you' re inter facing wi th an opt ical f iber you've got to
be running in the gigaher tz range . But somehow there's a way of not having to swi tch every
element every t ime . (Chuck can tel l you some nice things about the whole sel f - t iming thing where
you only do swi tching i f you need i t . Things don' t swi tch unless they change) .
GENE : Geof f rey Fox claims the speedup through concurrency is a l inear funct ion of the
number of PE's, per iod.
CARVER : I have gone on record as saying that the special -purpose archi tectures are going to be
the way to approach highly concurrent archi tectures . The reason for that isn' t that isn' t that -- yeah,
for Geof f rey's par t icular problem, he can arrange things in such a way that you only have nearest
neighbor communicat ions and then you can get a l inear increase in computat ion wi th the number
of e lements . And that ' l l work unt i l he wants to do something a l i t t le more sophist icated . The
computat ions they' re doing isn' t very di f ferent f rom the one you have to do in music, and they' re
get t ing about one VAX per ci rcui t board wor th of computat ion and we' re get t ing about 600
VAXes per chip . That should cal ibrate you a l i t t le bi t .
GENE : What 's the probl em wi th doing f loat ing-point in si l icon?
CARVER : We chose to do 64-bi t f ixed point instead of 16-bi t f loat ing point in our music chips
because i t 's much cleaner and for a lot of appl icat ions i f you go to a real ly long word you can use a
f ixed point number every bi t as ef fect ively as you can use a shor ter f loat ing point number , and the
computat ion does get enormously simpl i f ied. I mean, doing f loat ing point is a bi tch . There's no
quest ion about that . Because you have al l the interact ion between the exponent and the mant issa's .
In par t icular , adds are horr ible .
GENE : There's a lot of f loat ing point in graphics .
CARVER : We l l nobody's ever thought through i f you real ly need to do that or not . I t 's just that ,
they look at the dynami c range they have, which is huge, and they say gee we've got to do f loat ing
point . On the other hand they've only got a 1000 by 1000 mat r ix, so i t 's cer tainly a f ini te resolut ion
of things . So I bel ieve nobody's real ly thought through whether you can do that wi th a long-word
f ixed point ar i thmet ic . Nobody has a long-word, f ixed point engine, i t 's al l 16-bi t or 32-bi t .
Algor i thms in si l icon would faci l i tate that . But I 'm real ly not sure whether i t would be more
ef fect ive to buy a bunch of f loat ing point engines to do i t or whether i t would be more ef fect ive to
just have some long-word f ixed-point engines -- of which you could have a lot more on the same
si l icon . And then you ask yoursel f what the t radeof f is . And i t 's just an engineer ing t radeof f , i t 's
not a rel igious issue .
GENE : Geof f rey Fox sa id that for his par t icular scient i f ic problems, the larger the probl em
the less viable i t is to bui ld i t into hardware. The more par ts you have wi th greater degrees
of f reedom, the more genera l the probl em and you need a genera l purpose computer .
CARVER : That 's the old lore of the programmabl e machine people . They know how to program ;
ASL
MeadInterview2
5
Fi le : 2 Carver .doc
they don' t know how to design chips . So they assume i ts easier to wr i te a program . They can' t
conceive that wi th a chip compi ler you could compi le a special -purpose archi tecture for a probl em
easier than you can f igure out how to use one of those stupid programmabl e highly concurrent
machines . Right now i f you look at the amount of programming t ime i t takes use an array
processor , you could easi ly have a special -purpose archi tecture up and running before you could
have the same algor i thms running on an array machine. I 'm not saying that 's always t rue; there is a
lot of mer i t to programmabl e things you can change in some way ; but i t 's a big mistake to think
that sequent ial programming languages are going to work on concurrent machines for anything
except the most simple problems . I t 's real easy when everything's doing the same thing, to wr i te
down what i t does and you have a bunch of Von Neumann machines work ing on i t and i ts
st raight forward . But when i t 's more compl icated than that i t 's not so tr ivial any more. I ' l l once
again refer to the music problem, where the inst ruments are separable in the sense that a voice is
separate f rom other voices, but then they have to get choreograph- ed together wi th some k ind of
conductor k ind of thing, and each one's a l i t t le di f ferent , and now i t isn' t qui te so tr ivial anymore .
GENE :
I t 's probably the same thing in graphics i f you want to do photoreal simulat ions of
natural phenomena . That 's very interest ing. The physicists wi l l say they' re doing the real
ser ious work, mode l ing the universe, and i f you want to play wi th the big boys and mode l the
universe, then you need a general purpose supercomputer . But i t seems to me that mode l ing
natural phenomena for visual simulat ion is at least as compl ex i f not more so in terms of the
dynami c complexi ty of the probl em.
CARVER : I t has one other advantage : you can tel l i f you've done i t . A whole lot of physics these
days has the problem of how many angels are danc ing on the head of a pin .
GENE : So could i t be that mode l ing the universe is a simpler probl em than mode l ing an
orchest ra or a smal l ensembl e?
CARVER : Yes, i t 's more real . Physics has got ten i tsel f of f in lef t f ield . I don' t want to get my
physics f r iends mad at me . I do a lot of physics myse l f . But the physics communi ty is in a bi t of
t rouble nowadays and the reason is i t has lost a lot of contact wi th real i ty. I mean the kinds of
exper iments where they look for these par t icles at some enormous energies and they have some
symmet ry groups which they think explain the part icles, which are real ly just a way of cataloging .
A symmet ry group doesn' t explain anything . I t 's l ike Mende l ev before we understood what made
the per iodic table; you could see there was per iodici ty in i t and you could make some predict ions
f rom that . We l l that 's nice but i t doesn' t say why i t 's there. My percept ion is that they've got a very
pecul iar view going in physics and they cover that up wi th a lot of ego. I t 's very, very far f rom
anything di rect and exper iencable by real human beings or even measurable by real human beings .
I f you look at the exper iments that are done by casts of thousands on bi l l ion-dol lar faci l i t ies, the
whole thing has taken on an ai r of unreal i ty that 's just monumenta l .
GENE :
I f the 286 isn' t signi f icant ly di f ferent f rom the 8008 in the sense that i t 's a
microprocessor , then at what level of thinking does VLSI begin for you?
CARVER : I t 's cer tainly t rue that the microprocessor star ted an era where computat ion and si l icon
weren' t separate any more . In other words the real signi f icance of the micro- processor was that
people could no longer think of computat ion as going separate f rom i ts technology base . In fact i t
never had been separate . I t 's just that people thought of i t that way . There was the computer
indust ry and there was some other place where they bought thei r parts, and those were just par ts
and they didn' t real ly mat ter . We l l the complexi ty of things cont inued to grow because the basic
fab process al lowed you to put more and more t ransistors down ; but bui lding a big memory is no
di f ferent than bui lding a l i t t le memory. So in terms of the way the fab guys have to think, i t 's VLSI
al l r ight because they've got to make the thing yield . So f rom thei r point of view i t 's VLSI the
moment i t gets to 100,000 t ransistors . But f rom the point of view of the designer those memor i es
are no di f ferent than they ever were. They' re just l i t t le wi zened ci rcui ts . And the memory
designer 's job is no harder , involves no more intel lectual content , than i t did before VLSI . Have
ASL
MeadInterview2
6
Fi le : 2 Carver .doc
you heard the term "algor i thmic complexi ty?" The idea is, how would you character i ze the
complexi ty of a machine? Wel l , i f you look at a crystal , for example, i t can have ten to the twenty-
four th atoms in i t . But you can speci fy i t by the shape of a uni t cel l and the way the uni t cel ls are
stacked together . So there's real ly only two pieces of informat ion . So in a few tens of bi ts you can
speci fy a crystal . So i t 's not anywhere the ten to the twenty- four th k ind of complexi ty because of
the very regular nature of i t . Programs are the same way. You wr i te a loop and the loop can go and
create a god-awful amount of stuf f , but i f i t 's one simple l i t t le thing, no mat ter how much i t 's
repeated i t 's not compl ex somehow . So i f you look at i t f rom that point of view and say wel l how
can we talk about the complexi ty of si l icon algor i thms,
i t 's real ly the sort of unique funct ion and
the amount of unique interconnect ion that have to be speci f ied, that aren' t just repeated regular ly,
that gives you the nature of the complexi ty of the thing. So let 's look at Geof f rey Fox's machine.
I t 's a crystal . He's al ready told you that . No mat ter how big i t is i t 's a crystal . I t has one k ind of uni t
cel l that 's hooked up in some way to i ts neighbors . so you have to speci fy exact ly what you have
to speci fy in a crystal : i t 's no more compl ex than the descr ipt ion of i ts uni t cel l and of i ts
connect ions . And the fact that i t might have a longer -word ALU doesn' t make i t more
compl icated . But i f i t has a more compl icated ALU -- i f i t does f loat ing-point , that 's a lot more
compl icated than a f ixed-point ALU. But i f you go f rom a 16-bi t ALU to a 64-bi t ALU that
doesn' t make i t more compl icated, algor i thmical ly . I t 's harder for the fab guy to get yield out of i t,
so f rom his point of view i t may be qual i tat ively di f ferent . So the way I look at i t is that the fab
guys have created a technology that 's independent of what people use i t for : a systems designer
can sue i t for ei ther a sophist icated purpose or a dead simple purpose . I f people decide to just
make crystals out of i t -- make a memory -- which doesn' t have any more conceptual content than
memor i es ever did, then i t 's just a cost -reduct ion mechani sm . That 's al l i t is . I t hasn' t added any
real value except that you get more memory in a box of the same si ze for the same pr ice. And
that 's nice . But the real value of i t added by what you put into the memory. And that 's why
memor i es are cheap : there's no conceptual content in them . But now you take something l ike a 32-
bi t microprocessor -- and I was a l i t t le facet ious : the 286 is real ly qui te a bi t more sophist icated
than the 8080 -- so in fact they've added more value there than you would i f i t had been a memory,
because i t does a lot of things bet ter ; on the other hand, i f you take that another level and ask i f
there's any new conceptual content in i t, wel l no, i t 's doing what minicomputers a lways did . So i t 's
new to si l icon in some way maybe but i t adds nothing new to the theory of comput ing .
Incidental ly, this is why there's a lways what people cal l the hardware/sof tware t radeof f . I t means
where is the value? Is the value in the pat terns on the si l icon or is the value in the l i t t le bi t -pat terns
in the memory af ter you've made the si l icon? And you can a lways t rade that of f . The informat ion's
a lways going to be on the si l icon, but i t may be in l i t t le electr ical charges on the memory
locat ions; in which case i t was the value added by the guy that wrote the sof tware. Or i t may be
that someone actual ly created a st ructure that embodied that algor i thm, in which case he put i t
di rect ly on the si l icon -- in the wi r ing, in the content of those pieces of si l icon . So for me, VLSI
begins when you can start thinking about algor i thmic complexi ty. That 's when i t gets interest ing .
And I 've a lways thought of i t that way, ever since i t was just LSI . Because the potent ial was there
to bui ld real ly compl ex things .
GENE : The si l icon a lgor i thm is a photograph that does what i t represents.
CARVER : Fur thermore they' re beaut i ful . As forms, they' re beaut i ful . I f you've l ived wi th them for
awhi le you can appreciate them as an art form . You can tel l a beaut i ful design f rom an ugly design
that does the same thing very easi ly.
CARVER : There are two t ransistors per memory locat ion in a DRAM and six in a SRAM . And
three or four t ransistors per gate, i f you' re bui lding gates. But the par t they don' t tel l you -- these
people that l ike to count gates -- is that i f you take a good wel l -designed si l icon chip that 's done by
exper ts and you make a gate diagram for what i t does -- see, the thing i tsel f can' t be represented by
gates, because they don' t represent a lot of the funct ional i ty you can get wi th t ransistors . Bi t i f you
make a gate diagram of the thing i t turns out that we get about one equivalent gate for every one
and a hal f t ransistors . Because you use t ransistors not for mak ing gates but for mak ing things
much more clever than gates . Like you use a single-pass t ransistor as a memory locat ion . I f you
ASL
MeadInterview2
7
Fi le : 2 Carver .doc
had to bui ld that wi th gates you'd have to make two cross- coupled AND gates and some other
stuf f and i t 'd take at least four gates to make what one single-pass t ransistor does . So gates aren' t
an appropr iate descr ipt ion for what happens in VLSI . and there's this enormous argument about
wel l , that 's 30,000 t ransistors that 's only 8000 gates . No 30,000 t ransistors is probably l ike 20,000
gates -- i f you did i t wi th gates, l ike in a gate-array . That par t doesn' t get told . But i t means you' re
using the si l icon in a much more ef fect ive way than mak ing gates out of i t . So to summar i ze, i f i t 's
done wel l the number of t ransistors per gate-equivalent is between one and two. That 's because
you don' t use them to make gates ; i f you used them to make gates i t 'd be three or four . So you' re
al ready using them twice as ef fect ively as you would i f you made gates, just by being the sl ightest
bi t intel l igent .
GENE : What is meant by "devices per chip" and how much of the chip area is devoted to
"gates" and how much to wi res?
CARVER : Devices usual ly refers to t ransistors, and that 's misleading because wi res take up about
95 percent of the chip area. Let me say i t another way : i f you put the wi res down that have to be
there you can usual ly sl ip the t ransistors underneath and not not ice. I t 's down on the bot tom levels
and the wi res go over the top, and usual ly the wi res you can work in wi th pieces of the t ransistor
and i t turns out that i f they were shrunk to zero area for the actual t ransistors themselves you
wouldn' t save more than f ive or ten percent of chip area .
GENE : So when you say 100 mi l l ion t ransistors per chip you' re only talking about ten
percent of the chip area?
CARVER : Yeah, but you see, i f i t were just the t ransistors there they wouldn' t do anything . What
they do is determined by how they' re interconnected . So actual ly i t 's not a bad measure, because
when people have a work ing chip they tel l you how many t ransistors they were able to
interconnect const ruct ively . And that 's an impor tant number . That number is one dimension of this
complexi ty issue: i t doesn' t tel l you i f they' re ext remely regular or i f they have more informat ion
than that in them . And just because a thing appears regular doesn' t mean there isn' t informat ion in
i t that makes things not equivalent to other things . Like a ROM looks ext remely regular but i t may
have a lot of informat ion in i t because of the pat terns in ROMs . Like Geof f rey Fox's computer : i f
you were to put a di f ferent program in every machine, i t would be a much more compl ex thing
than i f you have one program in al l the machines . That 's what I meant by algor i thmic complexi ty .
Of course, f igur ing out how to use i t would also be that much more complex .
GENE :
Is there a rule of thumb by whi ch you can relate the minimum feature si ze or design
rule to the total area of a t ransistor in terms of square microns?
CARVER : A typical t ransistor in today's wor ld is of the order of one design rule by one design
rule . Three by three is the most common t ransistor .
GENE :
I read something that said 480 square mi crons.
CARVER : That 's the amount of chip per device. I f you take the total number of devices and divide
by chip area that 's what you get . So then immediate ly you can take those two numbers and f igure
out what the f ract ion of ut i l i zat ion is .
GENE : What is the computer revolut ion?
CARVER : There are a number of levels . The most obvious level is that since anybody can own an
ordinary Von Neumann-style computer , people are now discover ing that they can do a lot of
things, so everybody's got a PC at home . They wr i te programs to do al l kinds of things . That 's
become a thing you can talk about which you could never talk about before . I t 's l ike the car .
Enough people own cars that you can talk about them as a metaphor for explaining other things .
To me that 's been the value of the microcomputer phenomenon : not so much what they do but the
ASL
MeadInterview2
8
Fi le : 2 Carver .doc
fact that they' re obvious enough and useful enough and ubiqui tous enough that everybody knows
at least something about them . They' re not great big things that gobble you up anymore . So that 's
been a big he lp . But much more impor tant than that in terms of microcomputers are the
microcomputers that get bui l t into things -- telephones and typewr i ters and VCRs and al l the
ordinary everyday l i fe appl iances and tools . Elect r ic dr i l ls . A lot of people don' t understand that
the reason electr ic dr i l ls don' t get stuck as much as they used to is that they have a microprocessor
in them that looks at how fast the chuck's going around and where your f inger is on the t r igger and
f igures out what they ought to do . Those are real ly much more power ful in the revolut ion they
create because they solve real problems instead of being something that you have to program to
solve a real problem . They actual ly just do i t . Somebody worked the whole thing out instead of
just saying wel l here, now i t 's your turn . Al l of this is in the context of what people think of as
computers . The fact that there has occurred a viable thi rd-par ty sof tware indust ry where i t 's now
considered OK to wr i te sof tware, you can actual ly make money doing that . That 's not something
that was perceived a few years ago . That 's where most of the actual value is added in terms of
algor i thmic complexi ty. The value is added in the programs, not the hardware i tsel f . The hardware
is tr ivial . Most computers don' t have much in them . They' re real ly just a receptacle for sof tware .
So of course the real ly impor tant thing that 's coming up -- and we haven' t real ly begun to see i t --
is the revolut ion of algor i thms in si l icon, where al l the things you could never do wi th computers -
- which were the things you real ly wanted to do -- l ike make pictures and music and al l of the
things that relate to people and to what people real ly want to do -- ordinary computers can' t touch
that . They' re of f by at least f ive orders of magni tude in computat ional power . That to me is the
real ly exci t ing thing and i t 's the thing that hasn' t been touched yet by what people are talking about
as the computer revolut ion . But I think i f you dig underneath al l that , people's not ion of value is
changing . I t used to be that people thought of mater ial as value, so they'd think about steel or
a luminum or gold or di amonds . I t was things that were valuable . Af ter a whi le i t became clear that
i t was also energy that was valuable : energy al lowed you to t ransform things into other things . Up
unt i l very recent ly that 's been people's image of value: things held value. And the fact that i t 's
actual ly informat ion that 's the thing that 's valuable rather than the substance, is something that 's a
new idea. That 's why nobody would give you a dime for sof tware . Because what the hel l i t 's just a
tape you can copy so why is there any value in i t . You could have said the same for mot ion
pictures except that was in a di f ferent doma in so i t had di f ferent laws and i t grew up understanding
that the value wasn' t in the cel luloid . But everyplace else, especial ly in technology, people had this
very wei rd view of where the value real ly was . To me the most fundamenta l revolut ion that 's
going on is people are now beginning to perceive that not just in enter tainment is the informat ion
the impor tant thing . And that 's a lways been t rue in enter tainment , in music and mot ion pictures
and paint ings . I t wasn' t those l i t t le tubes of paint and a piece of canvas, i t was the informat ion that
was there . So i t 's always been t rue in the ar ts but i t has taken a long t ime to dawn in other areas .
And now i t 's happening in machines and businesses . People are beginning to see that the
informat ion is the valuable thing . I t br ings these closer to the f ine arts and the human pursui ts, not
far ther away . That 's not general ly perceived but i t 's very t rue .
GENE :
Is i t fai r to say that highly concurrent si l icon a lgor i thms put many orders of
magni tude more comput ing power in the hands of average people? Is that par t of the
revolut ion?
CARVER : Oh yeah . Things that the ordinary computer could never do . Vision . Speech
understanding . Musi c . Visual simulat ion .
End of Carver
Carver 3
1
Fi le : 3 Carver .doe
10/00
Carver Mead Interview Par t I I I
(Wi th Dick Lyon, Schlumberger AI researcher)
By : Gene Youngblood
Document 3 of 4 of Mead Interview
CARVER : When I say that one of our music chips is equal to 600 VAXes, wel l , "equal " is a funny word . What I
mean is that i f you do the same calculat ions on a VAX i t takes about ten minutes to do one second of sound . So one
of those chips does as much computat ion of that par t icular sort as 600 VAXes could do . Now VAXes are very
poor ly set up for doing computat ions of that sort , but so is every other general purpose computer . Now there are
special -purpose engines that can do comparable things ; so mine isn' t the only way to do i t .
GENE : What did you mean by "by the t ime you get done shuf f l ing al l the data around, you wind up wi th
something that 's a few hundred t imes real t ime instead of a few tens t imes real t ime?" What do you mean by
real t ime?
CARVER : You ought to be able to generate the sound as fast as you need the samples. To compute the samples as
fast as they' re needed for you to hear the sound . You cant do that on a regular computer . I f you look at how many
mul t ipl ies and adds i t takes per second to do these kinds of computat ions, i t 's only f ive or ten mi l l ion per second.
That sounds l ike f ive or ten t imes as many as a VAX can do . But i t turns out that 's not al l the VAX is doing . I t ends
up shuf f l ing al l the data around to be in the r ight place -- you fetch i t and you get i t in the machine and you
mul t iplying i t and then you get i t back out again . And al l those how many mul t ipl ies you can do per second don' t
count i f you' re only get t ing the data to mul t iply, you see . We were very surpr ised. People had told me this for
years, and I a lways thought wel l yeah, i t 's t rue for general programs, but I never thought that for a program l ike this
i t would be t rue that data shuf f l ing took most of the t ime . But i t turns out that there's enough pieces of data that you
have to gr ind on and put into other places that that ends up taking more t ime than al l the mul t ipl ies . Every t ime you
want a piece of data you've got to compute i t 's address, then do a part ial calculat ion, then f igure out where to put
the answer , and then put i t back, and so on . Al l those things eat you al ive . So only about one- tenth of the
inst ruct ions actual ly end up mul t iplying anything . So you could do the actual mul t ipl ies in zero t ime and i t doesn' t
speed things up very much. Whereas wi th special -purpose archi tecture you arrange i t so the data automat ical ly
f lows to the r ight place at the r ight t ime. In fact in our chip and others that was the key to the whole design -- to
make sure that that 's what happened .
GENE : Is there a rule of thumb for the amount of speedup you get f rom a dedicated archi tecture . Al l else
be ing equal , i f you' re going to put the same a lgor i thm in si l icon as opposed to running i t on a VAX . What
k ind of speedup in pr inciple, just by doing that?
CARVER : For a lot of the appl icat ions we've looked at i t 's more than two orders of magni tude . One way to look at
i t is that you get one factor of ten f rom what was just being discussed -- f rom the fact that i t 's special i zed -- and
then as many more factors of ten as you l ike f rom the fact that you' re put t ing more of the special i zed hard- ware in
that -- you get a factor of ten or 100 because you used 10 or 100 mul t ipl iers and another factor of ten because i t 's
not general purpose . So that 's a hundred or a thousand r ight there . So that 's why we' re at a factor of the order of
1000 -- because you've got things work ing in paral lel and then you' re not doing any data-shuf f l ing . So that 's
another factor of ten .
DICK: My speech recogni t ion machine's get t ing the same factor wi th respect to our general -purpose computer ; I
get somewhere between a factor of 1000 and 5000 speedup . I 'm doing speech recogni t ion by implement ing a mode l
of how the ear processes sounds . Sounds of al l sor ts including music .
CARVER : So my machine does this par t icular class of computat ions about 600 t imes faster than a VAX . But i t
won' t run a PASCAL program and i t doesn' t run UNIX and i t doesn' t maintain a f i le system. The way I think of
general purpose computers is they' re the l i t t le envi ronment that does al l those stupid things -- hooks up to
Ethernets, hooks up to telephone l ines, hooks up to keyboards, hooks up to humans, compi les languages, accesses
f i le systems -- does al l those things AND issues commands to the special -purpose engines that do the real ly hard
ASL
Carver 3
2
Fi le : 3 Carver .doc
grunt -work a thousand or more t imes faster than i t could .
CARVER : Six hundred t imes a VAX would be about ten t imes as fast as a Cray . I haven' t programmed this on a
Cray so I wouldn' t say that ; in fact a Cray is set up to do this k ind of calculat ion reasonably wel l also, so that for
this par t icular task the Cray might be more than 60 t imes a VAX. I want to be very careful not to mislead people
about this . One way of thinking about i t is that you' re not just taking the VAX and mak ing a special purpose thing ;
you' re taking the whole program that does a special thing on the VAX and you' re saying that I 'm going to take that
very special appl icat ion and instead of a general purpose programming language on a general purpose computer ,
I 'm going to put the whole thing -- appl icat ion and al l -- r ight down into si l icon .
GENE : Who invented the si l icon compi ler?
CARVER : I t evolved gradual ly over a per iod of about eight years . But the f i rst one that was recogni zable as a
compi ler instead of something less general was done by Dave Johannsen in 1977 . I did a very special purpose one
in 1971 for f ini te-state machines, but i t wasn' t a si l icon compi ler in the sense that we talk about them today.
GENE : The appearance of si l icon compi lers is a signi f icant histor ical event ; does what makes them possible
come out of your st ructured approach to VLSI design?
CARVER : I t had been possible for a long t ime . I t isn' t a mat ter of mak ing i t possible ; i t 's that people had been
thinking of hand-craf t ing everything because in the ear ly days you never had enough si l icon to waste any at al l .
And any st ructured approach to design is in some sense sl ight ly inef f icient at the bot tom level . You can a lways f ind
l i t t le places that aren' t al l f i l led up wi th t ransistors . Exact ly the same history happened in code. Back when
machines only had a 4K memory, people wrote every machine inst ruct ion because you couldn' t af ford any waste at
al l . But when you have a megabyte of memory you can let a compi ler al locate var iables because i f you waste ten
percent i t doesn' t mat ter any more . The same thing is t rue of si l icon compi lat ion : people did not foresee the fact
that we would have so much real estate avai lable; that the real probl em was the design cost , not the cost of the real
estate . When I t r ied to tel l people that in the ear ly days they laughed at me . That was wi thin f ive years of the t ime
they were standing up and saying i t 's the most impor tant problem for the semiconductor indust ry . They were
laughing when you would say that the design cost was going to be larger than the product ion cost for compl icated
par ts . Now that i t 's t rue i t 's them that invented i t . But at the t ime I remember t rying to get the Intel people interested
-- this was in 1973 -- and Gordon Moore said i t was an academic problem, and by the late 1970s he was publ ishing
his curve of the design costs going up to the moon. The compi ler viewpoint comes f rom saying we' re going to have
enough real estate and we' re not going to have enough engineer ing man-hours, so what you ought to be work ing on
is the design problem, not how dense is the si l icon.
DICK: But i t 's st i l l fai r to say that this approach of doing things in a more st ructured way is what made si l icon
compi lers possible, by set t ing up that way of thinking . To go f rom hand-craf t ing to st ructural bui lding blocks sets
the stage for the next thing, which is compi lat ion . So i t 's fai r to say that the Mead-Conway approach made si l icon
compi lers possible .
CARVER : And Dave Johannsen was the one who f i rst real ly saw how to pul l the whole thing together in a much
more general way than people had done before .
GENE : So i t 's a k ind of synergy between VLSI , whi ch makes possible a more simpl i f ied st ructured
approach, plus that mak ing possible the si l icon compi ler -- al l of that together resul ts in the abi l i ty to put
a lgor i thms in si l icon wi th a fast turnaround t ime . You can' t separate the compi ler f rom the st ructured
approach and you can' t separate the st ructured approach f rom VLSI .
CARVER : There are a lot of things that can' t be separated . Having people in business who are wi l l ing to fab chips
that you design . In fact we had to start a whole new set of companies to do that because the t radi t ional
semiconductor people didn' t want to do i t . They st i l l don' t want to do i t . They' l l do i t for thei r large customers who
want to make a mi l l ion par ts . So this thing couldn' t happen unt i l we had access to fabr icat ion. And there was a
ma jor amount of energy went into get t ing people to understand that there was a good business in that ; and r ight
now that 's the only par t of the semiconductor business that 's mak ing money . I t 's happening in a big way now .
DARPA provides fab services at a very low cost to research projects in a few hundred universi t ies . But there are
ASL
Carver 3
3
Fi le : 3 Carver .doe
also a number of commerc ia l places that wi l l do that k ind of thing now for low-volume engineer ing prototypes .
GENE : How do you talk about what is actual ly on a dedicated chip? What makes the adders and mul t ipl iers
in your chip dedicated?
CARVER : Wel l , on one of our chips we' re apt to have f i f ty mul t ipl iers al l work ing at the same t ime ; on a
microprocessor you have to have one -- or zero, more l ikely, because they use adders instead and make up the
mul t iply out of addi t ions . Almost al l microprocessors including the MC68000 have zero mul t ipl iers . Both in Dick's
speech chip and the chip we use for music, the key is there's a way to set i t up so that where the data comes f rom
and where i t goes to is something that can be set up and just run and not take a bunch of inst ruct ions to f igure out
everything .
GENE : Because the inst ruct ions are the chip?
CARVER : The chip has a special i zed way of set t ing up where the data should come f rom and where i t should go,
so that the faci l i t ies for mov ing data ef f icient ly f rom every place i t might want to come f rom to every place i t might
want to go to are a big par t of the chip . And i t 's not hardwi red to a par t icular algor i thm ; i t 's got enough f lexibi l i ty to
be able to run a reasonable number of algor i thms wi thin a class. Like di f ferent music inst rument mode ls can be put
on our chip . Di f ferent kinds of digi tal f i l ter ing st ructures can be put on Dick's speech chip .
GENE : So i t 's not accurate to say that this chip is a cel lo?
CARVER : I t can be conf igured to be any k ind of inst rument , but i t 's dedicated in the sense that i t per forms that
l imi ted class of calculat ions which are relevant to those physics formulas . The big chal lenge in this special i zed
hardware game is to make a piece of hardware that 's not so special i zed that i t 's only good for one thing . You want
to leave a cer tain amount of programmabi l i ty of some sor t . This resul ts in a good chunk of your si l icon area --
maybe as much as hal f -- being dedicated to the job of get t ing data f rom where i t 's coming f rom to where i t 's going .
In a general purpose computer that takes ninety percent of your resources ; in our chips i t 's probably less than 20
percent , in Dick's speech chip i t 's f i f ty percent . You get di f ferent amounts of general i ty for the di f ferent amounts of
overhead .
GENE : How many t ransistors is on your chip?
CARVER : I t has 64 mul t ipl iers, each giving a 32 by 32 mul t iply wi th a 64-bi t product . There are 32 stages of the
mul t iply . I t has about 200,000 t ransistors . That 's a lot less than the Hewlet t -Packard chip that has 450,000 . But for
this par t icular appl icat ion our chip is about 1000 t imes faster . The t ime-honored way of get t ing a high t ransistor
count is to put a lot of memory on the chip . Our chip has a lot of memory which is mixed in wi th the processors,
and the very thing that makes i t ef f icient is that you mix the processing in wi th the memory so you don' t have to
move things f rom the memory to a processing element and back . You mix them together so processing is going on
al l the t ime . Let me say whi le we' re at i t that the 600 VAXes est imate is ext remely conservat ive because the clock
for our chip is slowed down so that i t matches the sample rate which is the standard that al l D to A conver ters use .
There'd be nothing to prevent us f rom running the chip f ive t imes faster i f you wanted to do graphics instead of
sound. But in a sense that 's not fai r because we' re comput ing these samples ; and the fact that you could compute
them faster than real t ime doesn' t help . On the other hand, because a VAX computes them slower than real t ime we
ought to be able to at least count that somehow . But essent ial ly once you' re at real t ime at a given sampl ing
resolut ion you don' t need to go any faster . Your ear couldn' t hear i t anyway . Now i f we were work ing on bats
instead of humans, wel l bats can hear at 200 KHz instead of 20 -- they' re 10 t imes faster than people -- so then we'd
have to run the clock 10 t imes as fast . We could do that , too, in which case i t 'd be the equivalent of 6000 VAXes .
Now the other thing is that you may have the need to generate 10 musical inst ruments at once, and wi th our chip i f
you run i t 10 t imes faster i t st i l l cant qui te do that -- i t can generate one very fast inst rument but not ten at once .
Dick's speech chip has an ext ra degree of f lexibi l i ty that lets you be ten things at once instead of one thing very
fast . In fact his chip is not very good at doing one thing very fast , so he couldn' t make very good music for bats but
he could maybe analyze sounds f rom several microphones at once . That costs him a lot ; he has hal f his chip
dedicated to get t ing data f rom where i t 's coming f rom to where i t 's going and by the way stor ing i t temporar i ly in
between . That 's the ext ra cost of that ext ra general i ty . And that 's the t radeof f you make depending on what you
want to do . The discussion among people who do these special i zed archi tectures is another level up f rom al l this,
ASL
Carver 3
4
Fi le : 3 Carver .doc
namely, now that you've got things that run 1000 t imes as fast as a general purpose computer would on the same
problem, can you make i t 10,000 t imes or 100,000 t imes faster -- can you get an even bet ter match to the probl em
which uses the si l icon in even a bet ter way? I t 's just amaz ing when people start playing this game. I t 's not just more
concurrency, i t 's algor i thms that are more thought - through, t ighter . In fact both Dick and I have t raded of f for
general i ty the ul t imate in per formance . There would have been ways for each of us i f we'd wanted to be real ly
special i zed to make the things another order of magni tude faster . We chose to have some general i ty instead . For
example we both use a lot more bi ts of accuracy than are needed for most of the problems we' re at tacking, because
occasional ly you suddenly need more bi ts, so you spend the bi ts a lways and pay a big cost , but this means you
don' t of ten run into a problem where you don' t have enough bi ts . That 's one of the dimensions of var iabi l i ty, how
many bi ts you choose to put in . We use 64-bi t accumulators . Most people who do music synthesis would say that 's
out rageous, we' re throwing away resources .
GENE : Today to get an updated version of a sof tware package I buy a f loppy disk. How would I update my
computer i f everything's in hardware? Buy a new board?
CARVER : There's a l i t t le company in the bay area cal led Si l icon Solut ions, Inc . You should talk to them because
they make an algor i thm in si l icon . They founded this company on the premise that algor i thms in si l icon are going
to be the future . The i r f i rst product checks design rules on integrated ci rcui ts . So i t 's an integrated ci rcui t that
checks for errors in the next integrated ci rcui t . The next thing they' re bui lding is a chip simulator . What they did is
make an add-on for a standard workstat ion . So you can plug the card into your workstat ion's mul t ibus slot . And
there's a l i t t le sof tware package that goes wi th your standard UNIX operat ing system -- workstat ions are al l UNIX
based -- and now you can be up and running wi th thei r design-rule-checker in your workstat ion . So instead of a
disk that you plug into your disk slot there's a board you plug into the board slot . There's a chip that implemented
the Ethernet protocol . I t got bui l t on a l i t t le board that plugs into the PC . So that 's an exampl e of an al ready exist ing
approach . When you buy sof tware on a disk you pay f ive dol lars for the f loppy and three-hundred dol lars for the
ideas in i t . A board costs about the same, maybe ten or twenty dol lars for a cheap board instead of f ive dol lars for a
f loppy disk . Or even i f i t was $100 for the board you' re get t ing instead of something new but just as slow as ever ,
i t does something new but 1000 t imes faster . So that factor of 1000 costs you a hundred bucks over what i t would
be i f i t was a sof tware package . And you get a factor of 1000 . That 's a pret ty good pr ice . That 's a factor of ten per
dol lar .
End of Carver 3
Carver 3
5
Fi le : 3 Carver .doc
Interview: Mead 4
1
Fi le : 4 Carver .doe
10/00
Carver Mead Interview Par t IV
(Wi th Dick Lyon, Schlumberger AI researcher)
By : Gene Youngblood
(Document 4 of 4 of Mead Interview)
DICK: You asked about what i t 's l ike to design algor i thms when i t 's not just Pascal programs or something . I t 's a
di f ferent game, but people who design algor i thms a lways do i t wi th some target comput ing technology in mind,
whether i t 's a general purpose computer or ful l custom si l icon or maybe you' re designing the interconnect pat tern for
Carver 's chip to make a new inst rument mode l . Whatever your target technology is, that def ines the game you' re
playing when you design algor i thms . The neat thing about custom si l icon is that you've got a lot of new kinds of
games other than just t rying new programs . So designing musical inst ruments is a new k ind of game. You come up
wi th algor i thms that you could have wr i t ten in a general purpose programming language but you probably wouldn' t
have, because i f you had a general purpose computer to play wi th, you would have done something di f ferent -- more
compl icated, probably ; more ef f icient maybe . I f you' re designing f rom bare si l icon and you have to make a new
algor i thm, the game is wide open . Al l you know is you' re mak ing i t out of submicroscopic t ransistors . I f you' re
designing wi thin the context of somebody's si l icon compi ler , you' re a l i t t le more rest r icted than that -- you know you
can make i t out of predef ined modul e types and register types and bus st ructures and so on . so that def ines the rules
of the game . A programming language puts a lot of preconcept ions in your head about what you should do wi th a
computer .
CARVER : In fact you do things very di f ferent ly in di f ferent programming languages. Not because you couldn' t do
the same thing in two di f ferent languages but because the way you think in one language leads to a way of doing i t
which is natural in that language. Even though you could have thought in another way i t 's not as natural . So the
language of si l icon has cer tain things that are ext remely natural to i t . The idea of regular i ty matches very wel l the
idea that communicat ion is very expensive . I f you think of things local ly and have them communi cate not too
global ly wi th too many other things, a) : i t helps you to think about i t and make regular st ructures, and b) : i t also
makes things that are very high per formance . That was the par t that the old si l icon hackers missed . They didn' t
understand that a regular design can produce bet ter per formance than some i rregular way . Because you force your
thought processes to encompass the overal l way that the thing works.
DICK: You st i l l get quest ions f rom people who don' t know enough about i t who are steeped in the old lore but don' t
understand very much . They ask things l ike " I f you design a chip in the Mead-Conway st ructured style, how much
per formance do you have to give up : 20 percent , 30 percent?"
I say that 's a si l ly quest ion . The quest ion is how much
per formance can you gain. They think of the st ructure as being an art i f icial l imi tat ion, which i t is, but i t al lows you
to do things you couldn' t or wouldn' t do otherwise . And you get to invent the st ructure, which means you make your
problem easier not only at the bot tom level of hack ing t ransistors but at the next level up -- you can do creat ive
design and algor i thm planning at a higher level and make i t easy to bui ld the whole thing and make i t ef f icient .
Instead of doing i t the old way where you draw many pages of schemat ics and then have somebody t ry to force i t
into the chip .
GENE : Why can' t we get both VLSI and high speed at the same t ime?
CARVER : In 1956 when I was a student i t was thought that i f you make a bigger t ransistor i t a lways got slower .
That was the common exper ience of the day . So this one company said i f I make a t iny t ransistor I can make i t
faster , and i f I make a bunch of these l i t t le t ransistors and put them al l in paral lel , why isn' t that faster? We l l i t is
faster . Because al l the parasi t ics that loaded down the big t ransistors aren' t a proper ty of the individual t ransistor ; the
real problem was that people were scal ing things wrong to make the big t ransistors . They were thinking about i t
wrong . And these guys had f igured i t out . They asked me to prove scient i f ical ly that you don' t have to get something
that goes slower and takes more power i f you make i t bigger . So I ana lyzed what was actual ly going on there and
that 's actual ly what got me star ted thinking on this whol e t rain of scale -- the very f i rst consul t ing job I ever had . I t
turns out that i t 's the same k ind of misconcept ion when people assume something is constant that isn' t when you
scale .
Interview: Mead 4
2
Fi le : 4 Carver .doe
GENE : I f that 's the case, then, can we put a number on the speed l imi t of the Von Neumann computer?
CARVER : We can do that very wel l . Let 's do a one-chip machine. Things are scal ing in such a way that the
power /delay product is get t ing bet ter by something between the square and the cube of the scal ing factor . As you get
close to the l imi ts you don' t get the whole cube law any more . So i f you take the minimum-si ze t ransistors -- quar ter-
micron -- you have gate delay t imes in the 10 picosecond range . People have al ready made ci rcui ts wi th 30
picoseconds and the latest I heard was 18 picoseconds in submicron CMOS . And i t 's going to get bet ter . So the
speed l imi t of one isolated gate not dr iving anything wi l l be in the 10 picosecond range ; see, the probl em wi th the
Von Neumann archi tecture is they have these damn long wi res you have to dr ive, which is inherent in the large
RAM conf igurat ion -- so you need ei ther long wi res or many stages of delays . So you can say, wel l , what do I have
to do to dr ive that thing? Wel l , the wi res in terms of the technology underneath, are get t ing longer because you st i l l
want the wi re to go clear across the chip because you' re bui lding a bigger machine ; on the other hand the t ransistor
i tsel f is get t ing bet ter able to dr ive, because the channel lengths are shor ter and the submicron t ransistors are
st ronger for a given length . So when you add i t al l up, the actual speed gets bet ter about l inear ly wi th the scal ing . So
f rom where we are now in device si ze -- say 1 .25 micron -- that 's a factor of f ive f rom the .25-micron technology,
and i t runs at about 20 MHz . So you can look forward -- i f you' re going to bui ld a microcomputer that f i l ls a chip at
a quar ter-micron and you have good processing and you've done things sensibly, you can look forward to in excess
of 100 MHz clock rates for those things . That 's al ready respectable by the standards of people l ike Cray . And you
can look forward to the same k ind of complexi t ies you have on those kinds of machines . Right now you have
complexi t ies l ike you have on VAXes on one chip, there's no reason you can' t have a complexi ty on the order of a
Cray on one chip by that t ime. And the power per uni t area would be about the same as i t is today.
GENE : So the ul t imate speed of the Von Neumann machine is about ten t imes what i t is today, that is, ten
t imes a Cray?
CARVER : No . You'd be just about get t ing in the range on one chip where Cray is today by the t ime you do al l that .
The speed l imi t on a single chip is about a Cray . That 's a good number to keep in your head: you' l l get about one
Cray on a chip, including the clock rate and everything, by the t ime you push ordinary MOS devices as far as they' re
going to go . That is, i f you choose to make a Cray . Whi ch is an elaborated or extended version of the Von Neumann
archi tecture wi th vector processing. So we' re talking between 50 and 100 megaf lops depending on how wel l i ts
done .
GENE : And how much speedup wi l l we get f rom new mater ials l ike ga l l ium arsenide? A factor of ten more?
CARVER : I doubt i t . Fi rst , fundamenta l ly you can' t make i t as smal l as si l icon . The reason gal l ium arsenide is fast is
because the elect ron mobi l i ty is high . The reason the mobi l i ty is high is because the ef fect ive mass is low . This
means the tunnel ing distances are longer . There's a di rect relat ionship between ef fect ive mass and how far you can
tunnel . Since tunnel ing is one of the things that restr icts how smal l you can make devices, to the extent that that 's the
l imi t ing factor -- and i t does enter in submicron devices -- you' l l bump against i t sooner wi th gal l ium arsenide than
you wi l l wi th si l icon . Exact ly how al l that comes out is not known r ight now. Nobody has yet done i t . Meanwhi l e
people are work ing on some very fancy things cal led super lat t ice st ructures which give ext remely high mobi l i t ies .
But exact ly how the device st ructures are going to scale is something we need to know . These are compound layers
whose lat t ices match and you can make the bandgap go up and down by a sor t of stai rstep thing . That makes a
quantum ef fect on the elect rons . I t basical ly shapes the bandgap in a nice way and al ready McGi l l has worked out a
theory for that and the measured shi f t in the photo-emission has turned out to agree exact ly wi th his theory . That
would be the HEMT device . That may get you the factor of ten or even more in terms of raw speed. But you can' t
take the numbers for individual devices and apply them to large-scale ci rcui ts because . For instance what 's wrong
wi th gal l ium arsenide technology r ight now is not the individual devices . They work bet ter than you would have
thought . They' re bet ter than my f i rst predict ions, because there's a f luke, there's a violat ion of Murphy's Law that
happens . When an elect ron goes in under the gate you'd think i t would come up to saturated veloci ty -- which is only
a l i t t le bet ter in gal l ium arsenide than in si l icon -- but i t turns out they do a bal l ist ic overshoot , so they actual ly, for
shor t channel ings, go faster than the saturated veloci ty because they haven' t star ted to have enough col l isions yet .
That was a violat ion of Murphy's Law of the f i rst order . I t was wonder ful . The real problem wi th that k ind of
technology is that there's only one k ind of device -- a deplet ion mode device . So you have to have the gate vol tage
of opposi te polar i ty f rom the drain vol tage, which means you have to level shi f t between every stage . I t 's horr ible,
just l ike the old vacuum tube things . And i t turns out that ends up taking more space than the ci rcui t by a lot . So i t
ASL
Interview: Mead 4
3
Fi le : 4 Carver .doe
isn' t at al l clear that the densi t ies wi l l ever be compet i t ive wi th what you can do in si l icon .
DICK : But for that same reason i t would probably make possible very high densi ty, very fast memor i es. And you
might st i l l be able to get a Cray-si ze Von Neumann machine on a chip because the memory is where most of i t goes .
In fact as you everything up and the amount of global wi r ing gets more and more dominant , the amount of memory
gets bigger and bigger , the power of the ar i thmet ic processor goes up a l i t t le bi t and that 's i t . So the biggest thing
goes into more wi re, the next biggest thing goes into more memory, and the least gain is in the processor . This is
what people have been doing . When you grow a Von Neumann machine in any technology that 's what happens
whether i t 's on a chip or not . Cray is a depar ture f rom that because they f igured out how to put a lot more in the
processing ; but i t 's less Von Neumann- l ike than other machines .
CARVER : Cray is one of the people who f rom day one real i zed that , wel l , he said two things . He said computer
design has two problems . One is how you get the heat out . The second is how you keep the thickness of the wi r ing
mat wi thin bounds . He thought the key to his design was get t ing the heat out . We l l we can take care of mak ing more
compl ex things wi th less heat by just scal ing down the si l icon . So that par t isn' t the key ; but the other par t is, the
wi r ing management . And he was the only ma jor computer designer that I know of who speci f ical ly twenty years ago
ident i f ied the thickness of the wi r ing mat as the dominant thing about computer design. Everybody else was saying
wel l you have to have the x-y-z inst ruct ion and there's this and that , and he was saying no, i t 's the thickness of that
wi r ing mat .
GENE : Wi l l there ever be a Von Neumann machine wi th a one nanosecond clock.
CARVER : There might be . We al ready got you to under ten nano-seconds wi th our l i t t le chip at a quar ter-micron .
You could do i t today wi th a smal l enough Von Neumann machine . A real simple machine . You'd come close to that
today using submicron CMOS . They've al ready demonst rated .8-micron CMOS wi th 35-picosecond gates. You
could no doubt make a credible one-nanosecond smal l Von Neumann machine . I f i t was only eight bi ts wide and
had only three registers . Or i f you bui l t i t l ike Cray did and pipel ine the hel l out of i t . And we could cer tainly make
these bi t -ser ial things to run that fast . That 's our music chips and Dick's speech chip, where you do one bi t at a t ime .
Because the signals only have to go to the next stage instead of going clear across the chip .
GENE : Is RISC archi tecture relevant only to Von Neumann archi tecture?
CARVER : Yes, and what i t real ly means is something they did ear ly on and forgot about later . People used to bui ld
al l machines as reduced inst ruct ion sets because they couldn' t af ford anything else. The best exampl e of that was the
old Data General Nova, which had a real simple inst ruct ion set . Ever since then they bui l t in ever more elaborate
inst ruct ion sets, bel ieving that i t was going to make thei r computers run faster . And i t turns out that what l imi ts your
computer is the load inst ruct ion and the store inst ruct ion and the index calculat ions . I f you do those fast i t doesn' t
much mat ter what else you do . And i t doesn' t at al l mat ter how fast you do ar i thmet ic . So people f inal ly went back
and rediscovered the fact that had been known for a long t ime by good computer designers : that i t doesn' t real ly
much mat ter what you do wi th inst ruct ions i f you get the basic ones real fast . So they said why put in al l the others,
why not just make them up out of these pr imi t ives? You have to have a compi ler that 's smar t enough to do a decent
job of that .
DICK: The other argument is that the machines wi th compl icated inst ruct ion sets don' t real ly get any advantage
f rom them unless you have a compi ler that 's smar t enough to f igure out when to use compl icated inst ruct ions . Wi th
the RISC you may get bet ter per formance even wi th a very simple compi ler .
CARVER : But in fact nobody has yet done the real exper iment of actual ly mak ing a complete system wi th a
complete operat ing system and everything on one of these RISC things and actual ly honest - to-god put t ing i t side by
side wi th some other computer and given i t the smoke test . That ' l l no doubt happen but i t 's incredibly late in coming,
because the f igures people quote are concocted examples rather than real honest - to-god things happening .
GENE : Sure ly there wi l l a lways be a supercomputer , because there' l l a lways be the ten-mi l l ion-dol lar
machine .
CARVER : Oh but you know what i t 's going to be? I t 's going to be one of these chips that has the Cray on i t and a
ASL
Interview: Mead 4
4
Fi le : 4 Carver .doe
bunch of memory and discs and al l that , which wi l l eat up a whole lot of money, and then i t 's going to be a box that
has one k ind of special purpose chip on i t whi ch does the signal processing things, and another card that has another
k ind of chip which does the geomet ry calculat ions, and another card wi th chips that do whatever else . When you talk
about extending the inst ruct ion set . . . i t 's l ike r ight now when you buy a machine you get an ar i thmet ic accelerator
and you plug i t in and i t runs ten t imes as fast doing f loat ing-point . So you' l l have something that runs ten- thousand
t imes as fast doing signal processing . And something that runs a mi l l ion t imes as fast doing graphics render ing . And
something that runs a hundred- thousand t imes as fast doing whatever else you' re doing . There' l l be these cards
which are these accelerators for special classes of problems . And they' l l plug into this thing . There wi l l a lways be
card cages and power suppl ies and fans (or cryogenic cool ing systems) but the thing you plug in there is going to
have a god-awful amount of capabi l i ty compared wi th the l i t t le poor wi zened Cray that 's si t t ing on that one chip.
DICK: The interest ing problem is to f igure out how there wi l l be ten-mi l l ion-dol lar machines . I mean, what par t of
that are going to spend your money on . I bel ieve there wi l l st i l l be such machines but they' l l probably be dominated
by head-per- t rack discs or something l ike that . You' l l spend nine out of the ten mi l l ion dol lars get t ing enough
secondary storage and i /o bandwidth that 's fast enough to keep up wi th the thing . Any one of our l i t t le chips can
generate data a god-awful amount faster than any disc can soak i t up . We solve the probl em by just put t ing i t out on
a loudspeaker . We never store samples at al l , ever ; and i t may be that for some appl icat ions you never would need to
store al l that data .
DICK: In the speech analysis problem, you come in wi th some sampled speech, which may be at a reasonably low
rate l ike you get of f a telephone system, maybe bet ter qual i ty. In the intermediate calculat ions you end up wi th
places in your block diagram between the f i rst block and the second block where the data rate may be 100 t imes
higher than what you star ted out wi th. There's no way you' re going to feed that back into your general purpose
computer or put i t on disc or anything else. But i f you put special i zed stuf f out there to keep deal ing wi th i t unt i l
you've got ten close to an answer , unt i l you've narrowed i t down to what word was said, then you can throw away al l
that intermediate data. i t 's a t remendous amount of data but you don' t need to keep i t . You just look at i t to ext ract
the next stuf f f rom i t and you throw i t away . Put i t in the bi t -bucket .
GENE : What you guys are doing is amaz ing.
DICK: I t 's happening so fast that even new engineer ing graduates aren' t aware of the hal f of i t .
GENE : Any given appl icat ion a lways has a l imi t ing case. In imaging, you don' t need to compute more than
what your display device can show.
CARVER: There's no point in mak ing a picture faster than real t ime, any more than there is in me mak ing samples
faster than real t ime .
GENE : Alvy Ray Smi th thinks you need a complexi ty of 80 mi l l ion polygons per f rame for photorea l natural
phenomena .
CARVER : That 's a Jim Ka j iya measure : a compl ex scene has more than one polygon per pixel . Actual ly i t turns out
there are some very interest ing problems associated wi th scenes that are much more compl ex than one polygon per
pixel . Whi ch is the k ind our guys deal wi th.
GENE : So let 's say we reach some arbi t rary point beyond whi ch no more computat ion power is needed, then
you' re saying that i t 's probably going to be possible to put that k ind of power on a board and that 's that .
CARVER : You just use i t unt i l you get a bet ter idea of how to do i t, bet ter algor i thms . The real interest ing problem
now is the or igin of l i fe problem, r ight? I t 's the thing I talked about wi th the "Newmath" company . They' re work ing
the or igin of l i fe probl em. They want to design si l icon algor i thms so they' re bui lding things that ' l l help them do that
-- and by the way they can sel l that too, because other people wi l l want to make si l icon algor i thms too -- people who
want to make bet ter graphics algor i thms, who's going to help them? Because you've got to f igure out i f your ideas
are r ight before you go and make the bet ter graphics algor i thm . So there's a lways going to be room for a thing that 's
more general than the speci f ic thing because somebody has to invent the next one . So you' l l need a deve lopment
system that 's an engineer ing work- stat ion for people doing computer graphics, or speech or music -- whi ch is not
ASL
Interview: Mead 4
5
Fi le : 4 Carver .doe
real ly a general purpose computer but i t more general than the f inal si l icon algor i thms i t wi l l produce .
DICK: This is exact ly the idea that mot ivated my archi tecture: make a machine much more general than what I
wanted to do . So that I could exper iment wi th algor i thms on that machine . So that the next t ime around I ' l l know
what I want to do and I can put i t in si l icon .
GENE : So say we've got the l imi ts of what we need to do on one card of special i zed chips, and I 've got my
general purpose computer cont rol l ing i t . So you' re saying that at that point a supercomputer would be a
system l ike that but one whi ch would do al l these things .
CARVER : And a lot of them . So that your inst ruct ions, instead of being a load inst ruct ion or a store inst ruct ion --
you st i l l have those -- but what you real ly do is you say go Fourr ier- t ransform this, go render this display l ist on the
screen wi th the ray- t racing board, go analyze this speech wi th this other board.
GENE : But in fact a network in whi ch those funct ions are dist r ibuted, each node wi th a par t icular special ty,
would be equivalent to the supercomputer . You could synthesi ze a supercomputer by having smal l processors
on a network.
CARVER : I think that thing you just said is going to replace the supercomputer as a concept : you have servers on a
network . You have a server that does the Four ier analysis and a server that does the graphics render ing and so on,
instead of thinking of i t as be ing in one box . Because then i t 's just a much more convenient setup . So in fact I don' t
see any great big blue boxes wi th giant power suppl ies wi thin a few years . I just don' t see them at al l . Because you
can buy something that 's got a thousand t imes the capabi l i ty in one of these l i t t le boxes you hook on a network . That
makes so much more sense .
GENE : So bandwidth is emerging as the ma jor bot t leneck.
CARVER : I t a lways has been. I t 's a ma jor oppor tuni ty that bigger bandwidths are avai lable now . Fibers not only
carry more, they go longer distances . The networks you' re l ikely to f ind in a medium-si zed company or research lab
is the network that runs down the hal l to the room where you've got al l your special i zed machines . So you can use
this power ful machine f rom your own of f ice . That k ind of net - work is providing a lot of power to the people and
you don' t have to go out over the phone company to do any of that . That 's a decision that can be made by a smal l
company, not a big company . So what we' re f inding is that al l of the def ini t ions of these things are be ing done by the
people who are bui lding the stuf f . And the government agencies and AT&T come along later and say, "Oh, gee! We
didn' t say i t was OK. " We l l you didn' t have to say i t was OK, thank god; somebody got a chance to do i t anyway . I f
we were wai t ing around for a network standard to emerge nobody would have any networks r ight now . In fact we've
had networks since the mid-70s because people just went of f and did them . When you leave the bui lding, that 's
when the pol i t ics start . I t 's horr ible .
GENE : Where are we now in speech recogni t ion in relat ion to something that could be put into most user
inter faces? Is this technology we've just been talking about leading to a solut ion of the user - independent
recogni t ion device wi thin ten years .
DICK: Cer tainly wi thin ten years there's going to be a lot happening . I t 's a dangerous f ield to make predict ions
about . I f you look ten or twenty years ago people were mak ing very opt imist ic predict ions and not doing the r ight
things . What 's happened dur ing that t ime is that , in many cases people have pretended that the probl em is
technology l imi ted . So every t ime there's an advance in IC technology they make the next bet ter thing, but i t 's st i l l
no good .
CARVER : I t 's just l ike microcomputers . The idea st ream has not got ten bet ter as fast as the technology has . So they
make a much faster thing that 's st i l l lousy because i t doesn' t have any new ideas in i t . That has happened a lot . Just
l ike the microprocessor is an image of the ugly old computers of yesteryear .
DICK: When you record wi th just one microphone you lose a lot of informat ion . So whi le your two ears don' t have
any t rouble hear ing me, this one microphone may have more di f f icul ty . This is one area where there's a clear
di rect ion that 's needed in the speech recogni t ion business -- things that l isten to people talking need to have two
ASL
Interview: Mead 4
6
Fi le : 4 Carver .doe
microphones at least . They don' t . None of them do. Because people haven' t f igured out how to take advantage of
that . That 's one of the things I 'm work ing on .
CARVER : That 's the stupidest most zero-order thing you can imagine, but i t st i l l hasn' t been done to this day .
DICK: And one excuse they make is that i t would cost twice as much si l icon to analyze signals f rom two
microphones . That 's a total ly lame excuse, because i f you can make the problem work by throwing si l icon at i t you
ought to . Because nothing else is work ing . But i t 's not that simple . You've got to have the ideas of what to do wi th
the si l icon other than put more memory in i t and recogni ze more words poor ly -- which is what people are doing .
The key thing that 's mot ivat ing my own research is to f igure out how people do i t and mode l the human hear ing
system . That approach is not far enough along yet to show demonst rated good resul ts, but i t is far enough along to
be ext remely opt imist ic about i t .
GENE : Not far enough on the biology side?
DICK: No, in my actual implementat ion of ideas . I can' t yet show you a system that achieves spectacular
per formance . But I can show prel iminary resul ts that look encouraging .
GENE : Do we know how people do i t?
DICK: We know a lot about how people do i t, but there are st i l l some open quest ions . There's an area that 's not
receiving enough research at tent ion . There's a lot of research in the physiology of the hear ing system and
psychophysics, that k ind of thing, but not enough on the computat iona l approach -- t rying to f igure out what are the
algor i thms that the human is doing .
CARVER : In fact , work l ike the people here are doing is very much in the very near future, i t wi l l st imulate a lot of
biology work because i t wi l l raise quest ions that have not been addressed by the biology communi ty . Because
they' re not t rying to bui ld a system and unless you t ry to bui ld i t you simply don' t get faced wi th those quest ions . So
I think there's going to be a synergy between people l ike Di ck and the biologists and the psycho-acoust ic and
psycho-vision people that is going to real ly . . . in fact both of us are spending a lot of our t ime doing that now because
i t 's just a very gorgeous area that 's a lmost untapped.
DICK: The biologists are start ing to understand how impor tant i t is to look at the computat iona l aspects, so we've
formed some beginnings of some impor tant col laborat ions wi th a couple of biologists .
CARVER: Af ter al l , there's this work ing computer that does this wonder ful thing, that people haven' t ana lyzed as a
computer .
DICK : How do you compare how a microprocessor is put together to the way Carver 's chip is put together . The best
thing that works real ly wel l is a chip photo . Just show a picture of the chips. The di f ference between a regular design
and a non-regular design doesn' t need to be explained . I t 's just there, and st r ikingly obvious . Carver 's chip is simple
enough, that in addi t ion to that you could actual ly wr i te down the ent i rety of informat ion that i t contains. You could
wr i te the CIF-code (Cal tech Intermediate Form) for the layout in f ive pages . I t 's a representat ion of geomet ry . You
could have basical ly a pr intout of the computer text f i le f rom which the chip is created . i t would be interest ing to
show the chip, the code that created the chip, and cont rast that wi th the quant i t ies of informat ion that the chip
produces. The leverage is the fact that you put a l i t t le bi t of informat ion into i t to make the chip, and the chip is able
to produce back huge quant i t ies of informat ion every second, which sound l ike music . I t 's an informat ion ampl i f ier .
So the pictures and the l ist ing, even though i t 's ent i rely unintel l igible, would be interest ing to see that there aren' t too
many bi ts there .
End of Carver 4
