RESOURCE LETTER
Resource Letters are guides for college and university physicists, astronomers, and other scientists to literature, websites, and other teaching aids.
Each Resource Letter focuses on a particular topic and is intended to help teachers improve course content in a speciﬁc ﬁeld of physics or to
introduce nonspecialists to this ﬁeld. The Resource Letters Editorial Board meets at the AAPT Winter Meeting to choose topics for which Resource
Letters will be commissioned during the ensuing year. Items in the Resource Letter below are labeled with the letter E to indicate elementary level or
material of general interest to persons seeking to become informed in the ﬁeld, the letter I to indicate intermediate level or somewhat specialized
material, or the letter A to indicate advanced or specialized material. No Resource Letter is meant to be exhaustive and complete; in time there may
be more than one Resource Letter on a given subject. A complete list by ﬁeld of all Resource Letters published to date is at the website http://
ajp.dickinson.edu/Readers/resLetters.html. Suggestions for future Resource Letters, including those of high pedagogical value, are welcome and
should be sent to Professor Roger H. Stuewer, Editor, AAPT Resource Letters, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Minnesota, 116
Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455; e-mail: rstuewer@physics.umn.edu
Resource Letter ALIP–1: Active-Learning Instruction in Physics
David E. Meltzer
Mary Lou Fulton Teachers College, Arizona State University, 7271 E. Sonoran Arroyo Mall, Mesa,
Arizona 85212
Ronald K. Thornton
Departments of Physics and Education, Center for Science and Mathematics Teaching, Tufts University,
Medford, Massachusetts 02115
(Received 19 September 2011; accepted 30 December 2011)
This Resource Letter provides a guide to the literature on research-based active-learning instruction
in physics. These are instructional methods that are based on, assessed by, and validated through
research on the teaching and learning of physics. They involve students in their own learning
more deeply and more intensely than does traditional instruction, particularly during class time.
The instructional methods and supporting body of research reviewed here offer potential for
signiﬁcantly improved learning in comparison to traditional lecture-based methods of college
and university physics instruction. We begin with an introduction to the history of active learning
in physics in the United States, and then discuss some methods for and outcomes of assessing
pedagogical effectiveness. We enumerate and describe common characteristics of successful
active-learning instructional strategies in physics. We then discuss a range of methods for introducing
active-learning instruction in physics and provide references to those methods for which there is
published documentation of student learning gains. V
C 2012 American Association of Physics Teachers.
[DOI: 10.1119/1.3678299]
I. INTRODUCTION
We provide a guide to the literature on research-based
active-learning instruction in physics. This refers to instruc-
tional methods that are based on, assessed by, and validated
through research on the teaching and learning of physics.
Active-learning instruction involves students in their own learn-
ing more deeply and more intensely than does traditional
instruction, particularly during class time, in ways we shall ex-
plicitly identify. Interest in and use of these instructional meth-
ods in the United States have grown dramatically over the past
25 years, driven by a large and continually expanding research
base that validates their effectiveness. There is a substantial
body of evidence that demonstrates that these methods, in their
most modern form, offer potential for signiﬁcantly improved
learning in comparison to traditional lecture-based methods in
college and university physics instruction. The methods are
very diverse: they may incorporate techniques such as real-time
computerized data collection and display, Socratic “guided
inquiry,” interactive computer simulations, and structured
problem-solving, along with many others.
The methods we describe share three common features:
(1) they are explicitly based on research in the learning and
teaching of physics; (2) they incorporate classroom and/or
laboratory activities that require all students to express their
thinking through speaking, writing, or other actions that go
beyond listening and the copying of notes, or execution of
prescribed procedures; (3) they have been tested repeatedly
in actual classroom settings and have yielded objective evi-
dence of improved student learning. (Another term that has
often been used for research-based active-learning instruc-
tion in physics is “Interactive Engagement” [Ref. 10]. We
don’t believe there are signiﬁcant distinctions between the
intended meanings of these terms.)
We acknowledge that it is possible to satisfy criterion #2
without satisfying the other two criteria. Indeed, the terms
“active learning” and “interactive engagement” have them-
selves been applied to practices that are not explicitly based
on or validated by research. Our practice for citation in this
Resource Letter is to require that all three criteria be met for
instructional methods originating after 1970. However, as
discussed below, these post-1970 research-based methods
have origins that are directly traceable to still earlier devel-
opments in the history of physics education, and those earlier
developments will be discussed in a separate section.
(We should also note that although students involved in
reading a textbook, taking notes during lecture, or solving
478
Am. J. Phys. 80 (6), June 2012
http://aapt.org/ajp
V
C 2012 American Association of Physics Teachers
478
end-of-chapter problems can be said to be engaged in learn-
ing activities, these do not—by themselves, or even to-
gether—satisfy the criteria speciﬁed above.)
Although one might adopt the three characteristics as a
minimal, if perhaps sufﬁcient deﬁnition for “active-learning
instruction in physics,” we believe that they do not provide
an adequate description. Decades of research and practice
have demonstrated that methods that meet the three cited cri-
teria also share a substantially larger group of common char-
acteristics, although in varying proportions and in many and
diverse formats. We list those common characteristics here
and, in Sec. V, describe them in more detail along with cita-
tions to relevant references in this Resource Letter.
Research-based active-learning instructional methods in
physics, as deﬁned in this Resource Letter, share most or all
of the following characteristics:
(a) Instruction is informed and explicitly guided by research
regarding students’ pre-instruction knowledge state and
learning trajectory, including:
(1) Speciﬁc learning difﬁculties related to particular
physics concepts;
(2) Speciﬁc ideas and knowledge elements that are
potentially productive and useful;
(3) Students’ beliefs about what they need to do in order
to learn;
(4) Speciﬁc learning behaviors;
(5) General reasoning processes.
(b) Speciﬁc student ideas are elicited and addressed.
(c) Students are encouraged to “ﬁgure things out for
themselves.”
(d) Students engage in a variety of problem-solving activ-
ities during class time.
(e) Students express their reasoning explicitly.
(f)
Students often work together in small groups.
(g) Students receive rapid feedback in the course of their
investigative or problem-solving activity.
(h) Qualitative
reasoning and conceptual
thinking are
emphasized.
(i)
Problems are posed in a wide variety of contexts and
representations.
(j)
Instruction frequently incorporates use of actual physi-
cal systems in problem solving.
(k) Instruction recognizes the need to reﬂect on one’s own
problem-solving practice.
(l)
Instruction emphasizes linking of concepts into well-
organized hierarchical structures.
(m) Instruction integrates both appropriate content (based on
knowledge of students’ thinking) and appropriate beha-
viors (requiring active student engagement).
Active-learning instructional methods are similar to other
instructional methods in that they are ultimately intended to
give students a solid conceptual foundation in physics, and to
aid them to reason effectively and succeed at problem-solving
tasks. However, they differ from traditional lecture-based
methods in putting far greater emphasis on engaging students
in a variety of speciﬁc classroom activities. Many of these
active-learning methods engage students in directly ﬁnding
answers through hands-on laboratory activities. They aim to
generate, through interactions with peers and instructors,
understandings that eventually match those of physicists.
Some methods use technological tools; some make extensive
use of mathematical modeling; some do neither. Sometimes
students interact with the physical world indirectly, through
the medium of videos of physical events or computer simula-
tions that are analyzed and modeled by student-friendly soft-
ware. Simple observational experiments using no special
educational technology form the foundation of other instruc-
tional materials. Some make use only of paper and pencil, yet
still engage students in learning activities that are demonstra-
bly more effective than traditional lectures and homework.
Active-learning instructional methods strongly encourage
learning from peers, emphasize rapid feedback, and guide
students to express and reﬂect on their own reasoning
processes. Some of the techniques might be helpful in
“traditional” instructional environments; however, it is only
when applied in contexts explicitly based on research into
student learning that superior learning gains have been
clearly and repeatedly demonstrated. Henceforth, we will
refer to “active-learning instructional methods” without
explicitly stating that they are research-based.
A large body of peer-reviewed research for which we pro-
vide references indicates that typical learning gains for the
majority of students on qualitative, conceptual physics ques-
tions, when engaged in “traditional” instructional activities,
are around 10–15 percentage points on standard diagnostic
exams; see, for example, Ref. 10. (This represents the pre-to-
post-instruction gain, and corresponds to correcting !20%
of incorrect pretest responses). By contrast, research-based
active-learning materials and methods produce gains up to
and often more than double that amount on similar questions.
For example, in a recent study (Ref. 74), a sample of more
than 3000 students from ten universities showed gains from
active-learning instructional materials to be more than four
times those obtained through standard instruction. The
active-learning methods also generally produce gains on
traditional, quantitative physics problems that are equivalent
or superior to gains observed with traditional instruction.
To be considered for inclusion in this Resource Letter we
required that curricular materials, methods, and tools be useful
for undergraduates in colleges and universities. Many of the
materials we reference are also suitable for use in high
schools; however, that is not our focus. All materials are
research-based in the sense that they were developed using the
methods of research in physics education and have been sub-
jected to efforts to evaluate the learning of students who use
them. Our minimum criterion for inclusion is that a
curriculum or instructional program must have a citable peer-
reviewed publication that documents, in some fashion, evi-
dence for the pedagogical efﬁcacy of the method or material.
(Historical references in Sec. III are not uniformly held to this
standard, and websites containing materials that are research-
based, but not necessarily research-validated, are included in
Sec. II E.) An additional constraint is that we only included
curricular materials that are readily available either in print or
CD/DVD, or online. The references we cite all have a very
strong and speciﬁc focus on physics; space limitations
preclude us from including any of the vast body of literature
on active-learning instruction in other (or in general) contexts.
Finally, we only cite materials in English, because English is
the predominant common language of our audience.
The organization of the remainder of this Resource Letter
is as follows:
Section II—General references to journals, conference
proceedings, books, and online resources that deal exten-
sively with active-learning instruction in physics.
479
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
479
Section III—Historical perspective that traces the develop-
ment of active-learning physics instruction in the U.S. from
its origins during the 1800s.
Section IV—Research-based assessment methods and
assessment outcomes for active-learning instruction.
Section V—Common characteristics of active-learning
instructional strategies in physics.
Section VI—Active-learning instructional materials for in-
troductory algebra- and calculus-based physics courses: (a)
lecture-based; (b) laboratory-based; (c) hybrid lecture-lab
materials; (d) tutorials and problem-solving worksheets; (e)
computer simulations and intelligent tutors.
Section VII—Active-learning instructional materials for
intermediate- and advanced-level physics courses.
Section VIII—Active-learning instructional materials for
courses targeted at preservice teachers and nonscience
students.
Section IX—Conclusions.
II. GENERAL REFERENCES
A. Journals
Curricula and research results related to active-learning
instruction in physics are published in a wide variety of jour-
nals, including education journals related to cognitive sci-
ence,
educational
psychology,
computers,
and
general
science, but the journals listed below have the most pro-
nounced focus on physics.
American Journal of Physics. Generally addressed to uni-
versity and college instructors, with many articles of signiﬁ-
cance to researchers. A source for authoritative research on
physics education since the 1970s.
American Physical Society Forum on Education Newslet-
ter: <http://www.aps.org/units/fed/newsletters/index.cfm>
Journal of Physics Teacher Education Online: <http://
www.phy.ilstu.edu/jpteo/>
Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education
Research: <http://prst-per.aps.org/>. Generally addressed to
researchers.
Physics Education. Addressed to pre-college teachers, and
university and college instructors.
The Physics Teacher. Addressed to pre-college teachers,
and university and college instructors.
B. Conference proceedings
1. The Changing Role of Physics Departments in Modern
Universities: Proceedings of International Conference
on Undergraduate Physics Education, edited by E. F.
Redish and J. S. Rigden (AIP, Woodbury, NY, 1997), AIP
Conference Proceedings 399; Part One: Presentations;
Part Two: Sample Classes. Part Two includes a unique
collection of extended, detailed descriptions of some of
the most inﬂuential active-learning physics curricula of
the past 20 years. One of the most inﬂuential and wide-
ranging conferences of recent years. (E-I)
Beginning in 2003, the annual proceedings of the Physics
Education Research Conferences have been published by the
American Institute of Physics and are accessible online to
subscribers at <http://proceedings.aip.org/>. Many of the
proceedings papers are also available for free download at
<http://www.per-central.org/conferences/>. These confer-
ences include:
2. Physics Education Research Conference, AIP Confer-
ence Proceedings: 2003, Vol. 720; 2004, Vol. 790; 2005,
Vol. 818; 2006, Vol. 883; 2007, Vol. 951; 2008, Vol.
1064; 2009, Vol. 1179; 2010, Vol. 1289; 2011, Vol. 1413.
(E-A)
C. Books
3. Teaching Introductory Physics, A. B. Arons (Wiley,
New York, 1997). A massive compendium of insights
into teaching and learning of physics gained over Arons’s
40 years as a pioneer of active-learning instruction. Also
contains a large number of qualitative, concept-oriented
questions on a wide array of topics. (E)
4. Five Easy Lessons, R. D. Knight (Addison Wesley Long-
man, San Francisco, CA, 2003). An instructor’s guide to
accompany Knight’s research-based textbook and work-
book (Ref. 113). A unique and valuable compilation of
research results and instructional ideas covering the intro-
ductory university physics course. (E)
5. Teaching Physics with the Physics Suite, E. F. Redish
(Wiley, New York, 2003). A wide-ranging discussion of
research ﬁndings and instructional approaches, with a par-
ticular focus on cognitive issues. Part of the “Physics
Suite” series. (E)
6. Applying Cognitive Science to Education, F. Reif (MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, 2008). Compiles and systematizes
a lifetime of work devoted to exploring the general princi-
ples of learning in science, with particular emphasis on
active-learning instruction in physics. (I)
D. General articles
7.
“Millikan Lecture 1990: What we teach and what is
learned—Closing the gap,” L. C. McDermott, Am. J.
Phys. 59, 301–315 (1991). An inﬂuential summary of
more than 15 years’ research experience in developing
active-learning instructional materials. (E)
8.
“Millikan Lecture 1994: Understanding and teaching im-
portant scientiﬁc thought processes,” F. Reif, Am. J.
Phys. 63, 17–32 (1995). Contains concise discussions of
many key principles Reif introduced, including qualita-
tive reasoning strategies, hierarchical knowledge struc-
tures,
explicit
problem-solving
strategies,
students’
beliefs about the nature of physics learning, and the im-
portance of rapid feedback. (E)
9.
“Millikan Lecture 1995: Do they just sit there? Reﬂec-
tions on helping students learn physics,” D. Zollman,
Am. J. Phys. 64, 114–119 (1996). Emphasizes the role of
technology in active-learning physics instruction, with a
particular focus on interactive video. (E)
10. “Interactive-engagement versus traditional methods: A
six-thousand-student survey of mechanics test data for
introductory physics courses,” R. R. Hake, Am. J. Phys.
66,
64–74
(1998).
Widely
cited
analysis
of
test
data from thousands of students in dozens of courses
indicating the superior effectiveness of active-learning
instruction in physics (“interactive engagement”) in
comparison to traditional, lecture-based methods. (I)
11. “Resource Letter: PER-1: Physics Education Research,”
L. C. McDermott and E. F. Redish, Am. J. Phys. 67,
755–767 (1999). Extensive collection of research articles
480
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
480
on the teaching and learning of physics, including many
reports related to active-learning physics instruction.
Valuable reference but now somewhat out of date. (E-A)
12. “Teaching physics: Figuring out what works,” E. F.
Redish and R. N. Steinberg, Phys. Today 52(1), 24–30
(1999). Clear and accessible overview of research-based
instructional methods in physics with a review of evi-
dence for effectiveness. (E)
13. “Millikan Lecture 1999: The workplace, student minds,
and physics learning systems,” A. Van Heuvelen, Am. J.
Phys. 69, 1139–1146 (2001). Discussion of several key
principles of active-learning instruction focusing on how
students can become better at solving real-world prob-
lems through active learning and working in teams, and
by using multiple representations in widely varied con-
texts. (E)
14. “Recent advances in classroom physics,” B. A. Thacker,
Rep. Prog. Phys. 66, 1833–1864 (2003). Discussion and
comprehensive collection of references on recent devel-
opments in physics instruction, including active-learning
instructional methods. (E-I)
15. “Transforming physics education,” C. Wieman and
K. Perkins, Phys. Today 58(11), 36–41 (2005). Brief
overview of recent research with emphasis on interactive
lectures and the University of Colorado Interactive
Science Simulations; see Ref. 145. (E)
E. Online resources
This is a collection of websites that contain active-learning
instructional materials or links to such materials. In most
cases, the materials are in whole or part based on physics
education research or on instructional principles derived
from such research. However, their instructional effective-
ness has not necessarily been validated by published, peer-
reviewed studies. Materials are organized alphabetically.
16. Assessment Instrument Information Page, North Caro-
lina
State
University:
<http://www.ncsu.edu/PER/
TestInfo.html>. Large collection of links and references
to research-based diagnostic exams in many areas of
physics, with brief descriptions of each one and citations
of relevant publications. (E-I)
17. E & M TIPERs (“Tasks Inspired by Physics Education
Research”):
<http://tycphysics.org/tipers.htm>.
Also
available in printed form: E & M TIPERs: Electricity
and Magnetism Tasks (Inspired by Physics Education
Research), C. J. Hieggelke, D. P. Maloney, S. E. Kanim,
and T. L. O’Kuma (Pearson Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle
River, NJ, 2006). A large collection of exercises that
strongly emphasize interpretation of diverse diagram-
matic representations. (E)
18. Explorations in Physics, Dickinson College: <http://
physics.dickinson.edu/~eip_web/eip_homepage.html>.
Active-learning materials for non-science majors. (E)
19. Humanized Physics Project: <http://physics.doane.edu/
hpp>; related materials from a predecessor project are at
<http://www.phys.ttu.edu/~batcam/Courses.html>. Large
collection of instructional modules emphasizing biologi-
cal and physiological applications, targeted at the algebra-
based general physics course. (E)
20. Interactive
Online
Lectures,
University
of
Illinois:
<http://research.physics.illinois.edu/per/iol.html>. Inter-
active
web-based
materials
that
allow
students
to
engage with a simulated lecture, before or outside of
class. (E)
21. Internet Computer Coaches for Introductory Physics
Problem Solving, University of Minnesota: <http://
groups.physics.umn.edu/physed/prototypes.html>. Inter-
active programs that provide extensive feedback and
hints to coach students in the use of an expert-like prob-
lem-solving framework. (E)
22. Open Source Physics: <http://www.opensourcephysics.
org/>. Includes curriculum resources emphasizing inter-
active computer simulations on physics, astronomy, and
computer modeling. (E)
23. Paradigms in Physics, Oregon State University: <http://
www.physics.oregonstate.edu/portfolioswiki/>. Compre-
hensive set of upper-level materials for a restructured
physics majors’ curriculum. (E-I)
24. PER User’s Guide: <http://perusersguide.org>. Comp-
rehensive
and encyclopedic collection of links
to
research-based instructional materials in physics, accom-
panied by many related resources. (E-I)
25. Physical
Sciences
Resource
Center:
<http://www.
compadre.org/psrc>. Provides a vast array of curricular
resources, many of which are based on physics education
research. (E-I)
26. Physics Education Research Central: <www.compadre.
org/per>. Contains links to a broad collection of publications
on physics education research, many of which are directly
associated with active-learning instructional materials. (E-I)
27. Physics JiTT Resources: <http://jittdl.physics.iupui.edu/
jitt/sampler/physics/index.html>. Materials for “Just-in-
Time-Teaching,” in which student responses to pre-
instruction exercises guide the instructor in designing
and structuring the day’s lesson. (E)
28. Physics Problems, University of Maryland: <http://
www.physics.umd.edu/perg/problems.htm>. Large col-
lection of problems in a variety of formats on diverse
topics. (E)
29. Physics Teaching Technology Resource, Rutgers Univer-
sity:
<http://paer.rutgers.edu/pt3/>;
Physics
Union
Mathematics: <http://pum.rutgers.edu>. These materi-
als are based on and support the work described in Refs.
128–129. (E)
30. Physics Teaching Web Advisory, Kansas State University:
<http://www.physicspathway.org>. Provides research-
based guidance for instructors on speciﬁc physics
topics, as well as a library of physics demonstration
videos. (E)
31. Project Galileo [Interactive Learning Toolkit - BQ],
Harvard University: <https://galileo.harvard.edu/login/>.
Includes materials generated to support Peer Instruction
(Ref. 104), as well as other materials; requires online
registration. (E)
32. PTEC
Library:
<http://www.ptec.org/search/browse.
cfm?browse¼gsss>. Contains links to curricular materi-
als and research reports associated with the education of
physics teachers. (E-I)
33. RELATE Mechanics WIKI Home: <http://scripts.mit.edu/
~srayyan/PERwiki/>. An experimental physics textbook
using the “Modeling Applied to Problem Solving”
(MAPS) Pedagogy. (E)
34. Science Education Initiative, University of Colorado:
<http://www.colorado.edu/sei/departments/physics.htm>.
Links to a variety of research-based instructional
481
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
481
materials for intermediate- and upper-level physics.
Some of these are discussed separately in Sec. VII.
(E-I)
35. Six Ideas That Shaped Physics [Units C, E, N, Q, R,
and T], Second Edition, T. Moore (McGraw-Hill, New
York,
1997–2009):
<http://www.physics.pomona.edu/
sixideas/siimtc.html>. Includes an online instructor’s
manual for the published set of highly original printed
texts. (E)
36. Spiral Physics, Monroe Community College: <http://
web.monroecc.edu/spiral/>. Research-based, active learn-
ing workbooks that emphasize multiple-representation
problem-solving techniques in mechanics and in electric-
ity and magnetism. (E)
37. University of Maryland Physics Education Research Group.
(a)
Scientiﬁc
Community
Labs:
<http://umdperg.
pbworks.com/w/page/10511229/FrontPage>.
Materials
designed to simulate participation in a real scientiﬁc
community. (b) Thinking Problems in Math Physics:
<http://umdperg.pbworks.com/w/page/34231836/Methods-
of-Mathematical-Physics>. Collection of research-based
instructional materials in mathematical physics. (E)
38. Visual Quantum Mechanics, Kansas State University:
Powerful simulation software that allows construction of
“artiﬁcial” atomic energy levels, emission and absorp-
tion of photons, and many related phenomena of modern
physics.
(a) <http://web.phys.ksu.edu/vqm/>;
(b) <http://web.phys.ksu.edu/vqm/software/>;
(c) <http://www.ztek.com/physics/physics.html#Anchor-
Visual-6296>. (E)
III. HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Present-day
active-learning
instructional
methods
in
physics are the products of a long chain of developments
reaching back over a century. Some of the references relate
to physics at the K-12 (pre-college) level, but they and their
authors played essential roles in developing modern methods of
active-learning instruction in college-level physics. (Note:
Although
we
frequently
use
the
phrase
“active-learning
instruction” in this section, it’s important to recognize that most
instruction before 1970 was not based explicitly on research on
student learning in physics. It thus lacked many of the features
of modern active-learning instruction identiﬁed in Sec. I.)
A. U.S. origins
Laboratory-based instruction in physics spread rapidly in
the United States during the late 1800s. Among both high-
school
and
college
instructors
there
was
widespread
support for the so-called “inductive method” in which exp-
eriment precedes explicit statement of principles and laws.
39. Aims and Methods of the Teaching of Physics, C. K.
Wead [Circulars of Information of the Bureau of Educa-
tion, No. 7–1884] (Government Printing Ofﬁce, Wash-
ington, [D.C.,] 1884). The inductive method is discussed
on pp. 117–122. Also includes extensive coverage of
analogous
methods
used
in
contemporary
physics
instruction in Europe. (E)
Wead (Ref. 39, p. 120) states, “The book which is the
most conspicuous example now in the market of this induc-
tive method is Gage’s [‘Textbook on the Elements of Physics’].
Here, although the principles and laws are stated, the experi-
ments have preceded them; many questions are asked in con-
nection with the experiments that tend to make the student
active, not passive, and allow him to think for himself before
the answer is given, if it is given at all.”
40. A Textbook on the Elements of Physics for High
Schools and Academies, A. P. Gage (Ginn, Heath, and
Co., Boston, 1882). Perhaps the ﬁrst U.S. active-learning
physics text. (E)
41. “The teaching of physics in the secondary school,”
Edwin H. Hall, in The Teaching of Chemistry and
Physics in the Secondary School, A. Smith and E. H.
Hall (Longmans, Green, New York, 1902), pp. 229–371.
Endorses instructional methods in which the pupil is
kept “just enough in the dark as to the probable outcome
of his experiment…to leave him unprejudiced in his
observations,” since “the experimenter should hold
himself in the attitude of genuine inquiry” (p. 278). (E)
The increasing focus on laboratory work led, ironically, to
an overemphasis on formal methods and precision of mea-
surement to the detriment of qualitative understanding of
physics concepts and of the nature of scientiﬁc investigation.
A “New Movement” among high school and college physics
instructors
arose
as
a
reaction
against
this,
and
re-
emphasized the importance of active student investigation in
the pursuit of deep understanding of physics concepts.
42. The Teaching of Physics for Purposes of General
Education, C. Riborg Mann (Macmillan, New York,
1912). A leader of the New Movement, Mann insisted
that students’ laboratory investigations should be aimed
at solving problems that are both practical and interest-
ing. Includes extensive supporting analysis and a very
useful bibliography. (E)
B. Postwar curricular reforms
Further development of active-learning instruction in
physics was resumed in 1956 by the Physical Science Study
Committee (PSSC), supported by the National Science Foun-
dation (NSF). The PSSC curriculum was distinguished by
strong emphasis on conceptual understanding, and on student
investigations in the laboratory that were only lightly guided
through questions, suggestions, and hints. It rejected tradi-
tional efforts that had relied heavily on superﬁcial coverage
of a large number of topics, memorization of terse formula-
tions, and use of “cookbook”-style instructional laboratories
with highly prescriptive lists of steps and procedures
designed to verify known principles. (A contemporary cur-
riculum development effort in England with similar themes,
not covered in this review, was sponsored by the Nufﬁeld
Foundation.)
43. “The Physical Science Study Committee,” G. C. Finlay,
Sch. Rev. 70(1), 63–81 (Spring 1962). Emphasizes that
students are expected to be active participants by wres-
tling with lines of inquiry, including laboratory investi-
gations, that lead to basic ideas of physics: “In this
course, experiments…are not used simply to conﬁrm an
earlier assertion.” (E)
A contemporary project that utilized somewhat similar
instructional principles, but which put heavier emphasis on
482
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
482
historical and cultural aspects of physics, was the Harvard
Project Physics course.
44. “The Project Physics course, then and now,” G. Holton,
Sci. & Educ. 12, 779–786 (2003). A review and reﬂec-
tion by one of the three original leaders of the project. (E)
The reform efforts soon expanded to include the elemen-
tary schools and, backed by the NSF, an explosion of more
than a dozen new science curricula aimed at younger stu-
dents was generated. Leading physicists again played a cen-
tral role in several of these curriculum-reform projects.
Prominent in most of them was a strong and explicit empha-
sis on learning through hands-on activities using real objects
with varying degrees of guidance and support provided by
instructors; in general, the outcome of the activity was not
known to the students in advance. The method can be
broadly characterized as utilizing the investigational process
of science as a means of teaching scientiﬁc concepts them-
selves. (Various terms have been used in this context without
clear consensus on their precise deﬁnitions or the distinctions
among
them,
e.g.,
“inductive
method,”
“discovery,”
“inquiry,” and “guided inquiry.”)
One of the most widely used of the new curricula was the
Elementary Science Study (ESS), produced by a team that
included MIT physicist Philip Morrison.
45. “Reﬂections on a decade of grade-school science,” J.
Grifﬁth and P. Morrison, Phys. Today 25(6), 29–34
(1972). Emphasizes the importance of students engaging
in “the process of inquiry and investigation” to build
understanding of scientiﬁc concepts. (E)
In the three-phase “learning cycle” propounded by Berkeley
theoretical physicist Robert Karplus, students’ initial explora-
tion activities led them (with instructor guidance) to grasp gen-
eralized principles (concepts) and then to apply these concepts
in varied contexts. This instructional program was strongly
inﬂuenced by the Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget.
46. “The Science Curriculum Improvement Study,” R. Kar-
plus, J. Res. Sci. Teach. 2, 293–303 (1964). Describes the
early implementation of Karplus’s learning cycle. (E)
47. “Science teaching and the development of reasoning,” R.
Karplus, J. Res. Sci. Teach. 14, 169–175 (1977). Discus-
sion of the psychological and pedagogical principles under-
lying the Science Curriculum Improvement Study (SCIS),
including the learning cycle and the work of Piaget. (E)
C. Broadening impact on university physics instruction
A workshop on physics teaching, organized by Karplus
and his collaborators, focused on design and assessment of
instructional activities that would most effectively apply and
develop students’ logical reasoning abilities. The workshop
materials had a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on physicists who were
interested in building on research to develop more effective
active-learning instructional methods at the college level.
48. Workshop on Physics Teaching and the Development
of Reasoning, F. P. Collea, R. G. Fuller, R. Karplus, L.
G. Paldy, and J. W. Renner (AAPT, Stony Brook, NY,
1975).
Available
online
at
<http://digitalcommons.
unl.edu/karplusworkshop/>. (E)
49. “Can physics develop reasoning?” R. G. Fuller, R. Kar-
plus, and A. E. Lawson, Phys. Today 30(2), 23–28
(1977). Description of pedagogical principles of the
workshop. (E)
50. College Teaching and the Development of Reasoning,
edited by R. G. Fuller, T. C. Campbell, D. I. Dykstra, Jr.,
and
S.
M.
Stevens
(Information
Age
Publishing,
Charlotte, NC, 2009). Includes reprints of most of the
workshop materials. In the context of discussion of Pia-
get’s work, also contains summary descriptions of some
of the active-learning instructional methods in physics
developed since the late 1970s. (E)
Arnold Arons at Amherst College had been engaged since
the 1950s in developing a novel approach using active-
learning instructional methods for a calculus-based college
physics course. Arons’s methods provided the foundation for
an enormously inﬂuential line of development.
51. “Structure, methods, and objectives of the required
freshman calculus-physics course at Amherst College,”
A. B. Arons, Am. J. Phys. 27, 658–666 (1959). Arons
characterized the nature of this course’s laboratory work
as follows: “Your instructions will be very few and very
general; so general that you will ﬁrst be faced with the
necessity of deciding what the problem is. You will have
to formulate these problems in your own words and then
proceed to investigate them.” [Emphasis in original.] (E)
Arons moved to the University of Washington in the late
1960s and, soon joined by Lillian McDermott, continued to
implement these instructional methods at the university
level. Together they continued systematic development of
activity-based college physics courses, building on and
extending inquiry-based active-learning principles embodied
in elementary science curricula such as SCIS and ESS. In
1973, McDermott and her students initiated a systematic
research program to support and expand on the instructional
efforts (Ref. 59).
52. “Deﬁnition of intellectual objectives in a physical sci-
ence course for preservice elementary teachers,” A.
Arons and J. Smith, Sci. Educ. 58, 391–400 (1974).
Instructional staff for the course were explicitly trained
and encouraged to conduct “Socratic dialogues” with
students. (E)
53. “Combined physics course for future elementary and
secondary school teachers,” L. C. McDermott, Am. J.
Phys. 42, 668–676 (1974). Describes an inquiry-based
laboratory course in which prospective elementary and
high school teachers work together. (E)
54. “Cultivating the capacity for formal reasoning: Objec-
tives and procedures in an introductory physical science
course,” A. B. Arons, Am. J. Phys. 44, 834–838 (1976).
Focuses on teaching strategies for improving students’
reasoning skills. (E)
55. The Various Language: An Inquiry Approach to the
Physical Sciences, A. Arons (Oxford University Press,
New York, 1977). A hybrid text and activity guide for a
college-level course; provides extensive questions, hints,
and prompts. The original model for Physics by Inquiry
(Ref. 164). (E)
Arons and McDermott placed great emphasis on the need
for students to formulate and express reasoned written or
verbal responses to questions that the students themselves
raised during instruction. These efforts focused initially on
483
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
483
improving the preparation of prospective K-12 science
teachers, and teacher preparation was a common theme of
other active-learning physics programs.
56. “Orientation for the new teaching assistant—A labora-
tory based program,” J. Spears and D. Zollman, Am. J.
Phys.
42,
1062–1066
(1974).
An
active-learning
approach to the education of graduate teaching assistants
that helped them contrast inquiry-based learning to
“cookbook-style” instruction. (E)
Education of graduate teaching assistants was also dis-
cussed by McDermott in (Ref. 93), in the context of preparing
them to teach through a process of inquiry using the research-
based Tutorials in Introductory Physics (Ref. 136).
D. Building a research base
During the 1970s, education researchers worldwide began
systematic efforts to probe students’ thinking on a variety of
science topics, initially at the elementary and secondary lev-
els. Most of this work was tied only loosely, or not at all, to
concurrent development of instructional materials and meth-
ods at the post-secondary level. In the mid-1970s, Frederick
Reif, Lillian McDermott, and John Clement in the U.S. (as
well as Laurence Viennot in France), along with their students
and collaborators, were among the ﬁrst to systematically
investigate understanding of speciﬁc physics concepts by stu-
dents enrolled in university-level physics courses. These
investigations led to the development and implementation of
research-based active-learning instructional methods and
curricula.
57. “Teaching general learning and problem-solving skills,”
F. Reif, J. H. Larkin, and G. C. Brackett, Am. J. Phys.
44, 212 (1976). Students’ reasoning in physics was
investigated through observations of student groups
engaged in problem-solving tasks, through “think-aloud”
problem-solving interviews with individual students, and
through analysis of written responses. This paper fore-
shadowed much future work on improving problem-
solving ability through explicitly structured practice, car-
ried out subsequently by other researchers. (E)
58. “Spontaneous reasoning in elementary dynamics,” L.
Viennot, Eur. J. Sci. Educ. 1, 205–221 (1979). Provides
an analysis of high school and college students’
“spontaneous” ideas regarding forces in a variety of
physical systems. (E)
59. “Investigation of student understanding of the concept
of velocity in one dimension,” D. E. Trowbridge and L.
C. McDermott, Am. J. Phys. 48, 1020–1028 (1980).
The primary data sources in this groundbreaking paper
were “individual demonstration interviews” in which
students were confronted with a simple physical situa-
tion and asked to respond to a speciﬁed sequence of
questions. Curricular materials were designed to address
speciﬁc difﬁculties identiﬁed in the research; students
were guided to confront directly and then to resolve
confusion related to the physics concepts. This paper
provided
a
model
and
set
the
standard
for
a
still-ongoing program
of research-based
curriculum
development that has been unmatched in scope and
productivity. (E)
60. “Students’ preconceptions in elementary mechanics,”
J. Clement, Am. J. Phys. 50, 66–71 (1982). Describes
evidence from written tests and problem-solving inter-
views, and argues that preconceptions may be treated
as “zeroth-order models” that can be modiﬁed to
achieve greater precision and generality. Curricular
materials growing out of this research are described in
Ref. 131. (E)
A systematic investigation of student ideas related to
Newtonian mechanics was later reported in widely cited
papers.
61. “The
initial
knowledge
state
of
college
physics
students,” I. A. Halloun and D. Hestenes, Am. J. Phys.
53, 1043–1055 (1985). Development and administration
of
a
research-based
test
of
student
understanding
revealed the ineffectiveness of traditional instruction in
altering college physics students’ mistaken ideas about
Newtonian mechanics. (E)
62. “Common sense concepts about motion,” I. A. Halloun
and D. Hestenes, Am. J. Phys. 53, 1056–1065 (1985).
Comprehensive and systematic inventory of students’
ideas regarding motion. (E)
These ﬁndings were applied to the development of an instruc-
tional strategy for mechanics that—with explicit reference to the
work of Arons—emphasized use of Socratic dialogue.
63. “Promoting student crossover to the Newtonian world,”
R. R. Hake, Am. J. Phys. 55, 878–884 (1987). Hake’s
“Socratic dialogue inducing” (SDI) labs led to signiﬁ-
cantly higher scores on mechanics exams than had been
observed in a comparable “conventional” course at a
similar institution. See also (Ref. 117). (E)
The principles of active-learning instruction were reviewed
and expanded by emphasizing the advantages of using
“multiple representations” in solving physics problems.
64. “Learning to think like a physicist: A review of research-
based instructional strategies,” A. Van Heuvelen, Am. J.
Phys. 59, 891–897 (1991). Further development of
active-learning instruction in physics with a particular
emphasis on the need for qualitative analysis and
hierarchical organization of knowledge. Explicitly
builds on the work of many of the authors cited
above. (E)
65. “Overview, Case Study Physics,” A. Van Heuvelen, Am.
J. Phys. 59, 898–907 (1991). Inﬂuential paper that dis-
cussed methods for making systematic use in active-
learning physics instruction of multiple representations
such as graphs, diagrams, and verbal and mathematical
descriptions. (E)
E. Impact of technology
A signiﬁcant development in the history of active-learning
instruction in physics was the rapid advance in microcom-
puter use for real-time data acquisition, graphing, and analy-
sis. Coupled with the use of ultrasonic motion sensors and
other types of sensors, the new tools enabled rapid feedback
in the instructional laboratory to a degree not previously
possible.
66. “Tools for scientiﬁc thinking—Microcomputer-based
laboratories for physics teaching,” R. K. Thornton, Phys.
Educ. 22, 230–238 (1987). Describes initial steps in
484
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
484
developing microcomputer-based instructional curricula
for university-level physics. Argues that a well-designed
science laboratory “is one of the few places where students
can really participate in the processes of science.” (E)
67. “Learning motion concepts using real-time microcom-
puter-based laboratory tools,” R. K. Thornton and D. R.
Sokoloff, Am. J. Phys. 58, 858–867 (1990). Discusses
the potential for improving students’ understanding of
physics concepts and graphical representations using the
new tools, but emphasizes that they have to be coupled
to research-based curricula to bring about effective stu-
dent learning. (E)
68. “Calculus-based physics without lectures,” P. W. Laws,
Phys. Today 44(12), 24–31 (1991). Describes the princi-
ples and origins of the Workshop Physics Project at
Dickinson College (Ref. 125), begun in collaboration
with Thornton and Sokoloff in 1986. (E)
69. “Computer supported lab-work in physics education:
Advantages
and
problems,”
E.
Sassi,
in
Physics
Teacher Education Beyond 2000, edited by R. Pinto
and S. Surinach (Elsevier, Paris, 2001), pp. 57–64; also
available at <http://www.dsf.unina.it/Gener/did/drafts/
wp6/papers/paper_lecture_ﬁnal.doc>. Explores the intro-
duction of real-time data collection tools in Europe. (E)
70. “Effective learning environments for computer supported
instruction in the physics classroom and laboratory,” R. K.
Thornton, in Connecting Research in Physics Education
with Teacher Education, edited by M. Vicentini and E.
Sassi (International Commission on Physics Education,
2008);
<http://web.phys.ksu.edu/icpe/Publications/teach2/
Thornton.pdf>. Recent review that traces historical develop-
ments. Emphasizes that pedagogical beneﬁts of the tools
largely disappear if they are used in a traditional “equation-
veriﬁcation” context instead of focusing on conceptual
understanding. (E)
71. “Research and computer-based instruction: Opportunity
for interaction,” L. C. McDermott, Am. J. Phys. 58,
452–462 (1990). Describes the development of Trow-
bridge’s “Graphs and Tracks” instructional software
(one of the earliest research-based physics curricula
based on computer simulations), and the use of simula-
tions as a tool for research on students’ reasoning. (E)
Most of the developments in active-learning instruction in
physics since 1990 can be traced in some form to one or
more of the intellectual traditions identiﬁed in the above
brief historical summary. Although distinct and to some
extent developed in parallel to each other, they include many
common and cross-cutting themes.
The continued development and ultimate success of these
methods have been founded on rigorous, research-based
assessments of student learning. In Sec. IV, we describe
some of the diagnostic instruments that have been developed
to assess student knowledge, as well as some of the key
research results related to persistence of learning gains.
IV. ASSESSMENT OF STUDENT LEARNING
Active-learning
instructional
methods
are
based
on
research in student learning and are tested by research-based
assessment methods. A wide variety of assessment methods
have been used, including one-on-one interviews, written
free-response
(or
“open-response”)
questions,
multiple-
choice tests of various types, etc. In this section, we brieﬂy
describe a few of the most popular assessment instruments
and discuss some of the evidence these instruments have
yielded regarding persistence of learning gains.
A. Research-based diagnostic instruments
72. “Force Concept Inventory,” D. Hestenes, M. Wells, and
G. Swackhamer, Phys. Teach. 30, 141–158 (1992). First
published in 1992, the FCI grew out of earlier work
described in Refs. 61 and 62. It involves nonquantitative
questions using nontechnical language, set in familiar
“everyday” physical contexts. The FCI was one of the
earliest research-based tests designed to assess student
learning in physics, and has been used throughout the
world to probe students’ thinking and to assess the effec-
tiveness of new methods of physics instruction. A
revised version was published in 1995 in the book by
Mazur (Ref. 104) and is available online in many lan-
guages (password-protected) at (Ref. 132). (E)
Another widely used test for investigating students’
physics ideas, under development since the late 1980s, grew
out of Thornton and Sokoloff’s assessments of standard
instruction and of reformed curricula that often used
microcomputer-based laboratory tools.
73. “Assessing student learning of Newton’s laws: The
Force and Motion Conceptual Evaluation and the evalu-
ation of active learning laboratory and lecture curricula,”
R. K. Thornton and D. R. Sokoloff, Am. J. Phys. 66,
338–352 (1998). The FMCE has a particularly strong
emphasis on graphical representations and ability to
transform between and among representations. (E)
74. “Comparing the force and motion conceptual evaluation
and the force concept inventory,” R. K. Thornton, D.
Kuhl, K. Cummings, and J. Marx, Phys. Rev. ST Phys.
Educ. Res. 5, 010105 (2009). Compares the FCI and
FMCE based on test data from thousands of students at
ten
institutions.
Showed
that
learning
gains
with
research-based active-learning curricula were consis-
tently higher than with traditional instruction, regardless
of which test was used. (I)
75. “Surveying students’ conceptual knowledge of electric-
ity and magnetism,” D. P. Maloney, T. L. O’Kuma, C. J.
Hieggelke, and A. Van Heuvelen, Am. J. Phys. 69(S1),
S12–S23 (2001). Contains the Conceptual Survey in
Electricity and Magnetism (CSEM), a widely used diag-
nostic exam, along with extensive data obtained from
administration of the test to thousands of students in a
variety of different physics courses. (E)
76. “Evaluating an electricity and magnetism assessment
tool: Brief electricity and magnetism assessment,” L.
Ding, R. Chabay, B. Sherwood, and R. Beichner, Phys.
Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 2, 010105 (2006). Describes
the Brief Electricity and Magnetism Assessment (BEMA)
with a variety of data obtained in constructing and vali-
dating the test; does not contain the test itself. There is
some overlap between the CSEM and the BEMA. (E)
There is a large collection of other research-based diag-
nostic exams at (Ref. 16).
B. Persistence of learning gains
Several studies (for example, Ref. 70) indicate that student-
learning gains persist or even increase during the weeks and
485
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
485
months
following
active-learning
instruction.
Long-term
(years long) longitudinal studies of student conceptual under-
standing are not common owing to the great practical difﬁcul-
ties associated with them. However, consistent ﬁndings from
a number of studies strongly suggest that the improved
conceptual-learning
gains
from
active-learning
physics
instruction are retained over periods of years. For example
(Ref. 116), students who had used the Matter & Interactions
curriculum (Ref. 114) displayed greater absolute retention of
electricity and magnetism concepts than students who had fol-
lowed a traditional course of study, for periods up to 115
weeks post-instruction. Similarly, upper-level physics students
who had used Tutorials in Introductory Physics (Ref. 136)
in their introductory courses several years previously demon-
strated superior performance when compared with classmates
who had not used Tutorials. Other studies with similar out-
comes probed a variety of different curricula.
77. “Longitudinal study of student conceptual understanding
in electricity and magnetism,” S. J. Pollock, Phys. Rev.
ST Phys. Educ. Res. 5, 020110 (2009). Students in a
junior-level electricity and magnetism course who had
used Tutorials in Introductory Physics (Ref. 136) in
their freshman introductory course had better course
grades and higher scores on a conceptual test than stu-
dents who had taken introductory courses that did not
use Tutorials. Also see (Ref. 152). (E)
78. “Do they stay ﬁxed?” G. E. Francis, J. P. Adams, and E.
J. Noonan, Phys. Teach. 36, 488–490 (1998). Superior
learning gains (compared to traditional instruction)
resulting from using Tutorials in Introductory Physics
(Ref. 136) were retained up to a period of 3 years after
instruction. (E)
79. “Preparing teachers to teach physics and physical science
by inquiry,” L. C. McDermott, P. S. Shaffer, and C. P.
Constantinou, Phys. Educ. 35, 411–416 (2000). Students
who had used Physics by Inquiry (Ref. 164) 1 year pre-
viously had better performance on electric-circuits ques-
tions than students who had just ﬁnished studying the
same concepts using traditional curricula. (E)
80. “Does
active
engagement
curricula
give
long-lived
conceptual
understanding?”
J. Bernhard, in Physics
Teacher Education Beyond 2000, edited by R. Pinto and
S. Surinach (Elsevier, Paris, 2001), pp. 749–752; also
available at <http://webstaff.itn.liu.se/~jonbe/fou/didaktik/
papers/girep2000_active.pdf>. Materials adapted from
RealTime Physics (Ref. 121) were translated into Swedish
and used in introductory physics courses. Students’ learn-
ing gains were superior to those in traditional courses and
were well retained up to 2.5 years post-instruction even
with no additional instruction in mechanics. (E)
We next outline the principles on which research-based,
active-learning physics instruction has been founded and
continues to develop.
V. COMMON CHARACTERISTICS OF ACTIVE-
LEARNING INSTRUCTIONAL METHODS IN
PHYSICS
Active-learning instruction in physics, by our deﬁnition—
also, following Hake (Ref. 10), sometimes referred to as
“interactive-engagement”
instruction—generally
incorpo-
rates a number of characteristics indicated by the representa-
tive references in this section. We stress that it is our own
analysis that leads to this synthesis, and that nothing in the
current research literature is either so comprehensive or so
explicit in identifying this or any other set of common char-
acteristics of active-learning physics instruction. This is not
to say, however, that analogous lists do not exist.
81. “Implications of research on learning for the education
of prospective science and physics teachers,” J. P.
Mestre, Phys. Educ. 36, 44–51 (2001). Provides a list of
desirable attributes for physics courses suggested by
research on learning; substantially overlaps the list pre-
sented in this Section. (E)
A. Instruction is informed and explicitly guided by
research regarding students’ pre-instruction knowledge
state and learning trajectory
“Knowledge state” refers to students’ pre-existing physics
ideas and learning tendencies, the ways in which students
attempt to apply their pre-existing understanding to issues
that emerge during the course of instruction.
McDermott and her students were among the ﬁrst to apply
this principle in university-level physics instruction (Ref. 59),
exploring student thinking through one-on-one interviews,
and through use of written free-response diagnostic questions
that focus on qualitative, conceptual reasoning. Most of their
many papers are listed at <http://www.phys.washington.edu/
groups/peg/pubs.html>; some give detailed accounts of how
research on student learning is used to develop instructional
materials, for example (Ref. 137).
82. “The challenge of matching learning assessments to
teaching goals: An example from the work-energy and
impulse-momentum theorems,” T. O. Pride, S. Vokos,
and L. C. McDermott, Am. J. Phys. 66, 147–157 (1998).
Describes how research on student learning was used to
create more effective instructional materials on dynam-
ics. (E)
83. “Addressing student difﬁculties in applying a wave
model to the interference and diffraction of light,” K.
Wosilait, P. R. L. Heron, P. S. Shaffer, and L. C. McDer-
mott, Am. J. Phys. 67(S1), S5–S15 (1999). Detailed dis-
cussion of how knowledge of students’ speciﬁc learning
difﬁculties enabled development of improved curricular
materials in physical optics. (E)
A variety of diagnostic instruments using multiple-choice
and short-answer items have been developed to help assess
students’ intuitions and conceptual knowledge in different
areas of physics; some of these were described in Sec. IV.
The importance of students’ learning trajectory was
emphasized in an explicit analysis of the evolution of stu-
dents’ ideas.
84. “Conceptual Dynamics: Following changing student views
of force and motion,” R. K. Thornton, in The Changing
Role of Physics Departments in Modern Universities:
Proceedings of International Conference on Undergrad-
uate Physics Education, edited by E. F. Redish and J. S.
Rigden, AIP Conference Proceedings 399 (AIP, Woodbury,
New York, 1997), pp. 241–266. Analyzes changes in student
responses over time to the Force and Motion Conceptual
Evaluation diagnostic test (Ref. 73). (E)
85. “How do you hit a moving target? Addressing the dy-
namics of students’ thinking,” D. E. Meltzer, in 2004
Physics Education Research Conference, edited by
486
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
486
J. Marx, P. R. L. Heron, and S. Franklin, AIP Confer-
ence Proceedings 790 (AIP, Melville, New York, 2005),
pp. 7–10. Discussion of possible future directions for
research on student learning trajectories. (I)
The various aspects of students’ knowledge state and learn-
ing tendencies that have been addressed in active-learning
physics instruction include: (1) speciﬁc learning difﬁculties
related to particular physics concepts (Refs. 59 and 63), fur-
ther developed in Sec. V B; (2) speciﬁc ideas and knowledge
elements that are potentially productive and useful (Ref. 60);
and (3) students’ beliefs about what they need to do in order
to learn, as well as their actual learning behaviors.
86. “Helping physics students learn how to learn,” A. Elby,
Am. J. Phys. 69(S1), S54–S64 (2001). Focuses on guid-
ing students to adopt more sophisticated beliefs and
practices related to knowledge and learning. (E)
87. “Student expectations in introductory physics,” E. F.
Redish, J. M. Saul, and R. N. Steinberg, Am. J. Phys. 66,
212–224 (1998). Introduced the Maryland Physics
Expectations Survey (MPEX), the ﬁrst widely used
instrument for assessing student attitudes and beliefs in
college-level physics courses. (E)
88. “Student resources for learning introductory physics,” D.
Hammer,
Am.
J.
Phys.
68(S1),
S52–S59
(2000).
Reviews much previous work to emphasize potentially
productive beliefs and knowledge elements in students’
thinking that can play a positive role in their learning of
physics. (E)
89. “New instrument for measuring student beliefs about
physics and learning physics: The Colorado Learning
Attitudes about Science Survey,” W. K. Adams, K. K.
Perkins, N. S. Podolefsky, M. Dubson, N. D. Finkelstein,
and C. E. Wieman, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 2,
010101 (2006). Describes a sophisticated and rigorous
development process that produced a new instrument
for assessing students’ beliefs and expectations in
physics. (I)
90. “Uncommon knowledge: Student behavior correlated to
conceptual learning,” R. K. Thornton, in Research on
Physics Education: Proceedings of the International
School of Physics “Enrico Fermi” Course CLVI,
edited by E. F. Redish and M. Vicentini (IOS, Amster-
dam, 2004), pp. 591–601. Discusses several speciﬁc stu-
dent behaviors during laboratory activities that were
linked either to relatively high or relatively low learning
gains. (E)
A student’s knowledge state also includes general rea-
soning processes, to the extent that these can be treated as
distinct from reasoning processes that are themselves
closely linked to a speciﬁc physics concept. Exploring and
improving these general processes was an approach charac-
teristic of Karplus and his collaborators (Ref. 49) and has
also been addressed by Reif (Ref. 6).
91. “Expert and novice performance in solving physics prob-
lems,” J. Larkin, J. McDermott, D. P. Simon, and H. A.
Simon, Science 208, 1335–1342 (1980). Describes
research on “chunking” and “compiling” of concepts
and how these processes relate to expert practice in
physics problem solving. (I)
92. “Implications of cognitive studies for teaching physics,”
E. F. Redish, Am. J. Phys. 62, 796–803 (1994). Inﬂuen-
tial paper that delineated general cognitive principles
that underlie a great deal of present-day research in
active-learning instruction in physics. (E)
B. Specific student ideas are elicited and addressed
Several distinct methods have been employed, with
McDermott’s probably the best known.
93. “Oersted
Medal
Lecture
2001:
‘Physics
Education
Research—The key to student learning,’” L. C. McDer-
mott, Am. J. Phys. 69, 1127–1137 (2001). The instructional
strategy of McDermott and co-workers was designed to
help students confront and address speciﬁc learning difﬁ-
culties. This strategy, often summarized as “elicit, confront,
and resolve,” perhaps has been the most thoroughly tested
and validated of all active-learning instructional methods in
physics. Dozens of peer-reviewed publications by research-
ers working in diverse institutional and instructional con-
texts have documented substantial learning gains resulting
from this approach. See also Ref. 59. (E)
Other approaches for addressing and utilizing students’
ideas include, for example, guiding students to “reﬁne” their
ideas to “reconcile” them to physics concepts (Ref. 86).
Other terms that have been applied to this process include
“bridging” between more familiar and less familiar concepts
and “weaving” of loosely connected initial ideas into more
complete understanding.
94. “Using bridging analogies and anchoring intuitions to
deal with students’ preconceptions in physics,” J. Clem-
ent, J. Res. Sci. Teach. 30, 1241–1257 (1993). (E)
95. “Teaching science for understanding,” J. A. Minstrell, in
Toward the Thinking Curriculum: Current Cogni-
tive Research, edited by L. B. Resnick and L. E. Klop-
fer
(Association
for
Supervision
and
Curriculum
Development, Alexandria, VA, 1989), pp. 129–149. (E)
C. Students are encouraged to “figure things out for
themselves”
As discussed by Hake (Ref. 63), where the above quota-
tion appears, and much earlier by Karplus and Arons, this
refers to a pedagogical strategy in which students are
guided to reason through and investigate concepts and key
ideas through a process of questioning, experimentation,
and discussion (often called “guided inquiry”), in contrast
to receiving these ideas fully and clearly developed in
advance of (or instead of) an activity. The goal is for stu-
dents to develop personal insight rather than accept facts
and principles solely on the basis of authority. This peda-
gogical principle, which is an obvious extension of the
“inductive” methods advocated in the 1800s (Ref. 39), is
discussed in many references. 20th-century advocates of
this strategy such as Karplus often linked it to research by
Piaget which suggested that learning is largely based on
grappling with, accommodating to, and ultimately assimilat-
ing unfamiliar concepts (Ref. 47).
The investigative activity may take many forms depending
on the speciﬁc classroom context (laboratory, lecture, recita-
tion; small or large group; etc.). In the initial stages of
instruction, instructors tend to ask leading questions rather
than provide students with either direct answers or detailed
487
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
487
formulations of generalized principles (which may come
later). Alternatively, instructors may guide students to for-
mulate their own questions, as in the ISLE curriculum of
Etkina and Van Heuvelen (Ref. 129). Students may be soli-
cited to offer hypotheses or predictions regarding the out-
come of experiments, to debate the merits of various
hypotheses, and to test them through experimentation or rea-
soning. Carefully structured question or activity sequences
are often used to guide this process, both with and without
use of equipment and materials.
D. Students engage in a variety of problem-solving activ-
ities during class time
This characteristic may be considered the speciﬁc imple-
mentation method for the strategy described in Sec. V C; it
stands in contrast to having students spend most of the time
listening to an instructor speak (Refs. 52, 104, and 110). In
this context, “problem-solving activities” does not normally
refer to the solution of standard textbook-type quantitative
problems. Instead, students are challenged with a wide vari-
ety of thought-provoking activities that might include hands-
on experiments (brief or extended), written or verbal predic-
tions of experiment outcomes, qualitative questions requiring
verbal or diagrammatic responses, multiple-choice concep-
tual questions utilizing electronic response systems, and col-
laboration and discussion with the other students. More
broadly, students are guided to retrieve and apply the con-
cepts needed to solve problems in realistic physical settings
in novel and diverse contexts, and to justify or explain the
reasoning they have used.
E. Students express their reasoning explicitly
Expressions of reasoning can be generated both verbally
by interacting with instructors and other students, and in
written explanations as part of responses to quizzes, in-class
worksheets, homework, and exam problems, as discussed in
many references above. These verbal and written expressions
help students more clearly expose—and therefore modify—
their own thought processes.
A speciﬁc application of this principle has been designed
to improve students’ problem-solving ability; it is in some
ways an extension of Ref. 57 and is analogous to methods
described in Refs. 65 and 97.
96. “Using qualitative problem-solving strategies to high-
light the role of conceptual knowledge in solving prob-
lems,” W. J. Leonard, R. J. Dufresne, and J. P. Mestre,
Am. J. Phys. 64, 1495–1503 (1996). Students initiated
problem solving by ﬁrst writing a “strategy,” which
involved stating and justifying the major principles or
concepts needed to solve a problem along with a proce-
dure for applying them. (E)
F. Students often work together in small groups
Student group work is designed to lead students to express
their own thinking and to comment on and critique each
others’ thinking regarding problems and questions under
consideration. This strategy has been widely used and dis-
cussed in the context of physics education.
97. “Teaching problem solving through cooperative group-
ing. Part 1: Group versus individual problem solving,”
P. Heller, R. Keith, and S. Anderson, Am. J. Phys. 60,
627–636 (1992). Describes “Cooperative Group Problem
Solving” in which student groups are guided to imple-
ment a step-by-step general problem-solving strategy in
which physics principles and appropriate representations
are explicitly expressed and applied. (E)
98. “Teaching problem solving through cooperative group-
ing. Part 2: Designing problems and structuring groups,”
P. Heller and M. Hollabaugh, Am. J. Phys. 60, 637–644
(1992). Describes “context-rich” problems, discussed
further in Ref. 124. (E)
G. Students receive rapid feedback in the course of their
investigative or problem-solving activity
“Rapid” may connote feedback on a minute-to-minute ba-
sis or even shorter; it includes feedback from instructors
through frequent questions and answers, and feedback from
fellow students through small-group interactions (Refs. 8
and 63, and Refs. 104 and 110). A signiﬁcant advance was
the immediate feedback provided through automatic compu-
terized data logging and instantaneous graphical displays
(Refs. 66 and 70). The feedback works in two directions,
since instructors beneﬁt by acquiring a clearer picture of stu-
dents’ evolving thinking and are able to adjust instruction
accordingly in a rapid and ﬂexible manner.
H. Qualitative reasoning and conceptual thinking is
emphasized
Nonquantitative means of problem solving are used to
strengthen students’ understanding of fundamental concepts
and processes of physics, and to avoid having students focus
on mastery of mathematical algorithms as a substitute for
understanding. This principle has been widely discussed
and applied in physics education for over 100 years (Refs. 39
and 42).
I. Problems are posed in a wide variety of contexts and
representations
Physics education research has shown convincingly that
knowledge of physics concepts is not adequate for real-
world application if acquired and practiced only in few and
limited contexts utilizing a narrow range of representations.
In order to deepen conceptual understanding in active-
learning physics instruction, problem-solving and investiga-
tive activities are expressly designed to incorporate diagram-
matic, graphical, pictorial, verbal, and other means of
representing ideas and posing questions, and they are delib-
erately set in widely diverse physical contexts. This is dis-
cussed in nearly all of the references. Among the more
inﬂuential were Refs. 64 and 98, and the following ones:
99.
“Cognition of learning physics,” J. Larkin, Am. J.
Phys. 49, 534–541 (1981). Discussed the use of multi-
ple representations as a characteristic of expert problem
solvers. (I)
100. “Toward a modeling theory of physics instruction,” D.
Hestenes, Am. J. Phys. 55, 440–454 (1987). Provided a
theoretical framework for the development of Modeling
Instruction (Refs. 132–135). (I-A)
101. “A view from physics,” L. C. McDermott, in Toward a
Scientiﬁc Practice of Science Education, edited by
488
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
488
M. Gardner, J. G. Greeno, F. Reif, A. H. Schoenfeld,
A. diSessa, and E. Stage (L. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ,
1990), pp. 3–30. Succinctly outlines the particular util-
ity of multiple representations in physics education. (E)
J. Instruction frequently incorporates use of actual
physical systems in problem solving
Active-learning instruction often emphasizes “translating”
between, on the one hand, phenomena and processes in
actual physical systems and, on the other hand, diverse forms
of representation of these same processes (such as diagram-
matic, mathematical, and verbal). Whenever practical, stu-
dents are guided to answer questions and solve problems by
engaging in hands-on activities with real objects (Refs. 59,
63, and 66; also see Ref. 123).
K. Instruction emphasizes the need to reflect on one’s
own problem-solving practice
This characteristic is a direct analogue of day-to-day prac-
tices of working scientists (Refs. 8 and 64). Reﬂection may
be achieved by: (a) enunciating speciﬁc goals and planning
speciﬁc solution strategies in advance; (b) checking results
frequently during the problem-solving process; (c) searching
for coherent patterns; (d) considering alternative approaches;
(e) performing ﬁnal checks of the reasonableness and consis-
tency of results; and (f) reviewing the entire process to reﬂect
on how one’s thinking evolved, and to assess the effective-
ness of one’s strategies, often referred to as an emphasis on
“metacognitive” issues.
L. Instruction emphasizes linking of concepts into well-
organized hierarchical structures
Expert-like thinking requires both conceptual understand-
ing (including links among concepts), and ready access to
appropriate concepts through a well-organized hierarchical
“ﬁling system” (Refs. 8, 64, 92, and 100). Thus, broad gen-
eral principles such as conservation laws and related
problem-solving strategies based on these principles are
often the primary goal of knowledge-building activities in
active-learning physics instruction (Refs. 64, 65, and 96).
M. Instruction integrates both appropriate content
(based on knowledge of students’ thinking) and
appropriate behaviors (requiring active student
engagement)
Active-learning instruction emphasizes the content of
instructional materials as much as it does the speciﬁc instruc-
tional activities; explicit attention to students’ speciﬁc think-
ing patterns and learning behaviors is required. Instruction
based on research that probes these patterns and behaviors is
often called “research-based” instruction. Instruction that
employs some of the same learning activities or technologi-
cal tools, but in which the content does not focus on speciﬁc
challenges identiﬁed through research into student learning,
is not as successful.
102. “Evaluating innovation in studio physics,” K. Cum-
mings, J. Marx, R. Thornton, and D. Kuhl, Am. J.
Phys. 67(S1), S38–S44 (1999). Contrasts students’
learning gains in three different learning environments
which, however, were all characterized by highly
engaging activities, quite different from standard lec-
ture instruction. They all incorporated small classes,
collaborative group work, high levels of student-
faculty interaction, and very limited use of lectures.
The two research-based curricula produced far higher
learning gains than the third ostensibly analogous
active-learning curriculum, which differed from the
other two in not being closely guided by research on
students’ thinking, and in not explicitly addressing
known difﬁculties in students’ reasoning regarding the
targeted physics concepts. (E)
103. “Physics learning and Microcomputer Based Labora-
tory (MBL): Learning effects of using MBL as a tech-
nological and as a cognitive tool,” J. Bernhard, in
Science Education Research in the Knowledge-
Based Society, edited by D. Psillos, P. Kariotoglou, V.
Tselfes, E. Hatzikraniotis, G. Fassoulopoulos, and M.
Kallery (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2003), pp. 323–331. When
inquiry-based labs using computer technology were
rewritten to emphasize accurate veriﬁcation of known
formulas (instead of having students work to develop
underlying concepts associated with known student dif-
ﬁculties), results on diagnostic tests were signiﬁcantly
worse. (E)
VI. ACTIVE-LEARNING INSTRUCTIONAL
MATERIALS FOR INTRODUCTORY ALGEBRA-
AND CALCULUS-BASED PHYSICS COURSES
We include here selected references to research-validated
instructional materials and to papers that provide informa-
tion regarding implementation and effectiveness of the
materials. Materials within each of Secs. VI A–E are organ-
ized in chronological order of most recent publication of
the primary (ﬁrst) reference, which in some cases is years
or decades after the publication date of the original version
of the materials; additional references within subsections
are organized chronologically; otherwise, organization is
alphabetical.
A. Materials primarily for use in lecture sessions or
lecture-based courses
1. Peer Instruction
104. Peer Instruction: A User’s Manual, E. Mazur (Pren-
tice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1997). Peer In-
struction is a method of interactive lecturing; short
segments of a lecture are interspersed with students
working collaboratively to answer qualitative, concep-
tual multiple-choice questions (“ConcepTests”). Pro-
vides an overview of the method and a large collection
of ConcepTests. (E)
105. “Peer Instruction: Ten years of experience and results,”
C. H. Crouch and E. Mazur, Am. J. Phys. 69, 970–977
(2001). Detailed documentation of improved student
learning in physics lecture courses at Harvard that were
based on Peer Instruction. (E)
106. “Transforming the lecture-hall environment: The fully
interactive physics lecture,” D. E. Meltzer and K. Man-
ivannan, Am. J. Phys. 70, 639–654 (2002). Review of
active-learning instruction in physics and description of
the “fully” interactive lecture. This variant of Peer
489
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
489
Instruction minimizes lecture time and focuses on
extended question-and-answer sequences that gradually
ramp up the level of conceptual complexity. In conjunc-
tion with use of a specially designed student workbook
(along with other active-learning materials), the method
produced very high student learning gains on an electric-
ity and magnetism diagnostic exam. The workbook is
available at <http://www.physicseducation.net/>. (E)
107. “Designing effective questions for classroom response
system teaching,” I. D. Beatty, W. J. Gerace, W. J.
Leonard, and R. J. Dufresne, Am. J. Phys. 74, 31–39
(2006). Provides detailed strategies for designing effec-
tive
questions
in
a
“question-driven”
instruction
approach. Instruction focuses on the use of a classroom
response system to pose, collect answers for, and dis-
cuss carefully designed questions. (E)
108. “Peer Instruction: Engaging students one-on-one, all at
once,” C. H. Crouch, J. Watkins, A. P. Fagen, and E.
Mazur,
in
Research-Based
Reform
of
University
Physics, edited by E. F. Redish and P. J. Cooney (AAPT,
College Park, MD, 2007), Reviews in PER Vol. 1,
<http://www.per-central.org/document/ServeFile.cfm
?ID¼4990>. Extensive and detailed discussion of
Peer Instruction and the research studies that demon-
strate its efﬁcacy. (E)
109. “Testing a new voting machine question methodology,”
N. W. Reay, P. Li, and L. Bao, Am. J. Phys. 76,
171–178 (2008). Describes another method for design-
ing interactive question sequences to be used with class-
room response systems, and provides data that support
the effectiveness of the method. (E)
2. Interactive Lecture Demonstrations
110. Interactive Lecture Demonstrations: Active Learn-
ing in Introductory Physics [The Physics Suite],
D. R. Sokoloff and R. K. Thornton (Wiley, New
York, 2008). Interactive Lecture Demonstrations
(ILDs) are used in the physics lecture classroom
where the teacher performs actual experiments in
front of the class. They are sequences of carefully
chosen short demonstrations intended to help stu-
dents learn fundamental concepts. Students make
individual written predictions, discuss them with
their neighbors, and predict again. Most often, real-
time data-logging tools are used for data collection,
analysis, and modeling. The “correct” answer is
determined by experiment. For student learning
results, see also Ref. 70. (E)
111. “Using interactive lecture demonstrations to create an
active learning environment,” D. R. Sokoloff and R. K.
Thornton, Phys. Teach. 35, 340–347 (1997). Describes
ILDs with observations of learning gains as high as
90% of maximum possible gain. (E)
There is evidence that students’ spatial visualization
ability improves through use of Interactive Lecture Demon-
strations, as well as Workshop Physics activities.
112. “Real-time data display, spatial visualization ability,
and learning force and motion concepts,” M. Kozhevni-
kov and R. Thornton, J. Sci. Educ. Tech. 15, 111–132
(2006). Student performance on standard tests of spatial
visualization ability improved after participating in
Interactive Lecture Demonstrations and active-learning
laboratories. See also Ref. 70. (I)
3. Physics for Scientists and Engineers: A Strategic
Approach
113. Physics for Scientists and Engineers: A Strategic
Approach with Modern Physics, Second Edition,
and Student Workbook, R. D. Knight (Pearson Addi-
son Wesley, San Francisco, 2008). Inspired by the
work of Van Heuvelen (Refs. 64 and 65), the workbook
provides a wealth of conceptual questions using multi-
ple representations for the full introductory physics
course. The Instructor’s Guide for these materials
(Ref.
4)
describes
the
“interactive-lecture”
style
intended for their use. There also is a version for
algebra-based courses. (E)
4. Matter & Interactions
114. Matter & Interactions, Third Edition; Vol. 1, Mod-
ern Mechanics and Vol. 2, Electric and Magnetic
Interactions, R. W. Chabay and B. A. Sherwood
(Wiley, New York, 2010); E & M simulations: <http://
www4.ncsu.edu/~rwchabay/emimovies>.
Integrates
classical and modern physics with a strong emphasis on
microscopic models. Interspersed throughout with con-
ceptual questions, exercises using computer modeling,
and activities using simple physical equipment. (E)
115. “Matter & Interactions,” R. Chabay and B. Sherwood,
in Research-Based Reform of University Physics,
edited by E. F. Redish and P. J. Cooney (AAPT, Col-
lege Park, MD, 2007), Reviews in PER Vol. 1, <http://
www.per-central.org/document/ServeFile.cfm?ID¼4989>.
Extensive discussion of the curriculum and its design
principles; includes a survey of student-learning data
that show outcomes superior to those from traditional
instruction. (E)
116. “Tale of two curricula: The performance of 2000 students
in introductory electromagnetism,” M. A. Kohlmyer, M.
D. Caballero, R. Catrambone, R. W. Chabay, L. Ding, M.
P. Haugan, M. J. Marr, B. A. Sherwood, and M. F.
Schatz, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 5, 020105 (2009).
Description of careful studies documenting improved stu-
dent learning, as well as better total retention of concep-
tual material than traditional instruction more than 2 years
after instruction had ended. (E)
B. Materials primarily for the laboratory
1. Socratic Dialog-Inducing Labs
117. “Socratic pedagogy in the introductory physics labo-
ratory,” R. R. Hake, Phys. Teach. 30, 546–552 (1992).
“SDI” labs (Ref. 63) are designed to promote mental
construction of concepts through conceptual conﬂict,
analysis using multiple representations, peer discus-
sion, and Socratic dialogue with instructors. Curricular
materials are archived at <http://www.physics.indiana.
edu/~sdi/>. (E)
2. Tools for Scientific Thinking
118. Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking: Motion and Force Cur-
riculum and Guide; and Heat and Temperature
490
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
490
Curriculum and Guide, R. K. Thornton and D. R.
Sokoloff (Vernier Software, Beaverton, OR, 1990;
1993). One of the ﬁrst guided-inquiry college-level cur-
ricula to make full use of microcomputer-based labora-
tory technologies including motion sensors and real-time
graphing. Activities start by having students make and
explain predictions of experimental outcomes; students
then work together in small groups to test these predic-
tions in the laboratory. See also Refs. 66 and 67. (E)
119. “Constructing student knowledge in science,” R. F. Tin-
ker and R. K. Thornton, in New Directions in Educa-
tional Technology [Volume 96 of NATO ASI Series on
Computer and Systems Sciences], edited by Eileen
Scanlon and Tim O’Shea (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1992),
pp. 153–170. Explicit discussion of the ways technology
can be used to enable inquiry-based learning, set in the
context of the Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking project. (E)
120. “Learning physics concepts in the introductory course:
Microcomputer-based Labs and Interactive Lecture
Demonstrations,” R. K. Thornton, in Conference on the
Introductory Physics Course, edited by J. Wilson
(Wiley, New York, 1997), pp. 69–85. Reviews research
showing increased learning gains using technology-
based active-learning methods. (E)
3. RealTime Physics
121. RealTime Physics: Active Learning Laboratories,
Modules 1-4, Second Edition [The Physics Suite], D.
R. Sokoloff, R. K. Thornton, and P. W. Laws (Wiley,
New York, 2004). (An online Teachers’ Guide is avail-
able.) RTP uses real-time data-logging tools including
features for mathematical and statistical modeling. It
promotes conceptual and quantitative learning by
allowing students to test their predictions of experimen-
tal outcomes through direct observations of the physi-
cal world, supported by a detailed student-activity
guide. Students work together most often in groups of
three. See also Ref. 70 for student learning results. (E)
122. “RealTime Physics: Active learning labs transforming the
introductory laboratory,” D. R. Sokoloff, P. W. Laws, and
R. K. Thornton, Eur. J. Phys. 28, S83–S94 (2007). Gives
description of and guiding principles for RealTime
Physics, as well as student learning results. (E)
4. Problem-Solving Labs
123. University of Minnesota Physics Education Research
and Development, Problem-Solving Labs, Download
Laboratory Manuals: <http://groups.physics.umn.edu/
physed/Research/Lab%20Manuals/Lab%20Manuals.
html>. These materials are based on the developmental
work and assessments discussed in Refs. 97 and 98. (E)
C. Hybrid lecture-lab materials
1. Cooperative Group Problem Solving
124. University of Minnesota Physics Education Research
and Development, Cooperative Group Problem Solv-
ing: <http://groups.physics.umn.edu/physed/Research/
CGPS/CGPSintro.htm>. Comprehensive approach to
restructuring introductory physics courses, based on work
described in (Refs. 97 and 98). Includes: (a) Context Rich
Problems, On-Line Archive: <http://groups.physics.umn.
edu/physed/Research/CRP/on-lineArchive/ola.html>,
a
collection of the “context-rich” problems described in
Ref. 97 that use everyday situations as a context, may
include extraneous information or require estimations,
and do not directly state a target variable; (b) Manuals for
problem-solving labs using specially designed context-
rich problems (see Ref. 123); and (c) Cooperative Group
Problem
Solving
in
Physics,
Patricia
Heller
and
Kenneth Heller (University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
1999), a comprehensive guide to the instructional method
<http://groups.physics.umn.edu/physed/Research/CGPS/
GreenBook.html>. (E)
2. Workshop Physics
125. Workshop Physics Activity Guide, Modules 1-4, Sec-
ond Edition [The Physics Suite], P. W. Laws (Wiley,
New York, 2004). Designed for a calculus-based intro-
ductory physics course without formal lectures that
meets in a collaborative, active-learning classroom for
6 h each week. Employs computer tools for data collec-
tion and modeling and provides a detailed student-
activity guide; students work together, usually in
groups of two to four. Discussed in detail in Ref. 68;
see also Ref. 70 for student learning results. (E)
126. “Millikan Lecture 1996: Promoting active learning
based on physics education research in introductory
physics courses,” P. W. Laws, Am. J. Phys. 65, 14–21
(1997).
Overview
with
examples
of
Workshop
Physics, with discussion of some general issues related
to active-learning instruction in physics. (E)
127. “Women’s responses to an activity-based introductory
physics program,” P. W. Laws, P. J. Rosborough, and F. J.
Poodry, Am. J. Phys. 67(S1), S32–S37 (1999). Reports a
common challenge often observed in active-learning
instruction, that is: Some students who may be familiar
and comfortable with traditional instructional methods
never accommodate to the new methods, and remain dis-
satisﬁed with their instructional experience. (E)
3. Investigative Science Learning Environment: Physics
Active Learning Guide
128. The Physics Active Learning Guide, Student Edi-
tion, and The Physics Active Learning Guide, In-
structor Edition, A. Van Heuvelen and E. Etkina
(Addison Wesley, San Francisco, CA, 2005). Building
on principles described in Refs. 64 and 65 and further
developed in Ref. 129, these detailed activity guides
help students use multiple representations and qualita-
tive reasoning, and develop a systematic approach to
problem-solving. Students are guided to form hypothe-
ses and test them through direct observation by design-
ing experiments. (E)
129. “Investigative Science Learning Environment – A sci-
ence process approach to learning physics,” E. Etkina
and A. Van Heuvelen, in Research-Based Reform of
University Physics, edited by E. F. Redish and P. J.
Cooney (AAPT, College Park, MD, 2007), Reviews
in PER Vol. 1, <http://www.per-central.org/document/
ServeFile.cfm?ID¼4988>.
Detailed
review
of
the
design principles of the Physics Active Learning
491
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
491
Guide, including description of the curriculum with
data regarding student learning gains. (E)
4. SCALE-UP
130. “The Student-Centered Activities for Large Enrollment
Undergraduate Programs (SCALE-UP) project,” R. J.
Beichner, J. M. Saul, D. S. Abbott, J. J. Morse, D. L.
Deardorff, R. J. Allain, S. W. Bonham, M. H. Dancy,
and J. S. Risley, in Research-Based Reform of
University Physics, edited by E. F. Redish and P. J.
Cooney (AAPT, College Park, MD, 2007), Reviews in
PER Vol. 1, <http://www.per-central.org/document/
ServeFile.cfm?ID¼4517>. Home page is at <http://
scaleup.ncsu.edu/>. SCALE-UP is a method of struc-
turing and conducting interactive classes combined
with curricular materials specially designed for that
purpose. (E)
5. Preconceptions in Mechanics
131. Preconceptions in Mechanics: Lessons Dealing with
Students’ Conceptual Difﬁculties, Second Edition
[ﬁrst edition: Kendall Hunt, Dubuque, IA, 1994], C. W.
Camp and J. J. Clement (AAPT, College Park, 2010).
This curriculum originated in and developed from the
research described in Refs. 60, 61, and 62. Although
primarily intended for high school courses, many of the
activities are suitable for introductory college courses
as well. In Ref. 94, there is discussion of the develop-
ment process of the curriculum materials, along with
student-outcome data showing strong learning gains in
high-school physics classes. (E)
6. Modeling Instruction Program
132. Modeling
Instruction
Program:
<http://modeling.
asu.edu/>. Modeling grew out of Hestenes’s work (Ref.
100). Student groups carry out experiments, using graph-
ical, diagrammatic, and mathematical representations to
model physical systems. Some curricular materials are
password-protected and available to participants in Mod-
eling workshops; others are freely available at <http://
modeling.asu.edu/Curriculum.html>. (E)
133. “Modeling instruction in mechanics,” I. A. Halloun and
D. Hestenes, Am. J. Phys. 55, 455–462 (1987).
Description of an early form of Modeling Instruction;
students’ test scores are compared to those in tradi-
tional classes. (E)
134. “A
modeling
method
for
high
school
physics
instruction,” M. Wells, D. Hestenes, and G. Swack-
hamer, Am. J. Phys. 63, 606–619 (1995). Review of
pedagogical principles and descriptions of typical
classes using the Modeling method. (E)
135. “Modeling theory applied: Modeling Instruction in in-
troductory physics,” E. Brewe, Am. J. Phys. 76,
1155–1160 (2008). A concise “user’s guide” for apply-
ing modeling instruction in college physics courses. (E)
D. Tutorials and problem-solving worksheets
1. Tutorials in Introductory Physics
136. Tutorials in Introductory Physics; Homework for
Tutorials in Introductory Physics; Instructor’s Guide
for Tutorials in Introductory Physics, L. C. McDer-
mott, P. S. Shaffer, and the Physics Education Group
(Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2002–2003).
Guided-inquiry worksheets emphasizing written explana-
tions of qualitative reasoning, targeted at a wide variety of
challenging concepts in introductory physics. Material is
based on the Ph.D. research of more than 20 graduate stu-
dents over a period of decades at the University of Wash-
ington (UW), as reported in a large body of AJP articles.
Instructor’s Guide contains pretests, exam questions, and
instructor’s notes for each of the tutorials. A separate
homework volume provides extensions and applications
of concepts developed in the tutorials. (E)
137. “Development of a computer-based tutorial on the pho-
toelectric effect,” R. N. Steinberg, G. E. Oberem, and
L. C. McDermott, Am. J. Phys. 64, 1370–1379 (1996).
Provides a detailed account of the genesis of one of the
many UW tutorials, showing how research on student
learning conducted in parallel with development of cur-
ricular materials led to improvements in tutorial design
and learning outcomes. (E)
138. “Replicating and understanding successful innovations:
Implementing tutorials in introductory physics,” N. D.
Finkelstein and S. J. Pollock, Phys. Rev. ST Phys.
Educ. Res. 1, 010101 (2005). This close replication of
the implementation of Tutorials employed at the Uni-
versity of Washington yielded virtually identical stu-
dent learning gains, providing an unusually clear-cut
validation of the effectiveness of the curricular materi-
als when they were used in a manner faithful to that
intended by their developers. (E)
139. “Effectiveness of different tutorial recitation teaching
methods and its implications for TA training,” K. M. Koe-
nig, R. J. Endorf, and G. A. Braun, Phys. Rev. ST Phys.
Educ. Res. 3, 010104 (2007). Materials from Tutorials in
Introductory Physics were used in several different
instructional environments that varied in the amount of
student and teacher engagement. The most effective
teaching method was students working in cooperative
learning groups with the instructors questioning the
groups using Socratic dialogue. This method matches the
original implementation at the University of Washington.
(E)
2. University of Maryland tutorials
140. Activity-Based Tutorials: Vol. 1, Introductory Physics;
Vol. 2, Modern Physics [The Physics Suite], M. C.
Wittmann, R. N. Steinberg, E. F. Redish, and the Univer-
sity of Maryland Physics Education Research Group
(Wiley, New York, 2004). Older versions are available
(password-protected) at [Vol. 1:] <http://www.physics.
umd.edu/perg/abp/abptutorials/tutlist.htm> and [Vol. 2:]
<http://www.physics.umd.edu/perg/qm/qmcourse/New
Model/qmtuts.htm>. These guided-inquiry worksheets
are inspired by and modeled on Tutorials in Introduc-
tory Physics (Ref. 136). (E)
141. “Comparing three methods for teaching Newton’s third
law,” T. I. Smith and M. C. Wittmann, Phys. Rev. ST
Phys. Educ. Res. 3, 010205 (2007). Students’ perform-
ance on Newton’s third-law questions from the FMCE
(Ref. 73) improved signiﬁcantly after using relevant
tutorials
from
either
Tutorials
in
Introductory
492
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
492
Physics, Activity-Based Tutorials, or Open-Source
Tutorials (Ref. 142). Students who used Open-Source
Tutorials had higher gains than those who used either
of the other two tutorials. (E)
142. Tutorials in Physics Sense-Making (Open-Source
Tutorials).
Individual
tutorials:
<http://umdperg.
pbworks.com/w/page/10511239/Tutorials%20in%20
Physics%20Sense-Making>; All materials: <http://
www.spu.edu/depts/physics/tcp/tadevelopment.asp>.
These tutorials are based on principles and methods
discussed by Elby (Ref. 86). In addition to building
students’ conceptual understanding, they focus on
strengthening physical intuition, developing under-
standing of scientiﬁc reasoning, and relating physics
to everyday experience. The tutorials are accompa-
nied by extensive instructor’s materials including
annotated videoclips. (E)
E. Computer simulations and intelligent tutors
1. MasteringPhysics
143. “What course elements correlate with improvement on
tests in introductory Newtonian mechanics?” E.-S.
Morote and D. E. Pritchard, Am. J. Phys. 77, 746–753
(2009). “MasteringPhysics” is an online homework sys-
tem with self-paced tutorials that incorporate extensive
hints and feedback based on physics education research.
This study showed that use of an early version correlated
more strongly with high performance on both the MIT
ﬁnal course exam and the FCI (Ref. 72) than other
course elements such as written homework, group prob-
lem solving, and class participation. The system was
originally developed by D. E. Pritchard of MIT but is
currently owned by Pearson Education; see: <http://
www.masteringphysics.com/site/index.html>. (E)
2. Andes
144. “The Andes physics tutoring system: An experiment in
freedom,” K. VanLehn, B. van de Sande, R. Shelby,
and S. Gershman, in Advances in Intelligent Tutoring
Systems
[Studies
in
Computational
Intelligence
308], edited by R. Nkambou, J. Bourdeau, and R. Miz-
oguchi (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2010), pp. 421–443.
Andes is a highly sophisticated “intelligent tutor” that
provides step-by-step help and guidance to students as
they solve quantitative physics problems in an online
environment. This paper provides a detailed description
of its design principles and a survey of assessment data
documenting student learning. The system itself is
available at <http://www.andestutor.org/sets/>. (I)
3. Interactive Science Simulations
145. University of Colorado, Interactive Science Simula-
tions: <http://phet.colorado.edu/>. Large collection of
very sophisticated and powerful interactive simulations
on many topics in physical science. Related research
reports are archived at <http://phet.colorado.edu/en/
research>. (E)
146. “When learning about the real world is better done virtu-
ally: A study of substituting computer simulations for lab-
oratory equipment,” N. Finkelstein, W. K. Adams, C. J.
Keller, P. B. Kohl, K. K. Perkins, N. S. Podolefsky, S.
Reid, and R. LeMaster, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res.
1, 010103 (2005). Instruction on electric circuits using
simulations yielded higher gains on a diagnostic test than
did instruction using actual laboratory equipment. (E)
147. “Oersted Medal Lecture 2007: Interactive simulations
for teaching physics: What works, what doesn’t, and
why,” C. E. Wieman, K. K. Perkins, and W. K. Adams,
Am. J. Phys. 76, 393–399 (2008). Discussion of the
design, underlying research principles, and applications
of the simulations. (E)
148. “A study of educational simulations part I—Engage-
ment in learning,” W. K. Adams, S. Reid, R. LeMaster,
S. B. McKagan, K. K. Perkins, M. Dubson, and C. E.
Wieman, J. Interactive Learn. Res. 19, 397–419 (2008);
“A study of educational simulations part II—Interface
design,” W. K. Adams, S. Reid, R. LeMaster, S. B.
McKagan, K. K. Perkins, M. Dubson, and C. E. Wie-
man, J. Interactive Learn. Res. 19, 551–577 (2008).
Detailed description of research and development
process underlying creation of the simulations. Includes
many insightful observations regarding pedagogical
effectiveness of speciﬁc features and strategies. (A)
VII. ACTIVE-LEARNING INSTRUCTIONAL
MATERIALS FOR INTERMEDIATE- AND
ADVANCED-LEVEL PHYSICS COURSES
Material following the ﬁrst reference within subsections is
organized chronologically.
A. Mechanics
149. Intermediate Mechanics Tutorials: <http://umaine.edu/
per/projects/imt/>. Contains a large collection of pre-
tests, tutorials, exam questions, homework, and instruc-
tor’s guides for a wide variety of topics in upper-level
mechanics, modeled after the University of Washing-
ton’s Tutorials in Introductory Physics (Ref. 136). (E)
150. “Investigating student understanding in intermediate
mechanics: Identifying the need for a tutorial approach
to instruction,” B. S. Ambrose, Am. J. Phys. 72,
453–459 (2004). Discussion of research on which In-
termediate Mechanics Tutorials are based, along with
some student-learning data that demonstrate effective-
ness of some of the materials. (E)
B. Electricity and magnetism
151. University of Colorado, Junior-level Electricity and
Magnetism Course Materials: <http://www.colorado.
edu/sei/departments/physics_3310.htm>. Includes tut-
orials, ConcepTests (Ref. 104) for interactive lectures,
homework, lecture notes, and very detailed instructor’s
notes. (E)
152. “Longer term impacts of transformed courses on stu-
dent conceptual understanding of E&M,” S. J. Pollock
and S. V. Chasteen, in 2009 Physics Education
Research Conference, edited by M. Sabella, C. Hen-
derson, and C. Singh, AIP Conference Proceedings
1179 (AIP, Melville, NY, 2009), pp. 237–240. Students
in a course using research-based materials (Ref. 151)
did signiﬁcantly better on a diagnostic exam than
students in the traditionally taught course. Also see
493
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
493
Ref. 77 which describes analogous results for students
who had used other research-based materials several
years previously. (E)
C. Optics
153. “Active learning in intermediate optics through concept
building laboratories,” M. F. Masters and T. T. Grove,
Am. J. Phys. 78, 485–491 (2010). Laboratory approach
relying
on
direct
confrontation
of
misconceptions
through experimental tests of predictions. Materials
available
at
<http://users.ipfw.edu/masters/Optics%
20CCLI%20Project/optics_ccli_project.htm>. (E)
D. Thermal physics
154. Physics Education Research in Thermal Physics:
<http://thermoper.wikispaces.com/>.
Materials
tar-
geted at upper-level thermal physics courses; some are
also useful for introductory courses. (E)
155. “Student ideas regarding entropy and the second law of
thermodynamics in an introductory physics course,” W.
M. Christensen, D. E. Meltzer, and C. A. Ogilvie, Am.
J. Phys. 77, 907–917 (2009). Provides evidence for
effectiveness of some of the materials in introductory
and sophomore-level courses. (E)
156. “Student understanding of basic probability concepts in
an upper-division thermal physics course,” M. E. Lov-
erude, in 2009 Physics Education Research Confer-
ence, edited by M. Sabella, C. Henderson, and C.
Singh, AIP Conference Proceedings 1179 (AIP, Mel-
ville, NY, 2009), pp. 189–192. This and the following
reference provide promising, albeit ambiguous, evi-
dence of student learning gains in upper-level courses
using the thermal physics curricular materials. (E)
157. “Investigating student understanding for a statistical
analysis of two thermally interacting solids,” M. E.
Loverude, in 2010 Physics Education Research Con-
ference, edited by C. Singh, M. Sabella, and S.
Rebello, AIP Conference Proceedings 1289 (AIP, Mel-
ville, NY, 2010), pp. 213–216. (E)
E. Modern physics and quantum mechanics
These materials are organized chronologically. In addition
to the following sources, curricular materials on modern
physics and quantum mechanics are included in Volume 2 of
Activity-Based Tutorials (Ref. 140).
158. PhysletV
R Quantum Physics: An Interactive Intro-
duction to Quantum Theory, M. Belloni, W. Chris-
tian, and A. Cox (Pearson Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle
River, NJ, 2006). Physlets are computer applets that
allow students to interact with graphical and diagram-
matic representations of physical systems, yielding
immediate feedback. Materials are also available at
<http://www.compadre.org/quantum/search/browse.cfm?
browse=Tutorial>, and are discussed in “Physlets for
quantum mechanics,” M. Belloni and W. Christian, Com-
put. Sci. Eng. 5(1), 90–97 (2003). (E)
159. “Improving
students’
understanding
of
quantum
mechanics,” C. Singh, M. Belloni, and W. Christian,
Phys. Today 59(8), 43–49 (2006). Discussion of
research on student learning in quantum mechanics,
and of both the Physlet quantum-mechanics materials
and the University of Pittsburgh Quantum Interactive
Learning Tutorials (QuILTs); see <http://www.phyast.
pitt.edu/~cls/quantum/>. (E)
160. “Reforming a large lecture modern physics course for
engineering majors using a PER-based design,” S. B.
McKagan, K. K. Perkins, and C. E. Wieman, in 2006
Physics Education Research Conference, edited by
L. McCullough, L. Hsu, and P. Heron, AIP Conference
Proceedings 883 (AIP, Melville, NY, 2007), pp. 34–37.
Curricular materials are archived at <http://www.
colorado.edu/physics/EducationIssues/modern/>. Con-
tent emphasizes reasoning development, model building,
and real-world applications, and materials are designed
for
use
with
interactive-engagement
instructional
methods. (E)
161. “Interactive learning tutorials on quantum mechanics,”
C. Singh, Am. J. Phys. 76, 400–405 (2008). A descrip-
tion of the development of the QuILTs (Ref. 159),
including data reﬂecting student-learning gains after
use of the materials. (E)
162. “Developing and researching PhET simulations for teach-
ing quantum mechanics,” S. B. McKagan, K. K. Perkins,
M. Dubson, C. Malley, S. Reid, R. LeMaster, and C. E.
Wieman, Am. J. Phys. 76, 406–417 (2008). Detailed
description of development and assessment of the Univer-
sity of Colorado quantum-mechanics simulations. (See
Ref. 145.) (E)
163. “Transforming
upper-division
quantum
mechanics:
Learning goals and assessment,” S. Goldhaber, S. Pol-
lock, M. Dubson, P. Beale and K. Perkins, in 2009
Physics Education Research Conference, edited by
M. Sabella, C. Henderson, and C. Singh, AIP Confer-
ence Proceedings 1179 (AIP, Melville, NY, 2009), pp.
145–148. Discusses student learning outcomes in a
transformed course, evaluated with a diagnostic instru-
ment
that
focuses
on
conceptual
learning;
both
strengths and weaknesses were revealed. Materials
include tutorials, ConcepTests (Ref. 104), and many
other resources, archived at <http://www.colorado.edu/
sei/departments/physics_3220.htm>. (E)
VIII. ACTIVE-LEARNING INSTRUCTIONAL
MATERIALS FOR PRESERVICE TEACHERS AND
NONSCIENCE STUDENTS
Materials in this section are primarily targeted at courses for
nontechnical students who take physics to fulﬁll general-
education requirements or as part of an elementary-teacher-
education program. However, the materials are generally quite
useful as supplements for many other types of courses as well.
Subsections are organized chronologically according to most
recent publication date of the ﬁrst reference within each section;
references within subsections are organized chronologically.
A. Physics by Inquiry
164. Physics by Inquiry, L. C. McDermott and the Physics
Education Group at the University of Washington
(Wiley, New York, 1996), Vols. I and II. Detailed ac-
tivity guide that integrates quantitative and qualitative
problem-solving exercises, hands-on laboratory activ-
ities, and expository text. A broad range of physical-
science topics is included. Development of these
494
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
494
materials has been ongoing since the early 1970s, based
on
research
on
student
learning
and
continuous
class
testing.
Further
information
is
at
<http://
www.phys.washington.edu/groups/peg/pbi.html>. (E)
165. “Improving the preparation of K-12 teachers through
physics education research,” L. C. McDermott, P. R. L.
Heron, P. S. Shaffer, and M. S. Stetzer, Am. J. Phys.
74, 763–767 (2006). Exam performance by 9th-grade
students whose teachers had worked through Physics
by Inquiry materials was superior to performance of
undergraduate university physics students in traditional
physics courses. Also see (Ref. 79). (E)
166. “Comparing the inﬂuence of physical and virtual
manipulatives in the context of the Physics by Inquiry
curriculum: The case of undergraduate students’ con-
ceptual understanding of heat and temperature,” Z. C.
Zacharia and C. P. Constantinou, Am. J. Phys. 76,
425–430 (2008). Shows that the Physics by Inquiry
materials are effective even when transformed into a
virtual environment using manipulatives that are simu-
lated, rather than physical. (E)
B. Constructing Physics Understanding
167. “Using computers to create constructivist learning envi-
ronments: Impact on pedagogy and achievement,” D.
Huffman, F. Goldberg, and M. Michlin, J. Comput.
Math. Sci. Teach. 22(2), 151–168 (2003). Describes an
implementation and assessment of the Constructing
Physics Understanding (CPU) curriculum, targeted at
nontechnical students. On-screen prompts guide stu-
dents to make and test predictions with both real and
simulated experiments. Description and sample activ-
ities are at <http://cpucips.sdsu.edu/web/cpu/>. (E)
C. Intuitive Quantum Physics
168. “Laboratory-tutorial
activities
for
teaching
proba-
bility,” M. C. Wittmann, J. T. Morgan, and R. E.
Feeley, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 2, 020104
(2006). Documents improved student learning of some
probability concepts after use of the relevant tutorial
from the “Intuitive Quantum Physics” project, archived
at <http://umaine.edu/per/projects/iqp/>. (E)
D. Inquiry into Physical Science
169. Inquiry
into
Physical
Science:
A
Contextual
Approach, Second Edition; Vol. 1, Global Warming;
Vol. 2, Kitchen Science; Vol. 3, The Automobile, R.
Nanes (Kendall Hunt, Dubuque, IA, 2008). An inquiry-
based activity guide that uses everyday contexts to ini-
tiate explorations into fundamental concepts in physics
and chemistry. Targeted at preservice elementary
teachers and other nontechnical students. (E)
170. “Inquiry-based course in physics and chemistry for pre-
service K-8 teachers,” M. E. Loverude, B. L. Gonzalez,
and R. Nanes, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 7,
010101 (2011). Detailed description of a course based
on Ref. 169 that includes examples of activities
and student-assessment questions, as well as data
demonstrating improved student learning compared
to
traditional
courses.
Online
auxiliary
materials
include curriculum and assessment samples, and grad-
ing rubrics. (E)
E. Physics & Everyday Thinking
171. Physics & Everyday Thinking, F. Goldberg, S. Robin-
son, and V. Otero (It’s About Time, Armonk, NY,
2008). Detailed activity guide targeted especially at
prospective
elementary-school
teachers
and
other
nonscience students; makes heavy use of computer-
assisted tools and computer simulations. Puts strong
emphasis on students expressing and reﬂecting on
their own ideas, and explicitly comparing and contrast-
ing their thinking with that of scientists and other
students. (E)
172. “Attitudinal gains across multiple universities using the
Physics and Everyday Thinking curriculum,” V. K.
Otero and K. E. Gray, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res.
4, 020104 (2008). In surveys of 182 students in nine
courses at multiple institutions that used the Physics &
Everyday Thinking curriculum (or a variant of it),
“expert-like” attitudes on the CLASS instrument (Ref.
89) showed signiﬁcant increases from pre- to post-
instruction. This was in striking contrast to the ﬁndings
of most other courses previously surveyed with the
CLASS or similar instruments. (E)
173. “Design principles for effective physics instruction: A
case from physics and everyday thinking,” F. Goldberg,
V. Otero, and S. Robinson, Am. J. Phys. 78, 1265–1277
(2010). Detailed description of the design principles of
Physics & Everyday Thinking with evidence for stu-
dent learning gains; includes extensive analysis of
actual student classroom transcripts to illustrate the
principles in action. (E)
IX. CONCLUSIONS
In a very real sense, methods for active-learning instruc-
tion in physics have been under development in the US for
more than 130 years. As we have seen, there is a large body
of evidence that demonstrates that these methods, in their
most modern versions, offer potential for signiﬁcantly
improved learning in comparison to traditional lecture-
based instruction in college-level physics courses. The liter-
ature we have identiﬁed has shown that the methods are
very diverse, incorporating techniques such as real-time
data logging, Socratic “guided inquiry,” interactive com-
puter simulations, and structured problem-solving. These
methods strongly encourage learning from peers, empha-
size rapid feedback, and guide students to express and
reﬂect on their own reasoning processes. Some of the indi-
vidual techniques might be helpful in traditional instruc-
tional environments. However, superior learning gains have
been clearly and repeatedly demonstrated only in contexts
explicitly based on research into student learning, in which
most of the “common characteristics” cited in the Introduc-
tion and in Sec. V are utilized in an integrated fashion.
These
characteristics
include
(1)
guiding
instruction
according to students’ pre-instruction knowledge state as
revealed through research on student learning; (2) eliciting
and addressing students’ ideas; (3) encouraging students to
ﬁgure things out for themselves; (4) engaging in diverse
problem-solving activities during class time; (5) requiring
students to express their reasoning explicitly; (6) having
students work together in small groups; (7) providing rapid
feedback to students; (8) emphasizing qualitative and con-
ceptual reasoning; (9) posing problems in a wide variety of
495
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
495
contexts and representations; (10) incorporating use of
actual physical systems in problem solving; (11) incorpo-
rating student reﬂection on their problem-solving practice;
(12) emphasizing the linking of concepts into well-
organized hierarchical structures; and (13) integrating both
appropriate content and appropriate behaviors.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We appreciate the valuable comments of several colleagues on
an earlier version of this manuscript. We are particularly grateful
to Sarah McKagan for her very thorough and careful review, and
for suggestions that led to numerous improvements in the paper.
496
Am. J. Phys., Vol. 80, No. 6, June 2012
D. E. Meltzer and R. K. Thornton
496
