REFERENCE FRAME
How Not to Create Tigers
N. David Mermin
O ew'ge Nacht! Wann wirst du schwin-
den? Wann wird das Licht mein Auge
finden ?
—TAMINO, Die Zauberflote
L
ong-time readers of PHYSICS TODAY
may recall a series of conversations
with my opinionated friend and col-
league Professor Mozart, reported in
Reference Frame columns early in this
decade (PHYSICS TODAY, August 1990,
page 9; November 1990, page 9; June
1991, page 9; April 1992, page 9; and
November 1992, page 9.) In answer to
inquiries about his long silence, I can
now reveal that Mozart mysteriously
disappeared at the height of the Gin-
grich revolution in late 1995, demoral-
ized by the growing obsession with
"strategic research." I have just learned
and am happy to report that he is alive
and well, the proprietor of a small tobacco
plantation in central Connecticut.
I had transcribed one of my last
conversations with Bill Mozart in early
1995, but before I could negotiate his
permission to report it in these pages,
he vanished without a trace. As soon
as I rediscovered his whereabouts, I
sent him a brief note of inquiry, enclos-
ing the text reproduced below, and was
delighted to get it back decorated with
the familiar scrawl I had despaired of
ever seeing again: "PT-OK-WAM." I am
publishing our four-year-old conversa-
tion today both for the insight it sheds
on the state of mind that led so pro-
ductive a physicist to drop out of the
profession at so early an age, and also
because Professor Mozart's views on the
state of our discipline in the mid 1990's
remain relevant to the difficult situation
in which we find ourselves today, at the
brink of the new millennium.
A little background: Several years
before the conversation reported below,
Professor Mozart had become deeply
involved in satisfying the congressional
demand for international assistance in
the construction of the Supercon-
ducting Super Collider. In seeking con-
tributions from abroad he had given
free range to his prodigious imagina-
tion, and for several years after the
cancellation of that visionary under-
taking, he was fully occupied with the
N. DAVID MERMIN IS a physicist at
Cornell University. Although he has never
stumbled apon a tyger or even a sunflower,
he has a dandelion or two to his credit.
unwinding of his far-flung operations.
His normally sunny disposition was
clouded by his ongoing dismay at the
failure of the great dream.
Tb aid younger readers in under-
standing what follows, I should also
explain that well into the mid 1990's
there were people—even a few in the
State Department—who remembered
that Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Geor-
gia, and many other countries once
constituted a single nation that claimed
to be "Duilding" something called "com-
munism." The disintegration of this
effort was still on Mozart's mind, as
my record of our last meeting reveals:
For the first time in years, I could
sense cigar smoke as I entered the
building, and by the time the elevator
let me out on the fifth floor the scent
of fine Havanas was unmistakable. His
office door was ajar, so I went right in
and there he was, clearly visible across
the room through the haze, struggling
to wrap an Oriental carpet in enormous
sheets of brown paper. "W. A," I cried
out, "where on earth have you been?"
"Everywhere on Earth," he sighed.
I've returned cigars to Cuba, carpets
to Kazakhstan, peanuts to Senegal.
Sicilian carts for hauling magnets in
the tunnel, crates and crates of Chinese
seminar tea. They wanted interna-
tional support? I got them interna-
tional support! Not enough . . . not
enough . ..." he trailed off, emitting a
fresh jet of smoke. "So," he resumed,
perking up a bit, "I've taken it all back.
Everything. Overlooked this carpet,"
he muttered, tying one more knot with
a great flourish, "but now it's all ac-
counted for. Every jot and tittle."
"The cigars?" I ventured, timidly.
"Private side order," he shot back.
"Everything is now returned. And we
can start asking ourselves what next."
"In the import-export business?" I
ventured.
uIn the pursuit of an understanding
of nature," he corrected me, more in
sorrow than anger, "in the post-SSC era."
"You seem to have taken the can-
cellation rather hard," I observed, "for
somebody who once called the study of
elementary particles the archeology of
physics."
"And so it is," he noted. "But arche-
ology is a noble pursuit. The only com-
fort in the whole business is that the
discoveries will still be there, waiting
to be made, when we finally manage
to summon up the will to make the
attempt. No danger of earthquakes
pulverizing everything or tidal waves
washing it all away So sub specie
aeternitatis little has been lost if we
have to wait for the 22nd or 23rd
century to learn whether the Higgs is
really there or merely a figment of an
overactive 20th-century imagination.
The main problem is going to be keep-
ing the flame of learning alive over
that long gap, so that when mankind
finds itself again ready to resume the
quest, there will still be a few who
know what it's all about and can re-
kindle the fire in others."
"So you plan to retire to your study
and write books?"
"Certainly books will have to be
written, but books alone will not be
enough. Were professional baseball to
undergo a similar collapse, there would
have to be a complete codification of
the underlying principles for there to
be a hope of reviving the game in a
later century. But that would not suf-
fice. In isolated villages and towns, we
would need small bands of volunteers
quietly working hard to maintain their
skills with ball, bat, and glove, passing
a working knowledge of their craft on
to a younger generation who in turn
would struggle to refine their capabili-
ties and transmit them to yet the next
generation, waiting, hoping, until the
time came to resume the game at the
highest level.
"In physics we don't even know the
complete rules of the game, and prob-
ably never will. And the rules that we
do know are so strange that were we
merely to write them down and close
the shop for a few generations, nobody
would be able to make any sense of
them when the time came to open the
book. If we don't stay in training, in a
1999 American Institute of Physics, S-0031-9228-9908-210-1
AUGUST 1999 
PHYSICS TODAY 
11
generation or two nobody will be able
to make any sense of it. Which means
that the universities are now more
important than they have ever been
before."
"You mean . . . ?"
"Yes, to keep learning alive. As the
monasteries preserved literacy during
the Dark Ages, so must the universities
bend to the task of keeping learning
alive during the dark night of strategic
research that now sweeps irresistibly
over us." He was wracked by so violent
a sob that I felt obliged to try to put a
cheerful spin on the vision he seemed
to find so grim.
"So that when the fruits of
strategic research have brought
prosperity and abundance to all, 
g
we can resume the real quest?"
I cheerily injected.
"No," he sighed, "so that when
the sterility of attempting surgi-
cally to extract golden eggs from
flocks of anesthetized geese be-
comes evident even to the most
avaricious, we can still have a
hope of averting the impending
disaster
"By resuming the search for
the Higgs?"
"By restoring the climate in
which free-range geese can lay
their golden eggs unmolested in
the tall grass."
I tried to dislodge him from
his avian metaphor. 'You are
waiting for the day when the
nation 
is 
again 
prosperous
enough to indulge in the luxury
of curiosity-driven research?"
A shudder of revulsion swept over
him. "A phrase that calls to mind little
boys and girls playing doctor—prob-
ably as close to research as the thinker
who coined it ever got. No, I am await-
ing the day when people remember the
fact that discovery does not work by
deciding what you want and then dis-
covering it. Until that happens, we are
trapped in an epoch of stifling crea-
tionism."
"What do you mean, creationism?
Nobody is suggesting that the physical
world requires no explanation beyond
a declaration that God made it that
way. At least nobody in Congress is. At
least not yet. Are they?" A wave of
alarm swept over me.
With this remark, I seemed to have
finally reached his great reserves of
pedagogical energy. He smiled at my
foolishness. "The problem with crea-
tionism is not just that it appeals to
God to obviate the need for thought. If
that were all, it would be easily dis-
posed of. But today, though creationism
has suffered a crushing defeat in the
former Soviet Union, it is now running
rampant in the United States."
'You've lost me, W. A. How was the
collapse of atheistic communism a
crushing defeat for creationism?"
His good humor thoroughly re-
stored, Professor Mozart gave me a
tolerant smile. "Religion offers just one
avenue for creationism to do its mis-
chief. Communism was creationism in
the economic sphere." Noting my blank
expression, he elaborated. "Creation-
ists assume that the passage from the
actual or conjectured starting point to
the actual or desired final stage has
been or can be achieved by direct and
purposeful construction of the latter
/ am going to give you 15.5 billion in 6.1 money for basic
research—but you must spend it before midnight.
from the former."
The light dawned on me. 'You mean
religious creationists maintain that we
got from the void to an Earth teeming
with life through the purposeful inter-
vention of God?"
He smiled and moved as if to pat
me on the head, ending up offering me
a cigar instead.
"And," I went on breathlessly, de-
clining the offer with a shake of my
head, "economic creationists maintain
that we go from an inequitable distri-
bution of wealth to a just society by
the purposeful action of government?"
His smile seemed to light up the
room.
"And the proponents of strategic
research are creationists because
I ran out of steam and sheepishly
grinned back at him.
Professor Mozart rose to his feet.
Waving his cigar like a conductor with
a baton, he declared, "Proponents of
strategic research hold the creationist
belief that science works by deciding
where we want to get and then going
there. They would prescribe for science
what Stalin prescribed for agriculture.
It will have a similar success."
'What's wrong with going where you
want to get to?" I foolishly inquired.
"What's wrong with it?" Mozart
thundered, "what's wrong with it?
Nothing," he hissed, suddenly pianis-
simo, "if where you want to get is to
the mountains for a hike or the deli-
catessen for a sandwich. But it doesn't
make very much sense to insist on
where you want to end up when you're
dealing with a process that always
manages to get you somewhere won-
derful, provided only you don't specify
in advance the particular nature of the
next miracle."
"How can you get anywhere
interesting if you renounce any
advanced planning?" I asked.
"Are tigers interesting?" he
snarled at me.
I jumped back a good two feet.
'Yes," I said, having always liked
zoos.
"So you maintain that the first
thing that crawled out of the pri-
meval slime sat down and drafted
a proposal to the National Insti-
tutes of Health for a grant to help
it become a tiger?"
"Of course not," I replied.
"Natural selection led in the course
of time to an amazing variety of
more and more complex forms, the
particular character of the com-
plexity of each variation being gov-
erned entirely by chance. Planning
had nothing to do with it."
"Right," he pronounced. "No
immortal hand or eye could frame
a strategic plan for that fearful
symmetry. The only requirement was
for the surroundings to be both chal-
lenging and hospitable enough for won-
derful things to develop. One of them
happened to be a tiger. Another, an oak
tree. Yet another, you. All wonderful,
to be sure, but all unplanned and all
intrinsically unplannable."
And fixing his eyes on me as if I
were a specimen of a possibly interest-
ing species of butterfly, he completed
the last knot in the last loop of cord,
hoisted the fully wrapped carpet over
his shoulder, and headed for the door.
"They'll be glad to get this beauty back
in Kazakhstan," he sang out.
"What will you do when youVe
shipped it off?" I called after him.
"Think," the answer drifted down
the hall. "Sit back and think."
"What about?" I shouted.
"If I knew that," he proclaimed, as
he disappeared into the freight eleva-
tor, "there'd be little point in doing it!"
And as he slowly descended to the
loading dock his parting benediction
for science drifted up the shaft:
Tyger! Tyger! burning bright
In the forests of the night.... 
•
AUGUST 1999 
PHYSICS TODAY 
13
