Test objects and other epistemic things:
a history of a nanoscale object
CYRUS C.M. MODY AND MICHAEL LYNCH*
Abstract. This paper follows the history of an object. The purpose of doing so is to come
to terms with a distinctive kind of research object – which we are calling a ‘test object’ – as
well as to chronicle a signiﬁcant line of research and technology development associated
with the broader nanoscience/nanotechnology movement. A test object is one of a family of
epistemic things that makes up the material culture of laboratory science. Depending upon
the case, it can have variable shadings of practical, mathematical and epistemic signiﬁcance.
Clear cases of test objects have highly regular and reproducible visible properties that can be
used for testing instruments and training novices. The test object featured in this paper is
the silicon (111) 7r7, a particular surface conﬁguration (or, as it is often called, a ‘re-
construction’) of silicon atoms. Research on this object over a period of several decades has
been closely bound up with the development of novel instruments for visualizing atomic
structures. Despite having little direct commercial value, the Si(111) 7r7 also has been a focal
object for the formation of a research community bridging industry and academia. It exhibits a
complex structure that became a sustained focus of observation and modelling. Our study
follows shifts in the epistemic status of the Si(111) 7r7, and uses it to re-examine familiar
conceptions of representation and observation in the history, philosophy and social study
of science.
This paper follows the history of an object that has been important for research and
instrument development in the ﬁeld of surface science. The object in question is the
silicon (111) 7r7 (the 7r7 for short), a particular surface conﬁguration (or, as it is
often called, a ‘reconstruction’) of silicon atoms. Surface science has become a signiﬁ-
cant research programme in the electronics industry as well as in subﬁelds of physics,
chemistry, materials science and electrical engineering, and is one of an array of
* Cyrus Mody, Department of History, Rice University, PO Box 1892, Houston, TX 77251-1892, USA.
Email: Cyrus.Mody@rice.edu.
Michael Lynch, Department of Science and Technology Studies, Cornell University, 302 Rockefeller Hall,
Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. Email: mel27@cornell.edu.
Research for this article is based in part upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under
Cooperative Agreement No. 0531184 (Cyrus Mody) and Science and Society Award No. SES-0822757
(Michael Lynch). Versions of this paper were presented at the Annual Meeting of the Society for History of
Technology (SHOT), and at workshops and colloquia at the South Carolina NanoCenter, University of
Wisconsin Visual Culture Center, Rice University Humanities Research Center and Stanford University STS
Program. We are very grateful to Karin Knorr Cetina, Davis Baird, Rebecca Slayton, Chris Toumey and many
others who gave us comments and criticisms. We also are deeply indebted to the scientists and engineers who
were kind enough to share their reﬂections with us. Finally, we would like to thank the BJHS editors and
anonymous referees for their comments and help with the revision of the paper.
BJHS 43(3): 423–458, September, 2010.
f British Society for the History of Science 2009
doi:10.1017/S0007087409990689
First published online 17 December 2009
scientiﬁc and engineering specialities associated with the broader nanoscience/nano-
technology movement.1
Surface scientists use scanning probe microscopes and other instruments to visualize
and manipulate atomic and molecular conﬁgurations at the surfaces of selected mate-
rials. Research on, or with, the 7r7 over several decades has been closely bound up
with the development of novel instruments and the visualization of atomic structures.
Most famously, the 7r7 had a signiﬁcant role in the success of the scanning tunnelling
microscope (STM), for which Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer won the 1986 Nobel
Prize in physics.2 The STM is sometimes (erroneously) credited with being the ﬁrst
microscope to produce images of single atoms.3 What is true is that the STM was the
ﬁrst microscope to produce images of the particular single atoms of the 7r7 – through
which the new instrument tapped into a ready-made and enthusiastic audience of
surface scientists.
1 The rationale for calling nanoscience/nanotechnology (nano, for short) a ‘movement’ can be appreciated
by reading manifestos by the more enthusiastic proponents who promote the channelling of research funding
to encourage ‘convergence’ between diverse ﬁelds in engineering, biology and even cognitive science. See, for
example, Mihail C. Roco, ‘The emergence and policy implications of converging new technologies’, in
William Sims Bainbridge and Mihail C. Roco (eds.), Managing Nano-Bio-Info-Cogno Innovations,
Dordrecht and New York: Springer, 2006, pp. 8–22; Joseph Kennedy, ‘Nanotechnology: the future is coming
sooner than you think’, in Erik Fisher, Cynthia Selin and Jameson M. Wetmore (eds.), The Yearbook of
Nanotechnology and Society, vol. 1: Presenting Futures, New York: Springer, 2008, pp. 1–21. These pro-
ponents insist that research at the nanoscale poses essentially distinct methodological requirements from
investigations at higher levels of scale. Unlike ‘micro’ research, nano research does not simply transpose pre-
existing ‘micro’ concepts and tools to a new level of scale; it contends with forces and relationships that have
no counterpart in ‘macro’ physics, biology, chemistry or engineering, and develops specialized tools to con-
tend with them. As some surface scientists have acknowledged in interviews with the authors, their identiﬁ-
cation with the nanoscience/technology movement is contingent. Some are enthusiastic about nano as an
organizing principle for science or as a way to reinvigorate surface science; others are more ambivalent. Nano
has acquired a well-deserved reputation for hype, and many of its proponents have disavowed the futuristic
scenarios (of horror as well as hope) portrayed by K. Eric Drexler and Michael Crichton, but its future-
orientation remains very much a part of its history. See Colin Milburn, ‘Nanotechnology in the age of
posthuman engineering: science ﬁction as science’, Conﬁgurations (2002) 10, pp. 261–295; Andreas Lo¨sch,
‘Anticipating the future of nanotechnology: visionary images as means of communication’, in Fisher, Selin
and Wetmore, op. cit., pp. 123–142. The promotional idea that nano represents an epistemic and historical
break with past research is echoed, perhaps inadvertently, by historians Lorraine Daston and Peter Galison,
who tentatively suggest that nano embodies the emergence of a novel twenty-ﬁrst-century chapter in the
history of objectivity. In their view, exploration with probe microscopes neither aims for nor achieves ‘rep-
resentation’ of pre-existing atomic conﬁgurations; instead, it is ‘presentational’ in the sense that imaging with
a probe is simultaneously a matter of ‘haptic’ manipulation of the arrangements and forces that are imaged.
Lorraine Daston and Peter Galison, Objectivity, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007, pp. 363–415. Although
we do not subscribe to the idea that nano represents a clean break with pre-existing scientiﬁc methods,
instruments and conceptions of objectivity, we believe that the implications for history of science, as well as
for ‘macro’ and ‘micro’ social science research, are interesting to contemplate.
2 Binnig and Rohrer won the Nobel Prize just three years after publication of their 7r7 results. They
shared the prize with Ernst Ruska, who won for his role in the invention of electron microscopy, some ﬁve and
a half decades earlier.
3 For example, Steven A. Edwards, The Nanotech Pioneers: Where Are They Taking Us?, Weinheim:
Wiley-VCH, 2006, p. 33: the STM ‘allowed the ﬁrst ‘‘visualization’’ of individual atoms’. We will explain
later why this description is inaccurate. Note the scare quotes around the word ‘visualization’. The question
whether visualization with the STM and related instruments is a matter of ‘seeing’ is a vexed one, not only for
philosophers of science but also in popular accounts.
424
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
Although much of the research on the Si(111) 7r7 was motivated by the promise of
developing useful and proﬁtable technologies for the electronics industry, such research
was at least one step removed from any immediate context of application such as
building integrated circuits. The greater attraction of the 7r7 to surface scientists was
not commercial applicability, but rather the ability of this material object to be
exploited for diﬀerent experimental purposes on diﬀerent occasions. The 7r7 was
valued because, in Rumsfeldian terms, it was sometimes a ‘known known’ (a material
standard for testing particular instruments, harmonizing images produced with diﬀer-
ent techniques, and training human observers) and sometimes a ‘known unknown’ (an
unsolved problem, akin to a long-standing unsolved proof for mathematicians).4
In these dual roles, the 7r7 became a basis for establishing surface science as a
distinct ﬁeld and research community. The 7r7 has been a problematic research object
as well as an instrumental resource; a site of discovering work as well as a well-deﬁned
object with which to assess other, more novel, things. In this paper, we treat the 7r7 as
an example of a class of experimental artefacts we call ‘test objects’ – objects that can
be used both to test the experiment and/or experimenter and to generate new knowl-
edge.
Our ‘test objects’ complement, but also complicate, Hans-Jo¨rg Rheinberger’s
analysis of ‘experimental systems’ (material arrangements that generate extended lines
of experiment). Rheinberger distinguishes experimental systems into two intimately
associated elements: technical objects and epistemic things.5 He maintains this dis-
tinction in the face of the tendency in science and technology studies (STS) to entirely
collapse science and technology into a unitary concept of ‘technoscience’. In his view,
such indiscriminate concepts ‘disguise the essential tension of the research process’.6
Experimental systems, as he deﬁnes them, are open to surprises – indeed, they facilitate
surprises in the very way they create highly circumscribed spaces for experimentation
and observation. Epistemic things are the unknown, or vaguely known, objects of in-
vestigation that are the counterparts of experimental conditions (the technical objects).
They do not simply yield in docile fashion to the technologies of investigation.
The present paper respects the clarity of Rheinberger’s distinction with its emphasis
on objects that enable disclosure. However, we see the 7r7 as shifting back and forth
over time and in diﬀerent research contexts between being a problematic object of
investigation (an epistemic thing) and a standard matrix with which investigation is
performed, calibrated or tested (a technical object). Like a microscope, test tube or
other piece of apparatus, the 7r7 was a made thing. Over time, post-war surface
scientists learned how – or thought they learned how – to indirectly arrange the silicon
atoms of the 7r7 with near-Platonic precision, using careful combinations of
4 Former US secretary of defense Donald Rumsfeld’s famous ‘known unknowns’ speech was delivered at
NATO Headquarters, Brussels on 6 June 2002, and has since been collected in volumes of Rumsfeld’s ‘found
poetry’ and even set to music. For an illuminating treatment of a mathematical problem see Donald
MacKenzie, ‘Slaying the kraken: the sociohistory of a mathematical proof’, Social Studies of Science (1999)
29, pp. 7–60.
5 Hans-Jo¨rg Rheinberger, Toward a History of Epistemic Things: Synthesizing Proteins in the Test Tube,
Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997, pp. 30–31.
6 Rheinberger, op. cit. (5), p. 31.
Test objects and other epistemic things
425
temperature, pressure and other parameters.7 Indeed, the ability to make the 7r7 was
one test that qualiﬁed a novice to become a semiconductor surface science exper-
imentalist. Yet like Rheinberger’s epistemic things, the 7r7 was a material system that
surface scientists continually returned to in the hope of being surprised.
Thus, like Rheinberger, we locate our work alongside other ‘biographies of objects’
and ‘histories of things’ in science studies. Historians and ethnographers of science and
technology have become accustomed to writing histories of things to supplement or in
some cases challenge histories of persons, research groups, disciplines and ideas.
Histories of things are especially prominent in studies of the construction of, for ex-
ample, novel molecules, experimental protocols, material standards, technological
prototypes, molecular models and architectural designs.8 Of particular interest for this
paper is the family of objects whose members have an ontological status that confounds
the familiar distinction between conditions of observation and objects of reference.
The members of this family are diverse, including such things as model organisms, cell
lines, type specimens, material standards, natural laboratories and prototypes.9
Though diﬃcult to subsume under a single concept, these research objects are material
things, sometimes living or quasi-living entities, which function as ideal types, proxies,
representative specimens (and representations of specimens), vectors or entire en-
vironments within which to conduct investigations. They cover a range of intermediate
positions between the found and the made, the concrete and the abstract, and the
empirical and the ideal. They are not readily compartmentalized as natural objects,
engineered things, representational devices or ready-to-hand instruments, though such
terms, and the distinctions between them, can be salient for describing particular uses
and moments of use.
A biography of the 7r7 is especially useful as a tool for mapping a series of inﬂu-
ential research communities. The 7r7 began life in the late 1950s as one of the seeds
around which the surface science community precipitated from the larger subdisciplines
7 Surface scientists certainly learned how to make silicon samples on which small patches of the 7r7 were
present. However, until the advent of the scanning tunnelling microscope, it was believed that samples of the
7r7 were much more ordered than they probably were. One of the achievements of the STM was to show
that clear low-energy electron diﬀraction (LEED) signals could be seen even on relatively disordered surfaces,
giving the misimpression that the surface was more ‘well deﬁned’ than it warranted.
8 Lorraine Daston (ed.), Biographies of Scientiﬁc Objects, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000. For
a history of a molecule see Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar, Laboratory Life: The Social Construction of
Scientiﬁc Facts, London: Sage, 1979; on the production of standards see Simon Schaﬀer, ‘Late Victorian
metrology and its instrumentation: a manufactory of ohms’, in Robert Bud and Susan Cozzens (eds.),
Invisible Connections: Instruments, Institutions and Science, Bellingham, WA: SPIE Optical Engineering
Press, 1992, pp. 23–56; and M. Norton Wise, The Values of Precision, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1997; on prototypes see John Law, Aircraft Stories: Decentering the Object in Technoscience, Durham, NC:
Duke University Press, 2002; on architecture see Albena Yaneva, ‘Scaling up and down: extraction trials in
architectural design’, Social Studies of Science (2005) 35, pp. 867–894.
9 See, among others, Karen A. Rader, Making Mice, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995; Angela
N.H. Creager, The Life of a Virus: Tobacco Mosaic Virus as an Experimental Model, 1930–1965, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2002; Robert E. Kohler, Lords of the Fly: Drosophila Genetics and the
Experimental Life, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994; and several of the essays in Adele E. Clarke
and Joan H. Fujimura (eds.), The Right Tools for the Job: At Work in Twentieth-Century Life Sciences,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992.
426
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
of electron physics and solid-state physics. With the 7r7 as their shibboleth, yardstick
and epistemic thing, surface scientists could recognize each other as members of a body
of practitioners requiring their own methods, tools, career paths and institutions. Until
the 1980s, the 7r7 continued in this vein as a test object associated with only one
research community – something that interested surface scientists but almost no one
else. In that decade, though, the 7r7 became a test object of interest to a new com-
munity of probe microscopists – a group that included some surface scientists but also
many who were ambivalent about, and sometimes even antagonistic towards, surface
science. The latter group tried to ﬁnd their own test objects, even as they tried to pull
probe microscopy away from surface science. We will conclude by examining the
mixed results of their coproduction of community and test object.
Test objects and operative images
We take the term ‘test object’ from the history of microscopy. In the 1820s, micro-
scopist Charles R. Goring gave that name to a collection of calibrating objects with
regular properties, such as insect wings, arrays of regular cells, and diatoms, which he
used to test the resolution and power of his instruments (Figure 1).10 When viewed with
a microscope, the appearance of these test objects could show a microscopist if, or how
well, the instrumentation was working. Dr Goring selected these things for their reg-
ular, geometric form, much in the way a surveyor uses geometric tools to measure
distances, reckon ‘true’ lines and superimpose grids onto a landscape, but in this case
he used the test objects to survey the instrumental system through which their micro-
scopic properties were made visible. (The analogy would be with a surveyor who uses
an exquisitely regular object to test the alignment and accuracy of the survey instru-
ments.) Goring’s test objects thus were material things that had reﬂexive implications
for the research that made their details visible.
Later in the century, ﬁne lines, gratings and rulers etched into glass were deployed.
These were manufactured inscriptions rather than properties of found objects,
and assuming their reliable manufacture they had the advantage of being set up for
the express purpose of testing the instrumentarium.11 One such innovation, by
F.A. Nobert, was described as follows:
M. Nobert, of Griefswald, having occupied himself for some years in the manufacture and
testing of a large compound microscope, discovered that the productions of nature, which had
been almost exclusively used as test object, were more or less diﬀerent in the nature
10 See G.L’E. Turner, ‘The microscope as a technical frontier in science’, in S. Bradbury and G.L’E Turner,
Historical Aspects of Microscopy, Cambridge: Heﬀer, 1967, pp. 175–200; and Jutta Schickore, ‘Cheese mites
and other delicacies: the introduction of test objects into microscopy’, Endeavour (2003) 27, pp. 134–138.
Goring’s test objects are discussed brieﬂy in Michael Lynch, ‘The externalised retina: selection and mathe-
matisation in the visual documentation of objects in the life sciences’, Human Studies (1988) 11, pp. 201–234,
219, 224. Useful background information is available in Stuart M. Feﬀer, ‘Microscopes to munitions: Ernst
Abbe, Carl Zeiss, and the transformation of technical optics, 1850–1914’, Ph.D. dissertation, University of
California, Order No. 9504797, Berkeley, 1994.
11 Ian Hacking, ‘The self-vindication of the laboratory sciences’, in Andrew Pickering (ed.), Science as
Practice and Culture, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992, pp. 29–64.
Test objects and other epistemic things
427
and arrangement of their markings; hence he was led to the employment of such objects for
comparison as can be reduced to number and measurement, as modern philosophy requires in
all its branches. The plan adopted by M. Nobert, is to etch on glass ten separate bands at equal
distances; each band is composed of parallel lines of some known fraction of the old Paris line;
in the ﬁrst band they are 1/4000, and in the last 1/10000 of the same quantity, whilst the
intermediate groups with regard to the distance of their parallel lines form parts of a geometric
series …12
These test objects not only were designed to surpass the regularity of Goring’s found
objects, they also incorporated scales that were integrated with an international
metrological system. Consequently they would seem to be especially clear instances of,
in Rheinberger’s terms, technical objects included in the conditions of experiment or
Figure 1. Dr Goring’s ‘test objects’. From C.R. Goring and Andrew Pritchard, Micrographia:
Containing Practical Essays on Reﬂecting, Solar, Oxy-hydrogen Gas Microscopes; Micrometers;
Eye-Pieces, etc., etc., London: Whattaker and Co., 1837, p. 233.
12 John Quekett, A Practical Treatise of the Use of the Microscope, 3rd edn, London: H. Bailliere, 1855,
p. 511.
428
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
observation.13 Both Goring’s found objects and Nobert’s etched artefacts exhibited
geometric arrangements that functioned as ‘test patterns’, which were uninteresting in
themselves and designed to check and calibrate the imaging technology. We can add
that these test objects also made up preconditions of observation, in so far as they were
used to test or calibrate observational instruments and train practitioners before ‘real’
observation began.
What makes test objects noteworthy, though, is that they can undergo remarkable
shifts and become ‘interesting’ in themselves. Moreover, just what a test object is, and
just what it is a test of, can change dramatically over time. For example, in addition to
being reference standards for testing nineteenth-century optical microscopes, Nobert’s
etchings also were used as diﬀraction gratings for observing and measuring optical
phenomena. Like the later 7r7, the etchings were both technical objects and epistemic
things, as Rheinberger deﬁnes them: material entities whose in-depth conﬁgurations are
open to surprise, elaboration and further exploration.
A further property of Nobert’s test objects is implicit in their construction: the etched
lines display a state-of-the-art ability to inscribe materials with increasing precision at
ever-ﬁner levels of scale. This trend of increasing virtuosity in making ﬁne structures
both for and as an outcome of experimentation has continued right into the present. It is
for this reason that we ﬁnd test objects to be a powerful concept for understanding
nanotechnology – an enterprise in which the diﬀerence between technical objects and
epistemic things has perhaps collapsed.14 The means of precision have changed some-
what. Where Nobert had mechanically etched his test objects, a century later micro-
fabrication specialists would learn to carve structures with nearly atomic precision
using photolithography (i.e. shining light through a stencil or ‘mask’ onto a photo-
sensitive ‘resist’, then etching the resist with acid to transfer a demagniﬁed image of the
mask into the resist and the crystalline substrate on which it rests). Even smaller struc-
tures can today be carved into materials with ion and electron beams or with the tiny
probes found in scanning tunnelling microscopes and atomic force microscopes (though
none of these techniques is so far as commercially successful as photolithography).
Starting in the late twentieth century, a substantial amount of microelectronics re-
search and engineering used techniques of mechanical reproduction to inscribe ﬁne-
grained ‘images’ into (or onto) material surfaces. These ‘images’ were not representa-
tions, reference standards or measuring devices; instead, they were functioning tech-
nologies. As Norbert Wiener suggested in reference to printed circuits,
An electric circuit may fulﬁll a relatively complicated function, and its image, as reproduced by
a printing press using metallic inks, may itself function as the circuit it represents … Thus,
besides pictorial images, we may have operative images. These operative images, which per-
form the functions of their original, may or may not bear a pictorial likeness to it.15
13 Rheinberger, op. cit. (5), p. 31.
14 Alfred Nordmann, ‘Molecular disjunctions’, in Davis Baird, Alfred Nordmann and Joachim Schummer,
Discovering the Nanoscale, Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2004, pp. 51–62.
15 Norbert Wiener, God & Golem, Inc.: A Comment on Certain Points Where Cybernetics Impinges on
Religion, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1964, p. 31. Thanks to Hannah Rogers and Kathryn Vignone of
Cornell University for directing us to Wiener’s notion of ‘operative image’.
Test objects and other epistemic things
429
In this case, the conceptual diﬀerence between object and image (or original and copy)
can completely collapse. Wiener’s language is somewhat confusing, however. A copy
of the printed circuit does not represent an original circuit; it is a functioning circuit.
A particular instance of a printed circuit is a ‘re-presentation’ in the sense that it re-
produces or replicates a functional artefact. A printed circuit also is not an ‘image’ of
an electrical circuit, just as a copy of a manuscript usually is not viewed as an ‘image’ of
the original text, though under some circumstances it may become signiﬁcant as a poor
reproduction, unauthorized copy or rare survivor from an original print run.16 Wiener’s
use of the word ‘image’ lends mystique to what might otherwise be viewed as a manu-
factured object.
In the decades after Wiener wrote about printed circuits, etching and lithography
became the dominant means for inscribing electrical circuits onto material surfaces at
ever-ﬁner levels of scale. Selectively burning silicon wafers with lasers and electron
beams rather than printing with conducting ink is the medium through which chips are
made, but the idea of operative images applies to them at least as well as it does to
printed circuits.17
Among device physicists and electrical engineers, the ability to photochemically carve
out tiny features is both a prerequisite for research and a skill to be displayed on its own
merits. Indeed, specialists in ‘microfabrication’ will often make (and publish images of)
inscribed devices18 that are test objects rather than operative images in the sense that
they cannot function as devices, but are credible tests of a new fabrication technique
(see Figure 2). Though abstracted from functional devices, they are material displays of
craft performed at ever-ﬁner levels of scale and resolution on a chip-like matrix. The
visible, material properties of these particular non-functional objects are arranged to
display the virtuosity of the techniques that manufactured them. In a sense, they are like
16 Adrian Johns, The Nature of the Book: Print and Knowledge in the Making, Chicago and London:
University of Chicago Press, 1998; Walter Benjamin, ‘The work of art in the age of mechanical reproduction’,
in Hannah Arendt (ed.), Illuminations, New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1968, pp. 217–251.
17 Complicating the issue even further is current research and development aimed at commercializing
conducting and semiconducting ‘ink’ with which electronic circuits could be printed either at home (on an
inkjet printer) or in mass quantities (on the same presses that print mass circulation newspapers). Cyrus
Mody, Research Frontiers for the Chemical Industry: Report on the Third Annual CHF-SCI Innovation Day,
Philadelphia: Chemical Heritage Foundation, 2006, p. 16.
18 Inscribed devices are not inscription devices in Latour’s sense (Bruno Latour, ‘Drawing things together’,
in Michael Lynch and Steve Woolgar (eds.), Representation in Scientiﬁc Practice, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1990, pp. 19–68), nor are they ‘literary inscriptions’ (Latour and Woolgar, op. cit. (8)) that transpose or
translate research objects into paper representations. They are research objects, and the inscriptions are found
and/or made by ‘writing’ upon and with their material surfaces. However, to complicate Wiener’s and
Latour’s frameworks even further, we note that one of the most common tests of a microfabrication technique
is to ‘write’ a text and then image (‘read’) it. The most common such ‘text objects’ are the names of a
researcher’s home institution, but iconic texts such as Richard Feynman’s ‘Room at the bottom’ speech or the
ﬁrst page of A Tale of Two Cities are also used. See T.H. Newman, K.E. Williams and R.F.W. Pease, ‘High
resolution patterning system with a single bore objective lens’, Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology B
(1987) 5, pp. 88–91. Cute drawings and sculptures are also frequently microfabricated to test a technique’s
resolution. See Cyrus Mody, ‘Small, but determined: technological determinism in nanoscience’, Hyle (2004)
10, pp. 101–30; as well as the ‘Chip Art’ section of the Smithsonian Chip Collection, available at http://
smithsonianchips.si.edu/ (accessed 8 June 2009).
430
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
the sculpted objects made by medieval artisans to display their craftsmanship, only here
the aim is to display potential utility for industry. Although they are not functional
components of circuitry, they are designed to make transparent certain advantages that
can be implemented in actual or potential transistors.
In the argot of nanotechnology, etching is a form of ‘top-down’ assembly: it is an
imposition of structural design upon the surface in question. This contrasts to ‘bottom-
up’ or ‘self-assembly’, in which atomic and molecular components organize themselves
into structures.19 Structures that emerge through bottom-up fabrication are neither
‘found’ (as in Dr Goring’s striations) nor ‘made’ (in the sense of being deliberately
etched), but are enabled or cultivated through laboratory techniques akin to those used
in chemistry and molecular biology. Some of these objects exhibit the reliable and
Figure 2. Non-functional microfabricated patterns, designed to demonstrate an extreme ultra-
violet lithography technique’s ability to etch features (potentially for commercial use) as small
as 70 nm or even smaller. From Patrick P. Naulleau et al., ‘Fourier-synthesis custom-coherence
illuminator for extreme ultraviolet microﬁeld lithography’, Applied Optics (2003) 42,
pp. 820–826, p. 823.
19 Very little, if any, work in nanotechnology currently involves the sort of assembly of nanobots by other
nanobots envisioned by futurists and science ﬁction writers. Nor is it often a matter of atom-by-atom ma-
nipulation, though there are famous examples of atomic manipulation, such as Don Eigler’s use of a scanning
tunnelling microscope to position xenon atoms on a nickel surface to form the letters ‘IBM’. D.M. Eigler and
E.K. Schweizer, ‘Positioning single atoms with a scanning tunneling microscope’, Nature (1990) 344,
pp. 524–26. (See also the IBM ‘STM Image Gallery’, available at http://www.almaden.ibm.com/vis/stm/
gallery.html, accessed 4 June 2009). More often, bottom-up nanofabrication involves wet lab techniques that
harness and cultivate the properties of material ingredients systematically to form larger molecular assemblies.
Test objects and other epistemic things
431
regular form that enables them to be used as tests of skill or instrumentation, even as
their exact conﬁguration may remain enough of a mystery to aﬀord surprise. This is the
sense of ‘test object’ on which we will focus, with the 7r7 as our case study.
Reconstructions and the Si(111) 7r7
The ‘name’ Si(111) 7r7 refers to a surface conﬁguration of atoms in a silicon crystal. It
is an unusual sort of object with properties that can be said to be empirical, math-
ematical and practical (induced through manufacture). Standard descriptions and tu-
torials seem unbothered by the fact that the 7r7 is essentially a conjunction of natural
and artiﬁcial properties; instead, they freely deploy diagrammatic and notational con-
ventions, as well as references to standard modes of material preparation, to make sense
of the object.20 So, for example, the notation (111) is a conventional reference to the
perspective provided by a plane ‘sliced through’ a three-dimensional ﬁgure that rep-
resents a ‘unit cell’ – the minimal repeating unit in a regular structure.
For a given crystal, three characteristic vectors (of given length and direction) point
from an arbitrary corner atom of the unit cell to three other corner atoms, such that the
vectors are orthogonal. A set of ‘Miller indices’ then describe diﬀerent ways of slicing
through the unit cell. In surface science, this notation describes the plane of the bulk
crystal material that is exposed when it is ‘cleaved’ open. The numbers in the Miller
index refer to how far (in number of characteristic vectors) away from the origin of the
unit cell the cleaving plane will encounter another corner atom. In ‘high-index’ surfaces
the cleaving plane may be at a very shallow angle to one wall of the unit cell, such that it
encounters a corner atom very quickly in one direction but will go many vector lengths
before it does so in the orthogonal direction – such a material will have a cleave plane
of, say, (5 5 12) or (11 5 2). High-index surfaces are of interest today for producing
periodic nanostructures, but in the period covered by this paper surface scientists were
much more interested in very ﬂat, ‘low-index’ samples. In these, the Miller indices
possible within a single unit cell suﬃced – the (100), the (010), the (111) and so on. The
7r7 was a phenomenon only seen in the (111) surface, in which the diamond cubic unit
cell of bulk silicon is cut by a plane that bisects the three faces of the cube that touch the
unit cell’s origin.
When a crystal is cleaved to reveal a new surface, the atoms in the top few layers are
aﬀected by the sudden absence of further layers above them. In metals, this leads to a
very slight (if any) rearrangement of the surface atoms – the notation of the crystalline
plane is usually more or less suﬃcient to indicate what the surface looks like. In semi-
conductors, however, cleaving leaves a number of dangling bonds which are energeti-
cally unfavourable. The atoms of the surface layers may therefore rearrange
themselves – ‘reconstruct’ – into a more stable conﬁguration. Some reconstructions
20 We advise readers to consult online tutorials about the Si(111) 7r7. The brief account that follows
relies upon them, but without the abundant illustrations and animations that are available on websites. For a
tutorial on the notational conventions for describing unit cell structure, see http://www.chem.qmul.ac.uk/
surfaces/scc/scat6_1.htm. For an instructive animation see http://vimeo.com/1086112 (both sites accessed
30 November 2009).
432
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
happen with little input from the experimentalist; for others, surface scientists have a
battery of techniques and tacit knowledge with which to induce particular reconstruc-
tions.
Notationally, surface scientists imagine the cleaved crystal as initially having an
atomic conﬁguration that is unchanged from the bulk (except for the lack of further
layers above it). That imaginary conﬁguration has a ‘surface unit cell’ – the minimal
repeating unit in two dimensions. When the surface reconstructs, a new (usually larger)
unit cell emerges which is a transformation of the original. Thus the notation for the
reconstructed unit cell indicates how many times the original unit cell must be repeated
along each of its characteristic vectors in order to equal the size of the reconstructed
surface unit cell. Thus a ‘2r1’ reconstruction is twice the length of the original surface
unit cell along one of its characteristic vectors, and the same length as the original along
the other vector. The 7r7 is seven times the length of the original surface unit cell along
each vector, making its area forty-nine times larger than its primitive surface unit cell.
Thus it is one of the largest, and most complex, reconstructions – an important factor in
its emergence as a test object.
The relationship between the reconstructed unit cell and the primitive unit cell is, for
many surface scientists, most easily understood using ‘cork-ball’ or ‘ball-and-stick’
models (either three-dimensional models made from kits or improvised materials, or
two-dimensional representations of such models).21 Indeed, the ﬁrst thing one sees on
entering a surface scientist’s oﬃce is often a three-dimensional model of some notable
reconstruction. In published articles, reconstructions are depicted as abstract versions
of such cork-ball models, usually shown from the side or from above rather than in
perspective. One advantage of such depictions is that the ‘surface’ can in fact be seen as
a region several atomic layers deep, a region picturesquely known as the ‘selvedge’.
(Imagine a rack of billiard balls, with a second layer stacked on top of it; balls on the
top layer settle into ‘holes’ between balls in the lower one.)
It should, perhaps, go without saying that the cork-ball models are much simpler and
more regular, and contain fewer ‘defects’ (contaminants, ‘dislocations’ and so on),
than any actual surface viewed with a microscope or spectrometer. Yet surface scien-
tists work very hard to create conditions that enable the sample they are characterizing
to resemble the pristine cork-ball model (rather than simply the other way round). This
usually is referred to as creating a ‘well-deﬁned’ surface. The key technology for
making surfaces well deﬁned is the ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber, capable of cre-
ating a void as empty as interplanetary space. This descendant of Boyle’s air-pump22 can
preserve reconstructions such as the 7r7 for months, even years – reconstructions that
would either not appear in the open air or would last only minutes. Indeed, as we will
explain, in the 1950s surface scientists ﬁrst deﬁned themselves as a distinct community
by their expertise in the ultrahigh vacuum technology that allowed reconstructions to
be observed as a surface phenomenon.
21 See Eric Francoeur, ‘The forgotten tool: the design and use of molecular models’, Social Studies of
Science (1997) 27, pp. 7–40.
22 Steven Shapin and Simon Schaﬀer, Leviathan and the Air Pump, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1985.
Test objects and other epistemic things
433
In order to deﬁne their community in this way, though, surface scientists needed a
suite of instruments that would make reconstructions visible. The most important of
these was the low-energy electron diﬀractometer (LEED), an instrument that shoots
very low-energy electrons at a surface at an oblique angle, then scoops up the electrons
at the other end after they have ‘scattered’ through the obstacle course of atoms in the
selvedge. LEED, UHV, and surface reconstructions bootstrapped one another in the
1950s and 1960s. Better UHV technology produced cleaner, longer-lasting reconstruc-
tions that showed up as sharper LEED images in which diﬀerent reconstructions could
more easily be discriminated. This, in turn, allowed surface scientists to understand
how to tune various sample preparation techniques (annealing, sputtering, cleaving and
so on) inside the UHV chamber so as to produce speciﬁc reconstructions for further
study.
The study of reconstructions therefore became the central problem for semi-
conductor surface scientists (less so for those interested in metals). Speciﬁc reconstruc-
tions could easily be made visible with LEED; this then allowed experimenters to use
LEED to improve and vary sample preparation techniques so as to generate a suite of
reconstructions. Moreover, in the 1970s new families of surface science in-
struments – especially various spectroscopies – came into being. These could be cali-
brated by studying known reconstructions – ‘known’ largely through their LEED
images. As these new spectroscopies gained acceptance, therefore, surface scientists
continually referenced their results back to LEED data on reconstructions.
One upshot of this was that an increasingly prestigious research problem, from the
late 1960s to the early 1980s, was the deciphering of the locations of the atoms within
various reconstructions. The problem for surface scientists, though, was that LEED
gives only indirect and indeterminate information about where atoms are located (see
Figure 3). LEED images are in so-called ‘inverse space’ or ‘reciprocal space’.23 That is,
the locations of features in a LEED image do not correspond to the locations of features
on a surface, but rather to the frequency with which certain features recur on that
surface. Converting that frequency information into a real-space representation is dif-
ﬁcult because the electrons interact with many diﬀerent atoms, in several atomic layers,
as they ﬂy along the selvedge.
The standard approach to a reconstruction, therefore, was to elicit a ‘model’ from
LEED and other data. These models were what might be called quasi-empirical ren-
derings (see Figures 4 and 5). As we describe later, from the 1960s and through the
1980s,
numerous
models – which
could
be
called
‘reconstructions
of
a
re-
construction’ – were oﬀered to explain the atomic arrangement of the 7r7 made vis-
ible through a series of instruments.
23 An excellent participant’s history of surface reconstructions and LEED is M.G. Lagally, ‘Transition
from reciprocal-space to real-space surface science – advent of the scanning tunneling microscope’, Journal of
Vacuum Science and Technology A (2003) 21, pp. S54–S63. Our study focuses largely on semiconductor
surface science, but a memoir of LEED of metals can be found in P.M. Marcus, ‘LEED and clean metal
surfaces: personal reminiscences and opinions’, Surface Science (1994) 299, pp. 447–453.
434
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
A brief history of the 7r7
Like many other test objects, the Si(111) 7r7 has undergone epistemic shifts through-
out its decades-long history. It dates back to the 1950s, when it was one of the ﬁrst
surface reconstructions to be recognized from LEED data at a time when surface science
was just beginning to coalesce and surface reconstructions were novel phenomena.
Although other reconstructions also were available, the 7r7 held particular attraction
because its surface conﬁguration was (relatively speaking) unusually large, highly reg-
ular, easily prepared and readily recognized from LEED. Because of these features, its
appearance provided researchers with a reference point for noticing when their instru-
ments needed adjustment or their materials had become contaminated.
However, the 7r7 was no simple pattern. It has been described as ‘one of the most, if
not the most, complicated surface structure in existence’.24 Consequently, for much of
its history, the Si(111) 7r7 also was a research object that presented a sustained chal-
lenge for teasing out its atomic conﬁguration with spectroscopy, diﬀractometry and
probe microscopy. Information from these instruments would then be used to update
any of a dozen competing models of its atomic structure, or to inform a completely new
Figure 3. LEED image of the 7r7, in inverse space. Reprinted from M. Nishijima et al.,
‘Reactions of NO with the Si(111) (7r7) surface: EELS, LEED, and AES studies’, Surface
Science (1984) 137, pp. 473–490, p. 478, copyright (1984) with permission of Elsevier.
24 E. Bengu, R. Plass, L.D. Marks et al., ‘Imaging the dimers in Si(111)-(7r7)’, Physical Review Letters
(1996) 77, pp. 4226–4228, p. 4226.
Test objects and other epistemic things
435
Figure 5. Simulated LEED pattern, in inverse space, backed out of the real-space model in
Figure 4, meant for comparison with experimental LEED pattern of the type seen in Figure 3.
Reprinted with permission from D.J. Miller and D. Haneman, ‘LEED analysis and energy
minimization calculations for Si(111) (7r7) surface structures’, Journal of Vacuum Science
and Technology (1979) 16, pp. 1270–1285, p. 1276, copyright (1979), American Institute of
Physics.
Figure 4. The topmost atoms of the Lander vacancy model of the 7r7, based on an
interpretation of LEED images like the one in Figure 3. Reprinted with permission from
J.J. Lander and J. Morrison, ‘Structures of clean surfaces of silicon and germanium’, Journal
of Applied Physics (1963) 34, pp. 1403–1410, p. 1410, copyright (1963), American Institute
of Physics.
436
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
model. Consequently, the relation between instrument and test object was more of a
bootstrapping operation in which each was used to elaborate and establish the other.25
From electron physics to surface science
As the term suggests, surface science is the study of material surfaces, but it is the study
of very speciﬁc kinds of surface under highly delimited conditions. To use Andrew
Abbott’s terminology,26 throughout its history, state-of-the-art surface science included
only a few ‘jurisdictions’ – regions of professional activity – associated especially with
applications of interest to prominent corporate and national labs. Most of the re-
searchers who founded surface science as a separate discipline in the early 1960s came
from electron physics, and they brought with them orientations and institutional af-
ﬁliations characteristic of that ﬁeld.27 In particular, they came from a branch of electron
physics that simultaneously studied both the behaviour of electrons and the character-
istics of the materials that emitted or conducted electrons. That is, they constructed
experiments in which a material system (say, a sharpened tungsten emitter) could be
used both as a technical object (for emitting electrons) and as an epistemic thing (in
which the characteristics of the emitted electrons would indicate something about the
structure of the emitter).28 In this kind of electron physics, the diﬀerence between
technical object and epistemic thing did not necessarily collapse, but the same objects
would repeatedly turn up in either category.
One feature of this kind of electron physics that would translate to surface science
was the extent to which its practitioners were housed in corporate laboratories. As an
indication of this, we note that a large number of Nobel laureates recognized for major
twentieth-century breakthroughs on electron diﬀraction, electron tunnelling and electro-
chemistry were working in corporate labs when they made their most important
discoveries. These include Irving Langmuir and Ivar Giaever at General Electric;
Clinton Davisson, Walter Brattain, John Bardeen, William Shockley, Philip Anderson,
25 For ‘bootstrapping’ in science see Barry Barnes, ‘On the conventional character of knowledge and
cognition’, in Karin Knorr Cetina and Michael Mulkay (eds.), Science Observed, London: Sage, 1983,
pp. 19–51.
26 Andrew Abbott, The System of Professions: An Essay on the Division of Expert Labor, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1988.
27 Surface science is blessed with a keen historical sense, and the plethora of participants’ histories some-
what makes up for the sad lack of professional historians interested in the ﬁeld. See, among others, C.B. Duke,
‘Surface science 1964–2003’, Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology A (2003) 21, pp. S34–S35 (and the
other contributions to this special issue of JVST A); idem, ‘Atoms and electrons at surfaces: a modern
scientiﬁc revolution’, Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology A (1984) 2, pp. 139–143 (and, again, the
other contributions to this special issue); idem, ‘The birth and evolution of surface science: child of the union
of science and technology’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2003) 100, pp. 3858–3864.
28 Some participant histories that draw the connection between modern surface science and the older
emitter-in-an-evacuated-envelope electron physics include P.A. Redhead, ‘The birth of electronics: thermi-
onic emission and vacuum’, Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology A (1998) 16, pp. 1394–1401;
A.H. Sommer, ‘The element of luck in research – photocathodes 1930 to 1980’, Journal of Vacuum Science
and Technology A (1983) 1, pp. 119–124; W.E. Spicer, ‘The development of photoemission spectroscopy and
its application to the study of semiconductor interfaces: observations on the interplay between basic and
applied research’, Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology A (1985) 3, pp. 461–470.
Test objects and other epistemic things
437
Arthur Schawlow and Horst Sto¨rmer at Bell Labs; Leo Esaki, Gerd Binnig, Heinrich
Rohrer, Georg Bednorz and Karl Mu¨ller at IBM; Ernst Ruska at Siemens; and Jack
Kilby at Texas Instruments. Perhaps there has never been such a strong concentration of
Nobel laureates in a particular ﬁeld working within corporate conﬁnes as there was for
electron physics.
The relationship between commercial conditions and fundamental research in elec-
tron physics was no accident. Tungsten emitters sealed in evacuated glass envelopes
were the mainstay of electron physics well into the 1960s, and such apparatus was a
close cousin to the light bulbs, vacuum tubes and display screens that were so com-
mercially important for companies like GE, AT&T and RCA.29 Though researchers
worked with experimental apparatus that was clearly associated with potential com-
mercial applications, they cleaned up their tubes and emitters in ways that disconnected
them from their technological roots – most notably through an almost fetishistic
control of the vacuum in the glass envelope. Vacuum became an environment and
object for ‘pure’ research, in a literal sense, and electron physicists allied with, or
themselves became, world experts in high-vacuum technology – developing the gauges,
pumps and metal chambers that superseded hand-blown glass envelopes and led to
ultrahigh vacuum.30
By the late 1950s and early 1960s, some practitioners of this branch of electron
physics became interested in manipulating electrons as a means for researching the
surfaces
of
materials.
In
part,
this
interest
in
surfaces
had
always
been
present – Langmuir, for example, won his Nobel for work in surface chemistry.
The invention of the transistor in 1947, however, simultaneously elicited the ﬁrst clear
articulation of a theory of surface states (by Shockley and Bardeen) and a powerful
commercial and experimental incentive for a better understanding of surfaces.31
If the development of UHV and LEED provided the means for surface science to emerge
from electron physics, the transistor provided an important motive.
Means and motive are nothing without opportunity, though. In the case of surface
science, opportunity came in the form of a series of institutional openings from the early
1960s to the mid-1970s. One opening was the virtual takeover of the American Vacuum
Society (AVS) and its journal, the Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology, by
leading surface scientists.32 This gave the nascent community an institutional backbone
29 See Leonard S. Reich, ‘Irving Langmuir and the pursuit of science in the corporate environment’,
Technology and Culture (1983) 24, pp. 199–221; and George Wise, Willis R. Whitney, General Electric, and
the Origins of U.S. Industrial Research, New York: Columbia University Press, 1985.
30 See D. Alpert, ‘Science, technology, and the future’, Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology (1981)
18, pp. 143–147; M.C. Bridwell and J.G. Rodes, ‘History of the modern cryopump’, Journal of Vacuum
Science and Technology A (1985) 3, pp. 472–475; H.E. Farnsworth, ‘Preparation, structural characterization,
and properties of atomically clean surfaces’, Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology (1982) 20,
pp. 271–280.
31 Michael Riordan and Lillian Hoddeson, Crystal Fire: The Birth of the Information Age, New York:
W.W. Norton, 1997.
32 For retrospectives on the American Vacuum Society (now known as the AVS Science and Technology
Society) see H.W. Schleuning, ‘The ﬁrst twenty years of the American Vacuum Society’, Journal of Vacuum
Science and Technology (1973) 10, 833–842; J.L. Vossen and N.L. Hammond, ‘The American Vacuum
Society – 1973–1983’, Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology A (1983) 1, 1351–1361; and J.M. Laﬀerty,
438
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
by providing outlets for publication and presentation, credentialling through mem-
bership in the AVS, education through a series of AVS short courses in surface
science topics, recognition through AVS prizes, and so on. Among surface scientists
working on metals, other institutional openings came in the form of new modes of
employment (especially at the National Bureau of Standards in the US) and new sources
of funding.33 Funding for surface science of metals in this period was often closely
aligned with large-scale national projects. For instance, NASA funded many surface
scientists because of its interest in the eﬀect of vacuum conditions on metals. In the
1970s much research was funded on the catalytic properties of metal surfaces (such
as the ubiquitous experimental system/test object of carbon monoxide adsorbed on
nickel) as part of heightened national interest in environmental and alternative energy
research.34
Surface science research on semiconductors, on the other hand, aligned more closely
with commercial projects – or, more accurately, with the professional interests of
surface scientists housed in corporate research labs. Even though semiconductor surface
science focused on materials like silicon and gallium arsenide that were integral to the
microelectronics products of companies such as AT&T and IBM, research by surface
scientists
employed
by
those
companies only
intermittently
fed
directly
into
those products. Instead, the research indirectly paid oﬀby producing test objects that
were used for training the people and the instruments that were used to make and
understand them.35 Researchers at places like Bell Labs could hone their skills with
specialized research materials and equipment before moving on to work on projects
that involved similar types of material and equipment that were closer to the pro-
duction line.
Before the end of the Cold War, companies like AT&T and IBM received hefty tax
incentives for fundamental research that did not connect directly to their product
lines.36 Until the late 1980s, therefore, corporate surface scientists were relatively un-
bothered that the most professionally prestigious problem areas in their ﬁeld were not
the most commercially applicable ones. Ambitious surface scientists moved ever further
away from industrial products like the transistor or the laser, and towards materials
and apparatus that were abstracted from immediate, or even foreseeable, commercial
‘History of the American Vacuum Society and the International Union for Vacuum Science, Technique, and
Applications’, Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology A (1984) 2, pp. 104–109.
33 For reminiscences of early surface science at the NBS see T. Madey and B. Kendal, Special session on
NBS/NIST Centennial (videotape by AVS), San Francisco, 2001.
34 James Murday, interview by Cyrus Mody, Washington, DC, 8 July 2002. Also R. Stanley Williams,
interview by Cyrus Mody, Palo Alto, CA, 14 March 2006. Note Williams’s comment: ‘Frankly I think that
catalysis did a hell of a lot more for surface science, than surface science ever did for catalysis. I think there
were a lot more surface science experiments that were justiﬁed based on the fact that they might somehow be
applicable to catalysis than people doing real catalysis ever learned from surface science experiments.’ We are
making a broadly similar argument for the way research on the 7r7 was justiﬁed in the context of semi-
conductor manufacturing.
35 Charles Duke, interview by Cyrus Mody, Webster, NY, 30 October 2003.
36 Philip Mirowski and Esther-Mirjam Sent, ‘The commercialization of science and the response of STS’,
in Edward J. Hackett, Olga Amsterdamska, Michael Lynch and Judy Wacjman (eds.), Handbook of Science
and Technology Studies, 3rd edn, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008, pp. 635–690.
Test objects and other epistemic things
439
applications.37 Researchers focused on semiconductor materials themselves, rather than
on the semiconductor-oxide combinations used in actual logic elements. They placed
semiconductor samples in ultrahigh vacuum in order to maintain cleanliness, even
though almost all of the products their companies would make would have to survive in
air. Researchers tinkered with samples in arcane ways to make them ‘well-deﬁned’;
that is, more closely resembling the materials that current theories and models could
tractably handle.
Among semiconductor surface scientists, this Cold War logic of corporate research
encouraged surface reconstructions to emerge as the most prestigious problem of the
1970s and early 1980s. Reconstructions were easily recognizable, but not explicable,
with LEED. This meant that an excellent test of a young experimentalist, particularly a
postdoc at IBM Yorktown or Bell Labs, was to build a new surface science instrument,
calibrate and coordinate it with LEED, and contribute some new datum about a re-
construction to winnow down the number of viable models of its atomic structure.
Because the data from all these instruments were so indeterminate (and occasionally
contradictory), an excellent test for a young theorist was to build a new model of a
reconstruction based on all the available instrumental output.
Within this problem area, certain reconstructions rapidly became privileged. The
silicon (111) 7r7 was one of these reconstructions, and it soon topped the list for quite
telling reasons – some aesthetic, some commercial, some cultural and some practical.
To be sure, silicon was a commercially important material for the companies employing
surface scientists, but the (111) 7r7 reconstruction was not a technologically important
surface. Almost all integrated circuits are made with the (100) surface (for reasons
having to do with precision of etching). Consequently, we need to consider other at-
tractions of the 7r7 besides commercial importance.
One oft-cited reason for the 7r7’s popularity is that its LEED pattern is extraordi-
narily complex, even beautiful; more so than almost any other diﬀraction pattern.38
Many accounts testify that this reconstruction is much larger and more complicated
(and its solution therefore more satisfying and rewarding) than any other. Another
reason that is often given is that the 7r7 is relatively easy for surface scientists to
prepare: the (111) is the natural cleavage plane of silicon, so a wafer just needs to be
broken to reveal it, and the 7r7 emerges with some simple baking. However, it is
important to note that later events showed that the 7r7 could be very diﬃcult for non-
surface scientists to prepare. Preparing the reconstruction was a useful exercise for
training surface scientists and discriminating them from pretenders. In that sense, the
7r7 was a test object for demarcating membership and initiating novices in a nascent
ﬁeld. The 7r7 also was useful for ‘training’ new kinds of equipment, because the
LEED pattern was so distinctive, and its preparation so easy for the initiated, that they
could make it (and know they had made it) quickly before putting it into a new kind of
diﬀractometer, microscope or spectrometer, thus making interpretation less disputable.
37 It is not that there was no feedback into product design and manufacturing. Rather, we are arguing that
the professionally prestigious problems recognized by corporate surface scientists did not align well with their
employers’ technologies.
38 Jene Golovchenko, interview by Cyrus Mody, Cambridge, MA, 20 February 2001.
440
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
For similar reasons, it served as a whetstone for new theoretical concepts, because the
reconstruction was so complicated that theorists surmised that it must combine most of
the phenomena that they would need to explain simpler reconstructions.39 Thus ad-
vances could be made piecemeal and over long periods of time, with no one ever getting
closer to solving the whole thing.
New tools, new models
The ﬁrst work on the 7r7 was centred at Brown University, under Robert Ellsworth
Schlier and Harry E. Farnsworth, producing some of the ﬁrst indications that semi-
conductors could undergo such radical reconstructions.40 The locus very quickly
shifted to Bell Labs, though, where the ﬁrst serious suggestion of a structure for the
7r7 was advanced by J.J. Lander in 1962–3, and where Elizabeth Wood used the 7r7
to establish a ‘uniform vocabulary of surface crystallography’ in 1964.41 Wood’s vo-
cabulary quickly became the standard, and the ‘Lander vacancy model’ (as it came to
be known – see Figure 4) more or less dominated the problem area through the 1960s.
But since the 7r7 was much too complicated to solve from the LEED data alone,
throughout the decade no one was really interested in advancing alternative models.
Instead, the ﬁeld focused on more empirical questions: is the 7r7 caused by iron
impurities?42 Is there a quick transition from the 7r7 to other reconstructions of
the (111) plane? During this period, the 7r7 served to sharpen the vast array of
new surface science instruments that were appearing, the ‘alphabet soup’ of instru-
mental techniques that today’s surface scientists are so proud of: mass spectrometry,
infrared spectroscopy, electron paramagnetic resonance, ﬁeld emission spectroscopy,
ultraviolet and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, ion neutralization spectroscopy and
electron energy loss spectroscopy.43 Some instrument manufacturers – especially of
LEED – even started to ship passivated samples of the 7r7 with their products, so that
customers could turn on the instrument and instantly have the test object ready to make
sure everything was working.44
39 Duke interview, op. cit. (35).
40 R.E. Schlier and H.E. Farnsworth, ‘Structure and adsorption characteristics of clean surfaces of ger-
manium and silicon’, Journal of Chemical Physics (1959) 30, pp. 917–926.
41 J.J. Lander and J. Morrison, ‘Structures of clean surfaces of germanium and silicon, I’, Journal of
Applied Physics (1963) 34, pp. 1403–1410; E.A. Wood, ‘Vocabulary of surface crystallography’, Journal of
Applied Physics (1964) 35, pp. 1306–1312.
42 See, for example, R.M. Broudy and H.C. Abbink, ‘Silicon surface structure’, Applied Physics Letters
(1968) 13, pp. 212–213.
43 Surface scientists talk about a matrix of particles and radiation ‘in’ (to a surface) and of particles and
radiation ‘out’ – for every combination of a speciﬁc particle or frequency of radiation that strikes a surface
and a speciﬁc particle or frequency that it knocks out of the surface, there is an instrument to monitor the
inputs and outputs and thereby tease out information about the surface. A good explanation of this matrix is
D. Lichtman, ‘A comparison of the methods of surface analysis and their applications’, in A.W. Czanderna
(ed.), Methods of Surface Analysis, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1975, pp. 39–73. See Williams interview,
op. cit. (34).
44 Franz Himpsel, interview by Cyrus Mody, Madison, WI, 9 May 2001.
Test objects and other epistemic things
441
By 1973, then, there was enough empirical material to allow theorists to return to the
problem and advance a new crop of solutions: variations on the vacancy model, tri-
angular checkerboard models, defect models, planar chain models, close-packed over-
layer models, optimized trimer models, buckled-surface models, rippled graphitic
overlayer models and the unforgettable ‘milkstool’ model (see Figure 6).45
Figure 6. The milkstool model of the 7r7. Reprinted from L.C. Snyder, ‘Modiﬁed milk-stool on
wurtzite layer model for Si(111) 7r7 surface reconstruction’, Surface Science (1984) 140,
pp. 101–107, p. 102, copyright (1984), with permission from Elsevier.
45 We only have room to cite a smattering of such models: L.C. Snyder, Z. Wasserman and
J.W. Moskowitz, ‘Milk-stool models for Si(111) surface reconstruction’, Journal of Vacuum Science and
Technology (1979) 16, pp. 1266–1269; E.G. McRae, ‘Surface stacking sequence and (7r7) reconstruction at
Si(111) surfaces’, Physical Review B (1983) 28, pp. 2305–2307; F.J. Himpsel and I.P. Batra, ‘Structural models
for Si(111)-(7r7)’, Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology A (1984) 2, pp. 952–956; D.J. Chadi et al.,
‘Atomic and electronic structure of the 7r7 reconstructed Si(111) surface’, Physical Review Letters (1980)
442
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
In this period, we see an interesting shift: while 7r7 theory remained centred on the
corporate world, the number of corporate labs producing competitive models of the
reconstruction shrank to just Bell Labs, IBM Yorktown (or IBM’s other labs) and oc-
casionally Xerox. Whereas earlier, in the late 1960s, companies like Zenith, United
Aircraft and Ford shared the lead in surface science, by the 1970s they had fallen well
behind IBM, Bell Labs and Xerox in the area of surface reconstruction research.
Participants usually explain this development by pointing to the concentration of
computer power at those three labs, and noting that the process of devising new re-
construction models was just at the edge of computing power for the period.46 At Bell
Labs, IBM and Xerox, theorists had routine access to on-site powerful computers to test
and revise their models, and they ﬂooded the surface science marketplace. Like chess-
playing for AI researchers, the 7r7 became a test object of scientiﬁc compu-
ting – allowing researchers at the major corporate labs both to sharpen their skills and
to show oﬀtheir dominance in the ﬁeld.
Like chess, the 7r7 exhibited suﬃcient depth and complexity to challenge (test)
theorists to devise models to decipher its atomic structure. However, it was a prob-
lematic test object when used for testing the available models. At the time, LEED
images and other data provided less than stable or determinate empirical grounds
for testing those models. Instead, the models presented possible conﬁgurations with
which to decipher LEED images and spectrographic data. Surface scientists look
back to the 1970s as the ﬁeld’s period of maximum self-conﬁdence. They cite the rise
in computing power and the advent of a family of experimental techniques, the
members of which were no longer new and unproven but also not yet mature and
‘involuted’.47
This self-conﬁdence gave new urgency to the 7r7 problem. If, as practitioners of the
late 1970s and early 1980s believed, surface science was rapidly emerging from darkness
into light, then the great questions that had bedevilled previous generations should soon
be answered. The 7r7 was the unsolved problem, the thing that, if it could not be
solved, would mean that surface scientists’ conﬁdence was misplaced and that their
paradigm would have to give way. Semiconductor surface scientists began to pin their
hopes on it. One of our interviewees described it as the ‘Rosetta Stone’ – a puzzle that,
if solved, would provide the answer to all other puzzles in the ﬁeld of semiconductor
reconstructions.48
Surface theorists began to obsess about it. One of our interviewees, a prominent
experimentalist at IBM, recounts being so overwhelmed by the certainty that he was
just at the edge of solving the reconstruction that, during one holiday, his loved ones
44, pp. 799–802; K.C. Pandey, ‘Atomic and electronic structure of semiconductor surfaces’, Journal of
Vacuum Science and Technology (1978) 15, pp. 440–447.
46 Duke interview, op. cit. (35).
47 For a study of ‘involution’ in a discipline see Hugh Gusterson, ‘A pedagogy of diminishing returns:
scientiﬁc involution across three generations of nuclear weapons science’, in David Kaiser (ed.), Pedagogy and
the Practice of Science, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005, pp. 75–107. That surface science became invol-
uted, or at least lost its ‘bloom’, is testiﬁed to in the Williams interview, op. cit. (34), as well as several other
interviews with practitioners – e.g. Randall Feenstra, interview by Cyrus Mody, Pittsburgh, 2 May 2001.
48 Duke interview, op. cit. (35).
Test objects and other epistemic things
443
had to hector him to momentarily stop playing with models of the 7r7 and come down
to share Christmas dinner with them.49 Around 1980 one increasingly ﬁnds published
papers that begin with frustrated expressions of the 7r7’s centrality and mystery: ‘The
Si(111)-7r7 has created a substantial amount of interest since its discovery more than
two decades ago [and] many structural models have been proposed. (refs 2–23)’, ‘The
structure of the Si(111)-7r7 has long been a subject of speculation’, ‘The nature of the
(7r7)-fold periodic reconstruction of the annealed Si(111) surface is a long-standing
question of fundamental importance for semiconductor surface physics’, ‘The Si(111)-
(7r7) surface is probably the most studied of the reconstructed surfaces of semi-
conductors’.50 Such statements can be read as acknowledgement that, by 1980, the 7r7
had become a test not only for individual practitioners, instruments or theories, but also
for the discipline as a whole.
Binnig and Rohrer, the 7r7 and the STM
The period between 1980 and 1986 was the 7r7’s most famous era. It was central to
the development and establishment of the scanning tunnelling microscope (STM) and
became the iconic object for exhibiting ‘atomic resolution’ achieved with that instru-
ment.51 It also is credited with being responsible (or co-responsible, along with electron
diﬀraction instruments) for ‘the ﬁrst reasonably accurate structure model’ of the
7r7 – the dimer-adatom-stacking fault (DAS) model.52
Although the STM is sometimes said to be the ﬁrst instrument to image (or even to
‘see’53) individual atoms, there are reasons to question both the meaning and the his-
torical accuracy of that claim. The ﬁeld ion microscope and the transmission electron
microscope could both, under narrow sets of conditions, achieve atomic resolution
49 Himpsel interview, op. cit. (44).
50 Himpsel and Batra, op. cit. (45); McRae, op. cit. (45); E.G. McRae and C.W. Caldwell, ‘Structure of
Si(111)-(7r7)H’, Physical Review Letters (1981) 46, pp. 1632–1635; P.A. Bennett et al., ‘Stacking-fault
model for the Si(111)-(7r7) surface’, Physical Review B (1983) 28, pp. 3656–3659.
51 For more comprehensive histories of the STM and related instruments see C.C.M. Mody, ‘How probe
microscopists became nanotechnologists’, in Davis Baird, Alfred Nordmann and Joachim Schummer (eds.),
Discovering the Nanoscale, Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2004, pp. 119–133; and Cyrus C.M. Mody,
‘Corporations, universities, and instrumental communities: commercializing probe microscopy, 1981–1996’,
Technology and Culture (2006) 47, pp. 56–80.
52 Bengu et al., op cit. (24), p. 4226.
53 For philosophical discussions of ambiguities associated with ‘seeing’ or ‘imaging’ with the tip of a
probe microscope see Ota´vio Bueno, ‘Representation at the nanoscale’, Philosophy of Science (2006) 73,
pp. 617–628; Joseph Pitt, ‘When is an image not an image?’, in Joachim Schummer and Davis Baird (eds.),
Nanotechnology Challenges: Implications for Philosophy, Ethics, and Society, Singapore: World Scientiﬁc
Publishing, 2006, pp. 131–141. For an analogous case in which a measuring tool was turned into a visuali-
zation instrument see Kelly Joyce, ‘From numbers to pictures: the development of magnetic resonance ima-
ging and the visual turn in medicine’, Science as Culture (2006) 15, pp. 1–22. The invention of MRI involved a
heated priority dispute between Raymond Damadian and Paul Lauterbur over whether Damadian’s use of
technology to measure nuclear magnetic resonance in selected bodily tissues anticipated Lauterbur’s devel-
opment of an imaging technology. Also see Amit Prasad, ‘The (amorphous) anatomy of an invention: the case
of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)’, Social Studies of Science (2007) 37, pp. 533–560.
444
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
decades before the STM.54 The STM also has been credited with breaking the logjam of
possible structural models of the 7r7, but that claim also needs to be qualiﬁed. In
addition to the STM, two other experimental techniques – helium ion scattering, and
transmission electron diﬀraction – stimulated a new round of developing and testing
models of the 7r7 that ended with the acceptance of the DAS model. The STM was
only one of – and certainly not the last in – a long line of instruments that were ‘tested’
on the shoals of the 7r7. Each of these instruments – the STM included – purported to
narrow the range of acceptable models, and often (as with the STM) the experimental
results generated with the novel instruments would be accompanied by new proposed
structures for the 7r7. Yet in every case (the STM included), the proposed structures
proved problematic. It was only when Kunio Takayanagi combined his own trans-
mission electron diﬀraction data with clues from STM, LEED, ion scattering and other
instruments that he could produce (and garner communal acceptance of) the DAS
model (see Figure 7).55
Figure 7. The dimer-adatom-stacking fault model of the 7r7 that was eventually accepted.
Reprinted from K. Takayanagi, Y. Tanishiro, M. Takahashi and S. Takahashi, ‘Structural
analysis of Si(111)x7r7 reconstructed surface by transmission electron diﬀraction’, Surface
Science (1985) 164, pp. 367–392, p. 382, copyright (1985), with permission from Elsevier.
54 See A.J. Melmed, ‘Recollections of Erwin Mu¨ller’s laboratory: the development of FIM (1951–1956)’,
Applied Surface Science (1996) 94–95, pp. 17–25; and idem, ‘The day atomic resolution happened’,
Microscopy Today (2006) 14, pp. 46–47. For transmission electron microscopy see A.V. Crewe, J. Wall and
J. Langmore, ‘Visibility of single atoms’, Science (1970) 168, pp. 1338–1340.
55 K. Takayanagi et al., ‘Structural analysis of Si(111)–7r7 by UHV-transmission electron diﬀraction and
microscopy’, Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology A (1985) 3, pp. 1502–1506.
Test objects and other epistemic things
445
What makes both these claims (that the STM ﬁrst imaged single atoms and that it
solved the 7r7) plausible enough that they are frequently repeated is their juxtapo-
sition. The STM was the ﬁrst instrument to visualize the particular single atoms of the
7r7. Because the 7r7 was such a long-standing test object, thought to be a Rosetta
Stone for other surface phenomena, STM images of the 7r7 were taken to be more
generalizable than atomic-resolution images of other surfaces. Surface scientists inter-
preted other atomic-resolution instruments as too ‘constrained’ to be of interest, since
they could not image the atoms of iconic test objects like the 7r7.56 Even the STM
initially suﬀered on this count. Where its inventors insist that they had achieved a
noteworthy instance of atomic resolution (though of atomic rows, not single atoms) of
a gold reconstruction prior to the 7r7, surface scientists ignored the STM (and still
today dismiss that result) until the microscope proved its worth on their central test
object.57
When Binnig and Rohrer ﬁrst started developing the tunnelling microscope in the
IBM laboratory near Zurich, they were attempting to develop a measuring device for a
project to build a supercomputer using superconducting Josephson junctions in place of
semiconductor logic elements.58 IBM oﬃcially abandoned the Josephson project in
1983, though most of the Zurich lab’s contribution was being wound down in 1981,
before the STM was functional. Consequently, Binnig and Rohrer had an instrument in
search of a problem. To ﬁnd suitable problems, they asked colleagues to suggest sam-
ples that would demonstrate the new technology’s scientiﬁc importance. However, they
also needed samples with known and regular properties that would show oﬀthe STM’s
distinctive powers and provide a metric of its capabilities.59 One sample, for instance,
was made by a crystal grower at IBM Zurich, and had ‘huge terraces or steps’ which
could be viewed even with an optical microscope.60 In the manner of Dr Goring’s test
objects, these regular and readily visible ‘atomic steps’ (the height of which was known
from other instruments) would be a reference point for showing how well the instru-
ment was working. Such regular structures provided a basis for identifying, naming,
correcting for and even exploiting characteristic types of ‘accident’ that, as Binnig and
56 Murday interview, op. cit. (34).
57 G. Binnig et al., ‘(111) facets as the origin of recontructed Au(110) surfaces’, Surface Science (1983) 131,
pp. L379–L384. See also Gerd Binnig, interview by Cyrus Mody, Ru¨schlikon, Switzerland, 26 September
2000; Heinrich Rohrer, interview by Cyrus Mody, Ru¨schlikon, Switzerland, 13 November 2001; Donald
Hamann, interview by Cyrus Mody, Murray Hill, NJ, 28 February 2001.
58 The Josephson junction was based on theories of Brian Josephson, a British physicist who shared the
1973 Nobel Prize. For the IBM Josephson project see J.C. Logue, ‘From vacuum tubes to very large scale
integration: a personal memoir’, IEEE Annals of the History of Computing (1998) 20, pp. 55–68; and
M.W. Browne, ‘Tinier than a nerve ﬁber, faster than a silicon chip’, New York Times, 8 January 1980. To
learn more about the invention of the STM see Galina Granek and Giora Hon, ‘Searching for asses, ﬁnding a
kingdom: the story of the invention of the scanning tunneling microscope (STM)’, Annals of Science (2008)
65, pp. 101–125.
59 Binnig interview, op. cit. (57).
60 Binnig interview, op. cit. (57), referring to Hans-Jo¨rg Scheel’s work; also see H.J. Scheel, G. Binnig and
H. Rohrer, ‘Atomically ﬂat Lpe-grown facets seen by scanning tunneling microscopy’, Journal of Crystal
Growth (1982) 60, pp. 199–202.
446
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
Rohrer slowly realized, the STM could be prone to have – such as a ‘crashed tip’, ‘gunk
on tip’ or ‘sudden reversal of contrast’.61
Though Binnig and Rohrer devised ways to visualize the three-dimensional con-
ﬁguration of surfaces with the STM, ‘seeing’ with the device is more like running a stick
across a surface, much as in Michael Polanyi’s famous example of a blind person’s
probe.62 However, the probe does not touch the surface; instead the tip picks up vari-
ations in the current of electrons ‘tunnelling’ to or from a (usually tungsten or plati-
num/iridium) tip suspended above a metal or semiconductor surface. These variations
in tunnel current may or may not reﬂect an underlying topography: an area that looks
‘higher’ in an STM image may do so because, in fact, the surface is raised at that point,
but it could just as easily be because of a change in the electronic structure of the sample
at that point. Features of an STM image that look like ‘atoms’ may in fact roughly
correspond to positions of atomic nuclei on the surface, but they can just as easily be
mirages produced by the sample’s electronic structure.
As noted earlier, the 7r7 already was the established ‘fruit ﬂy’ in surface science,63
and although Binnig and Rohrer initially were not members of the surface science
community, the same properties of the object (its relative size, ease of preparation,
regular structure and established use) also appealed to them as they worked out the
design and operation of the new microscope. In addition, its status as a subject of
competing structural models oﬀered a challenging vehicle for testing and demonstrating
the STM’s potential. However, as novices to surface science (and, to some extent,
sceptics of that community), Binnig and Rohrer initially had trouble mastering the basic
task of making the 7r7. Only when an established IBM surface scientist visited their
lab, and passed on the ﬁeld’s tacit knowledge or guild secrets, were they able to make
samples with enough order that the STM could glimpse the 7r7.64 However, Binnig
and Rohrer’s sample preparation practices remained looser than those of most surface
scientists – for instance, they would prepare a sample in one chamber, then walk it
down the hall (in air) to the STM chamber. They cite the fact that they could still obtain
images as evidence that some of the surface scientists’ guild secrets could be dis-
regarded.65
Binnig and Rohrer also reconstructed the 7r7 reconstruction in their own way. Not
only did they do so with a novel instrument, they also built their image of the 7r7 in an
idiosyncratic low-tech way, using analogue images on paper rather than digital images
and simulations. Binnig and Rohrer proceeded by handing chart recorder traces re-
corded on a storage oscilloscope to one of their associates, who pasted each strip to a
cardboard base, cutting along the lines to build a 3-D relief model.66
61 Binnig interview, op. cit. (57).
62 Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-critical Philosophy (1964; ﬁrst published 1958),
New York: Harper and Row, p. 61.
63 The 7r7 as the ‘fruit ﬂy of surface science’ is from Ruud Tromp, interview by Cyrus Mody, Yorktown
Heights, NY, 23 February 2001.
64 Himpsel interview, op. cit. (44).
65 Binnig interview, op. cit. (57).
66 J. Hennig, ‘Changes in the design of scanning tunneling microscopic images from 1980 to 1990’, in
Schummer and Baird, op. cit. (53), pp. 143–163. For another example of the exploitation of paper as a
Test objects and other epistemic things
447
This ‘landscape’ image sculpted out of paper and cardboard (Figure 8) did not accord
well with the ‘ball-and-stick’ models favoured by surface scientists. In addition, their
published view of this landscape was from an angle, rather than the ‘map’ views from
above that were conventional for surface science.67 Thus, when they ﬁrst exhibited their
STM image publicly to surface scientists, Binnig and Rohrer also took pains to present a
top view (see Figure 9). As they recounted, this exhibit attracted considerable excite-
ment:
[After we] wrote the paper on the 7r7 … [w]e returned convinced that this would attract the
attention of our colleagues, even those not involved with surface science. We helped by pres-
enting both an unprocessed relief model assembled from the original recorder traces with
scissors, Plexiglass and nails, and a processed top view; the former for credibility, the latter for
analysis and discussion. It certainly did help, with the result that we practically stopped doing
research for a while. We were inundated with requests for talks.68
The initial reception among surface scientists was mixed. A few scientists even accused
the Zurich team of trying to pass oﬀcomputer simulations of the 7r7 as images ob-
tained from a microscope (although the homely low-tech landscape model served to
Figure 8. The iconic STM image of the 7r7, made by Christoph Gerber from cardboard-backed
analogue line tracings. Reprinted from G. Binnig and H. Rohrer, ‘Surface imaging by scanning
tunneling microscopy’, Ultramicroscopy (1983) 11, pp. 157–160, p. 158, copyright (1983), with
permission from Elsevier.
concrete modelling material see the discussion of the ‘paper doll’ method in Michael Lynch, Art and Artifact
in Laboratory Science, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1985, pp. 284–287.
67 Perspectival views, often using shadowing eﬀects, have become commonplace in both images and
models of nanoscapes. For an illuminating examination of aesthetic technique in displays of quantum corrals
see Christopher Toumey, ‘Truth and beauty at the nanoscale’, Leonardo (2009) 42, pp. 151–155.
68 G. Binnig and H. Rohrer, ‘Scanning-tunneling microscopy: from birth to adolescence’, Reviews of
Modern Physics (1987) 59, pp. 615–625.
448
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
defuse such accusations).69 Controversy was short-lived, though. Most semiconductor
surface scientists could see that Binnig and Rohrer’s images contributed new knowledge
about the 7r7; they could also see, however, that the Zurich team’s proposed model
for the 7r7 was unlikely. Therefore a few eagerly began to build their own STMs in
order to reﬁne that model.
It is interesting to note the role of the 7r7 in stimulating the replication of the STM.
The very ﬁrst people who expressed an interest in building their own STMs – prior to
seeing the 7r7 images – were, in general, people who had only recently come to surface
science, or who saw the STM as a way to gain entry to that ﬁeld. Those few established
surface scientists who had heard of the STM prior to the atomic-resolution images of
the 7r7 were, in general, unimpressed. When these surface scientists did ﬁnally see the
7r7 images, many changed their minds instantly and either decided to get into the
STM ﬁeld themselves or oﬀered institutional support (which had previously been
lacking) for colleagues who were building STMs.70 Even so, some early corporate
STMers experienced resistance from practitioners of traditional surface science instru-
ments such as LEED; in response they found ways to make STM images more com-
parable to LEED images by, for instance, transforming their real-space STM images
into images in inverse space (see Figure 10).71
What brought surface scientists around to acceptance of the STM was not (as noted
earlier) that the new instrument ‘solved’ the 7r7. Rather, it was that they could now
Figure 9. Binnig and Rohrer’s proposed model for the 7r7 based on Figure 8. Note that this
representation would have been much closer to what surface scientists were used to than Figure 8
(compare, for instance, with Figure 6 especially, but also Figures 4 and 7). Reprinted from
G. Binnig et al., ‘Revisiting the 7r7 reconstruction of the Si(111)’, Surface Science (1983) 157,
pp. L373–L378, p. L376, copyright (1983), with permission from Elsevier.
69 Arne Hessenbruch, ‘Introduction to Binnig and Rohrer’s 10 publications, 1981–1986’, http://
authors.library.caltech.edu/5456/1/hrst.mit.edu/hrs/materials/public/BR_papers/BR_1981-86.html
(accessed
5 June 2009).
70 Golovchenko interview op. cit. (38); Feenstra interview, op. cit. (47); and Hamann interview,
op. cit. (57).
71 Golovchenko interview, op. cit. (38). See also J.E. Demuth, U. Koehler and R.J. Hamers, ‘The STM
learning curve and where it may take us’, Journal of Microscopy (1988) 152, pp. 299–316.
Test objects and other epistemic things
449
see in real space this (test) object of mystery and speculation that they had only been
able to see (as through a glass darkly) via the indirect approaches of diﬀractometry and
spectrometry. In practical terms, the STM was just one more tool in surface scientists’
kit – another means for winnowing down the competing models of surface re-
constructions. In emotional terms, though, the STM images of the 7r7 were (as one
early corporate STMer put it) like ‘pornography’ – what had been observed obliquely
and speculated about wildly could now be ‘seen’ directly (comparable, perhaps, to
biologists’ celebrations of the decodings of the genomes of various model organisms).72
This emotional impact should not be underestimated, since it led to the swift awarding
of the Nobel Prize to Binnig and Rohrer in 1986, and enticed large numbers of surface
Figure 10. Fourier-transformed STM image. One way for STMers to insinuate their instrument
into surface science was to Fourier-transform their images into inverse-space representations
similar, though not equivalent, to LEED images of the same surfaces (since LEED is an inverse-
space tool, though one that averages over a larger area, and a somewhat lower depth, than
the STM). From E. Demuth, U. Koehler and R. J. Hamers, ‘The STM learning curve and where
it may take us’, Journal of Microscopy (1988) 152, pp. 299–316, p. 311. With permission of
Wiley-Blackwell.
72 Attributed to Jene Golovchenko by James Gimzewski, interview by Cyrus Mody, Los Angeles,
22 October 2001. The 7r7 is not the only ‘pornographic’ test object. In electrical engineering, the ‘Lena’
image from a 1971 Playboy centrefold is regularly used to compare diﬀerent image processing algorithms. See
Jamie Hutchinson, ‘Culture, communication, and an information age Madonna’, IEEE Professional
Communication Society Newsletter (2001) 45.3, p. 1. For further analysis of this aspect of the 7r7, and
perhaps test objects more generally, see the line of inquiry stemming from Carolyn Merchant, The Death of
Nature: Women, Ecology, and the Scientiﬁc Revolution, San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1982.
450
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
scientists to adopt the STM. It is probably an exaggeration to say that without the 7r7
there would not have been an STM community, but it is almost certainly true that that
community would have grown much more slowly and would likely not have been as
successful.
Moving beyond the 7r7 – graphite, biology and DNA
Thus by the mid-1980s the 7r7 had become an important boundary object at the
intersection of surface science and scanning tunnelling microscopy.73 The 7r7 quickly
became the standard (and standardizing) test object for tunnelling microscopists – they
used it to test their instruments, as a kind of password to see who in the community
actually had a working instrument and as a key for harmonizing STM results with those
of other surface science instruments. The STM was also applied to the 7r7 in a manner
consistent with the reconstruction’s role as a kind of model organism (‘fruit ﬂy’) or
code-breaker’s key (‘Rosetta Stone’). That is, because surface scientists saw the 7r7 as
containing clues to the solution of many other reconstructions, they believed that ap-
plying the STM to the 7r7 would show them how to use it to unlock other re-
constructions. For instance, some early surface science STM groups used the 7r7 to
demonstrate their ability to turn the STM into a spectroscopic tool, by gathering data at
a large number of points in the 7r7 unit cell over a range of bias voltages.74 Others
took the 7r7 as a launch pad to explore closely related (and hitherto poorly under-
stood) variants of the silicon (111) such as the 9r9 and 11r11 reconstructions.75
However, within surface science, the ‘solution’ to the 7r7 together with rapid im-
provements in STM technology led to a dramatic diminution in the importance of
solving reconstructions. Up until 1985, a Ph.D. student could consider solving a re-
construction as enough of a discovery to be worthy of an entire dissertation, but after
that time solving a reconstruction began to be an ordinary piece of brush-clearing to be
achieved before moving on to more pressing matters.76 This lessening of the importance
of reconstructions was by no means a smooth process. In their eagerness to get the ﬁrst
STM images of various reconstructions into print, some researchers in the mid-1980s
oﬀered overly simplistic interpretations of the relationship between those images and
the reconstructions they represented. These simplistic interpretations were countered,
and eventually corrected, by proponents of other surface science techniques.77 A chas-
tened STM community eventually developed more cautious ways of applying STM
images to the solution of surface reconstructions. As a result, by the 1990s reconstruc-
tions had faded in importance as a topic of surface science investigation.
73 The much-abused concept of ‘boundary object’ derives from Susan Leigh Star and James Griesemer,
‘Institutional ecology, ‘‘translations’’ and boundary objects: amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s
Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907–39’, Social Studies of Science (1989) 19, pp. 387–420.
74 R.J. Hamers, R.M. Tromp and J.E. Demuth, ‘Surface electronic-structure of Si(111)-(7r7) resolved in
real space’, Physical Review Letters (1986) 56, pp. 1972–1975.
75 R.S. Becker et al., ‘New reconstructions on silicon (111) surfaces’, Physical Review Letters (1986) 57,
pp. 1020–1023.
76 Lagally, op. cit. (23).
77 Williams interview, op. cit. (34).
Test objects and other epistemic things
451
As the STM became standardized and commercially available, more and more non-
corporate and non-surface scientiﬁc researchers joined the STM community. These
researchers began to look for test objects other than the 7r7 that would be suitable for
their own investigations. Indeed, the history of probe microscopy from the early 1980s
until about 1995 could be written as the story of an often-frustrating search for new test
objects that would tie together a rapidly growing and diﬀerentiating community that
grew out of surface science, enrolled other ﬁelds, and became a substantial part of the
nanoscience/nanotechnology movement. Such eﬀorts, and the frustrations they en-
countered, provide insight into the fragile conjunction of pragmatic and epistemic
qualities that make up a ‘good’ test object.
One such eﬀort involved graphite – a common material used in surface science and
related areas of contemporary ‘nano’ research. As a surface scientist from Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory noted during an interview, graphite seemed very prom-
ising as a ‘test material’:
Graphite I did [image] but more as a test. Not for doing science with it, but for test. As a test
material it’s a good material. Well at least we thought it was a good material. It has the
following advantages: graphite, in air, you can just cleave it, it’s made of sheets laid on top of
each other, you can remove one and the new surface … is exposed as a fresh new clean sur-
face … [and] chemically they are so inert that nothing reacts with graphite. So even though it’s
in air, the air molecules and junk molecules that ﬂoat in the air, they may land but they don’t
stay on the surface.78
In this excerpt, ‘air’ refers to a variant of the STM in which the sample is not enclosed
in an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber.
Air STMs are far less expensive and easier to use than UHV STMs, though their use is
complicated by the potential for contamination. Given the scale at which samples are
visualized (a matter of nanometres or, at most, micrometres), ambient molecules
(‘junk’) can easily contaminate the surface under scrutiny. The scientist mentions two
advantages of graphite in this regard: it is easy to peel oﬀthe top ‘dirty’ layer (for
example, with a strip of common sticky tape) to expose a fresh, clean layer beneath it;
and graphite is relatively inert, so ambient molecules do not tend to adhere to its in-
terface with air.
Like the 7r7, graphite was usable as a ‘known known’79 for taking the measure of a
working instrument and ‘certifying’ the skills of novice microscopists. As one electro-
chemist who was among the ﬁrst in his discipline to adopt the STM puts it:
Gewirth: Whenever anybody’s learning a new technique and it doesn’t matter what it is, you
always have them work on something that’s known, say ‘can you produce what’s known
here?’ Then we can go and move away from that …
Mody: Where do the ‘standard things’ come from? Is it a matter of sitting people down with
particular specimens?
Gewirth: Yes, right, exactly. You will run graphite in air because everyone should be able to
do that. Then we’ll do gold under water, then we’ll put down this metal monolayer business
78 Miquel Salmeron, interview by Cyrus Mody, Berkeley, CA, 9 March 2001.
79 Rumsfeld, op. cit. (4).
452
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
and once you get to that level then you are viewed as being certiﬁed. You have to be able to do
that. The other thing is that with any technique, the most important thing is to know when the
machine is broken. Machines break and that’s the way it is. So we have them do some of these
simpler things on a regular basis just to show that the machine is working. For example,
graphite in air now is something you should be able to do every day, right – so I say, once a
week go make sure you can do it, not because I think you’re losing your skills but just to prove
that the machine is actually working.80
Graphite was characterized as a highly regular material, showing row after row of
closely packed atoms with few point defects.81 A further advantage was that an un-
usually large ‘corrugation’ (the distance between the surface layer of atoms and the
next layer down) showed up in STM images of the graphite surface – it took less eﬀort
to see the corrugation on graphite than on other materials. Yet the unexpectedly large
corrugation of graphite proved to be a disadvantage as well – it was a jarring ‘unknown
unknown’ for a material that was not even supposed to have ‘known unknowns’.
Eventually, STMers came to believe that the large corrugation was an artefact of the tip
pushing on the graphite, rather than a ‘real’ distance between undisturbed layers.
Graphite also lent itself for use as a surface on which to deposit other objects – ana-
logous to a glass slide for a light microscope. In various disciplines that are now
associated with nanotechnology, graphite began to be used as a substrate on which to
place objects of interest such as polymer and liquid crystal molecules and biomolecules.
Graphite seemed to be an ideal substrate because it was inert, clean, easy to prepare and
highly conducive to atomic resolution. Ideally, atomic resolution would provide a reg-
ular pattern with known distances between atoms, acting both as an indicator that the
microscope was working properly and as a ruler to measure the adsorbed molecules
(much like F.A. Nobert’s ruler etched in glass).
When air STMs became commercially available in the 1980s, their relatively low cost
and apparent ease of use with the graphite substrate led to a proliferation of new
research in diverse areas, particularly in biology. However, many of the early adopters
of the STM were not biologists by training; instead, many were physicists who sought
to use the new technology to make biological discoveries. Veteran surface scientists, in
contrast, denounced as ‘rubbish’ much of what was published at that time by the non-
surface scientists who took up the STM.82 They also viewed graphite as uninteresting,
when compared with the 7r7 – which continued to hold interest for them as a theo-
retically deep research object as well as a standard test object.83 In contrast, for many
ambitious non-surface scientists, the ‘uninteresting’ surface structure of graphite was
just what was needed to act as a gestalt background for highlighting the features of
adsorbed specimens; a background that, moreover, exhibited a deﬁnite texture that was
usable as a metric.
80 Andrew Gewirth, interview by Cyrus Mody, Urbana-Champaign, IL, 25 June 2001.
81 Graphite in various forms continues to be of interest as a research object and tool. Common forms of
graphite of interest include single- and double-walled carbon nanotubes – sheets of graphite rolled in tubes
with distinct ‘chirality’ in the way the ‘chicken wire’ is joined – and spherical geodesic arrangements of
carbon atoms commonly called ‘Fullerenes’ and ‘Buckyballs’ named in honour of Buckminster Fuller.
82 Robert Hamers, interview by Cyrus Mody, Madison, WI, 9 May 2001.
83 Gimzewski interview, op. cit. (72).
Test objects and other epistemic things
453
However, as the scientist in the penultimate quotation above testiﬁed, ‘Well at least
we thought it was a good material.’ The apparent contrast in STM images between
graphite substrate and adsorbed molecule broke down during a controversy over claims
about ‘atomic-scale imaging’ of DNA molecules with STM. Other taken-for-granted
distinctions between image, instrument and object broke down as this controversy
opened up radical questioning about what the apparent visual regularities of the
graphite surface ‘meant’, technically speaking.
In the late 1980s, as the Human Genome Project was getting under way, several
researchers applied for funding in order to explore the possibility of using probe micro-
scopes to visualize, and potentially sequence, DNA strands. That alternative method
of sequencing never panned out, but at the time it seemed to oﬀer a potentially fast,
cheap and direct way to read the molecular ‘code’.84 Although reasons for being scep-
tical about that possibility were immediately expressed, the voices of the sceptics were
initially drowned out by those who claimed that the atomic resolution of DNA was
tantalizingly close. The possibility of direct visual sequencing of DNA was given its
most notorious boost when an STM image of a DNA molecule made the 19 July 1990
cover of Nature. The image was produced by a research group at Caltech headed by
John Baldeschwieler and was accompanied by an article that described the achieve-
ment.85
The image that purported to give atomic resolution of DNA (see Figure 11) looked
something like a space-ﬁlling model of the DNA double helix. It does not take too much
imagination to see the iconic turns in the helix and the ladder of base pairs linking the
two strands. The authors of the Nature article interpreted the image by relating vari-
ations in electron tunnelling to established structural constituents of the molecule:
Experimental STM proﬁles show excellent correlation with atomic contours of the van der
Waals surface of A-form DNA derived from X-ray crystallography. A comparison of vari-
ations in the barrier to quantum mechanical tunneling (barrier-height) with atomic-scale top-
ography shows correlation over the phosphate-sugar backbone but anticorrelation over the
base pairs. This relationship may be due to the diﬀerent chemical characteristics of parts of the
molecule.86
The base pairs and phosphate-sugar backbone were not independently visible in the
particular specimen, but those iconic structures provided a scheme for attributing var-
iations in current to an ‘atomic-scale topography’. However, it did not take long for
critics to come up with alternative schemes of interpretation: long, meandering strand-
like defects in graphite that could mimic DNA, right down to the pitch of the helix.87
84 Paul Hansma, one of those who hoped to sequence DNA with a probe microscope but who presciently
exited that line of inquiry before it became controversial, puts it this way: ‘imaging DNA is probably the
project that I spent the most intellectual eﬀort on without ever publishing a paper’. Paul Hansma, interview by
Cyrus Mody, Santa Barbara, CA, 7 August 2006.
85 Robert J. Driscoll, Michael G. Youngquist and John D. Baldeschweiler, ‘Atomic-scale imaging of DNA
using scanning tunneling microscopy’, Nature (1990) 346, pp. 294–296.
86 Driscoll, Youngquist and Baldeschweiler, op. cit. (85), 294.
87 C.R. Clemmer and T.P. Beebe, ‘Graphite – a mimic for DNA and other biomolecules in scanning tun-
neling microscope studies’, Science (1991) 251, pp. 640–642; W.M. Heckl and G. Binnig, ‘Domain-walls on
graphite mimic DNA’, Ultramicroscopy (1992) 42, pp. 1073–1078; S.R. Lindsay et al., ‘Contrast and
454
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
In shades of the infamous N-ray aﬀair,88 STMers began to ‘see DNA’ even where
they had not intentionally placed it on graphite. As a microscopist recalled years later in
an interview,
That certainly looks like a twisted helix of DNA. But according to these particular researchers,
they put no DNA down unless they sneezed on their samples. I mean that became a running
joke of, you know, who sneezed on their samples.89
Another researcher recalled a similar joke that also keyed the familiar tropes of
pathological science:
Reconstructions in graphite can resemble diﬀerent crystalline materials, they can resemble
long-chain molecules, literally if you look around long enough you’ll see what you want to see.
We had a term for that – ‘face of Jesus’. If you looked around long enough you’d see the face
of Jesus.90
Figure 11. Purported atomic-resolution STM image of DNA (a), compared with a space-ﬁlling
model of the DNA double-helix (b). Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers, Ltd:
Robert J. Driscoll, Michael G. Youngquist and John D. Baldeschwieler, ‘Atomic-scale imaging of
DNA using scanning tunneling microscopy’, Nature (1990) 346, pp. 294–296, p. 295, copyright
(1990).
chemical-sensitivity in scanning tunneling microscope images of DNA’, Biophysical Journal (1990) 57,
p. A383.
88 See Malcolm Ashmore, ‘The theatre of the blind: starring a Promethean prankster, a prism, a pocket,
and a piece of wood’, Social Studies of Science (1993) 23, pp. 67–106.
89 Jane Frommer, interview by Cyrus Mody, San Jose, CA, 14 March 2001.
90 Matt Thompson, interview by Cyrus Mody, Chadd’s Ford, PA, 26 February 2001. Though he received
his Nobel for other reasons, Langmuir is best known in STS circles for his essay (originally a talk) on
Test objects and other epistemic things
455
Many of these STM images of DNA and other biological structures were produced by
physicists who had little acquaintance with the epistemic culture of biology,91 and
particularly with established practices for interpreting transmission electron micro-
scope images of biological specimens. Their claims were met with scepticism by biolo-
gists who could not imagine how apparent biological structures could be visualized
without metal coatings (as was routine in biological electron microscopy). The growing
suspicions about artefacts led to wholesale rejection of STM images of DNA and a
moratorium on funding for probe microscope research from the National Institutes of
Health.92
Even before the DNA image was unravelled, so to speak, by a growing army of
critics, veteran STMers had become less realist about atomic resolution. They became
increasingly attuned, for instance, to how the apparent positions of apparent atoms
could change dramatically from one tunnelling voltage to another. Moreover, the
graphite platform itself came into question. The nearly perfect lattice structure shown
in STM images – which seemed to recommend graphite as an especially ﬁne test ob-
ject – now seemed suspiciously free of defects. As a researcher explained in an inter-
view, what looked like atomic resolution could arise from ‘a transfer of one ﬂake of
graphite to the tip’, so that the scan was ‘graphite over graphite’.93 The reason the
images were ‘never ﬂawed’, and seemed to have ‘perfect order’, was that the pattern
was ‘an ensemble average’:
Prior to that realization everybody calibrated his or her ability for atomic imaging with
graphite. You joined the world [of STM] – by showing that you could image graphite. Well the
truth of it was that, if you couldn’t image graphite with atomic resolution, you certainly
weren’t going to image anything else with atomic resolution, but imaging the graphite was no
proof that you had actually imaged individual atoms.94
The tip of a probe microscope is constructed from a very thin metal wire that is
chemically sharpened to a point consisting of a single atom (or, rather, a jagged surface
in which a single atom should stand out as the apex). Under normal operations, elec-
tronic current ﬂows (‘tunnels’) from the sample to the tip, and the amount and vari-
ation in the current is measured as the tip moves across the surface. The tip–surface
interface is quite unstable, especially when the tip scans an uneven surface. As noted in
the above account, the tip can ‘pick up’ ﬂakes from the surface, so that they become the
sentry atoms attracting the tunnelling current and lending their (unknown) structure
to the tip’s conductivity and raster of measurements.95 At other times, particular
pathological science: Irving Langmuir, ‘Pathological science’ (ed. and transcribed by R.N. Hall), Physics
Today (October 1989), pp. 36–48.
91 For the concept of epistemic culture and a comparison of molecular biology and particle physics see
Karin Knorr Cetina, Epistemic Cultures: How Sciences Make Knowledge, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1999.
92 Hansma interview, op. cit. (84).
93 Murday interview, op. cit. (34).
94 Murday interview, op. cit. (34).
95 Howard Mizes, interview by Cyrus Mody, Webster, NY, 23 October 2003. Also T. R. Albrecht,
‘Observation of tilt boundaries in graphite by scanning tunneling microscopy and associated tip eﬀects’,
Applied Physics Letters (1988) 52, pp. 362–364.
456
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
topographic features in the sample being scanned are sharper than the tip, thus turning
the tip into the surface that is imaged – a reverse salient, in a very concrete sense.96 In
both cases, the images that result contain large numbers of repeated features – features
that probably do not correspond to anything on the surface being inspected.
Graphite continued to be an important material for research and engineering, and it
continues to be used as a substrate for probe microscopy, but it lost favour as a test
object for surface science, and the 7r7 still stands as an unchallenged icon of the ﬁeld’s
golden years.97
Conclusion
The 7r7 and, for a time, graphite became test objects because they satisﬁed a wide
range of disciplinary objectives for the particular networks of scientists who formed
around them and adopted them as preferred objects. Of the two, the 7r7 proved more
robust for maintaining its integrity at the intersection of structural models, novel in-
strumentation and material practices in (or near) a commercial domain of research. It
was a gold standard for measuring a trainee’s skills, as well as an intriguingly complex
and yet aesthetically pleasing research object. Some of these objectives harmonized – if
indirectly – with the interests of companies like AT&T and IBM: new researchers could
become familiar with handling materials similar (though not identical) to those on the
production line, new instruments and theories that could be adapted for more com-
mercially relevant questions could pass muster on the 7r7, prestige that would attract
new generations of bright minds ﬂowed towards labs that contributed to the 7r7
puzzle. Yet the interests of discipline and institution were often only loosely coupled,
joined – barely – through the plausibility of seeing test objects like the 7r7 as both
technologically relevant and professionally interesting.98 We believe that test objects of
this sort are widespread, cropping up whenever professions and institutions must coopt
each other and share communal materials.
As discussed in this paper, the 7r7 performed an integrative function for the virtual
community (or network) of surface science.99 In this respect, it is an illustration of a
96 For ‘reverse salient’ see Thomas P. Hughes, Networks of Power: Electriﬁcation in Western Society,
1880–1930, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983, pp. 73–75. An art-historical take on how sci-
entists interpret such probe microscope images can be found in Jochen Hennig, ‘The instrument in the image:
revealing and concealing the condition of the probing tip in scanning tunneling microscope design’, in Helmar
Schramm, Ludger Schwarte and Jan Lazardzig (eds.), Instruments in Art and Science: On the Architectonics
of Cultural Boundaries in the 17th Century, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2008, pp. 348–361.
97 However, ‘graphene’ (a monoatomic layer of graphite), often deposited on a semiconductor substrate,
has become an important and dynamic area of research in the past ten years. Kenneth Chang, ‘Thin carbon is
in: graphene steals nanotubes’ allure’, New York Times, 10 April 2007.
98 This theme is explored more fully in the ‘new institutionalism’ in sociology. See Paul J. DiMaggio and
Walter W. Powell, ‘The iron cage revisited: institutional isomorphism and collective rationality in organiz-
ational ﬁelds’, American Sociological Review (1983) 48, pp. 148–160.
99 The evocative term ‘invisible college’ was once used to describe the research networks integrated by
literatures and indexed through citations: Diana Crane, Invisible Colleges: Diﬀusion of Knowledge in
Scientiﬁc Communities, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972. The term was a misnomer, since the
‘college’ in question is not invisible, but is instead made visible through the very literature that indexes and
Test objects and other epistemic things
457
well-established claim in the history and social study of science. Bruno Latour’s notion
of ‘immutable mobiles’ suggests that the stability, reproducibility and portability of
maps, graphic recordings and graven images are coextensive with the historical ex-
pansion, accumulation and stabilization of modern science and technology.100
Accordingly, in any given case, the successful production of immutability (the stabiliz-
ation of an object, image, map and so on) sets up its mobility as well as the network that
facilitates its movement. However, just how this works remains contentious. Critics of
this idea point out that both immutability and mobility are contingent achievements,
which are subject to all manner of natural and human subversion, so that Latour’s
formulation begs the question of how immutability is secured and mobility sustained.101
This case study of the 7r7 did not answer that question; indeed, if it did anything it
made it more complicated.
Perhaps one of the most confusing aspects of this history of the 7r7 is the object’s
epistemic mobility. Not only did it ‘move’ through a network of practitioners, while
also being a nodal object for turning that network into a disciplinary ‘community’, its
epistemic status also shifted among several possibilities: a novel form of entity (a re-
construction), an unsolved problem for structural modelling and a standard for testing
instruments and practices. In some respects, its epistemic status followed a familiar
temporal sequence from being an unstable and uncertain focus of research and
controversy to becoming a ‘black box’ – a presumptive standard for further research on
other, more problematic, matters. However, not only were such shifts reversible (as is
especially clear in the case of graphite), they also raised the salience of diﬀerent lines of
epistemic distinction between image and object, theoretical model and empirical re-
ferent, and instrument and sample. All the while, the 7r7 maintained a protean stab-
ility through a series of instrumental innovations. Perhaps such epistemic mobility is
characteristic of the ‘family’ of objects – model organisms, material standards, samples
and so on – whose members hold intermediate status in the hiatus between conditions
of experimentation and research objects. The familiar dichotomies and debates about
objectivity and reference come into play in vernacular accounts of these ubiquitous
epistemic things, but the ‘tensions’ these things provoke are themselves sources of his-
torical surprise.
integrates it. The literary means and speciﬁc modes of integration are better described as ‘virtual’ (in the sense
of ‘virtual witnessing’, in Shapin and Schaﬀer, op cit. (22)).
100 Latour, op. cit. (18).
101 For criticisms of Latour see Johns, op. cit. (16); and Karin Knorr Cetina and Klaus Amann, ‘Image
dissection in natural science inquiry’, Science, Technology & Human Values (1990) 15, pp. 259–283.
458
Cyrus C.M. Mody and Michael Lynch
