 
Forth - The Early Years 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chuck Moore  
chipchuck@colorforth.com  
1991  
 
2
 
 
 
To avoid any copyright issues I asked for 
permission, and kindly Chuck did allow 
the posting: 
chipchuck@colorforth.com 
Looks good. 
 
Early Years reads well. You're welcome to 
post it.  
 
3
 
 
 
Contents 
Page 
5 
  
Abstract  
5 
  
Forward 1999 
5 
  
Contents  
6 
  
Forth  
8 
  
MIT, SAO, 1958 
10 
  
Stanford, SLAC, 1961 
11 
  
Free-lance, 1965 
13 
  
Mohasco, 1968 
17 
  
NRAO, 1971 
20 
  
Moral 
21 
  
References 
22 
  
Summary 
 
 
4
 
 
 
5
 
Abstract 
Forth is a simple, natural computer language. It has achieved 
remarkable acceptance where efficiency is valued. It evolved in 
the 1960s on a journey from university through business to 
laboratory. This is the story of how a simple interpreter expanded 
its abilities to become a complete programming 
language/operating system.  
Forward 1999 
This paper was written for the HOPL II (History of programming 
languages) conference. It was summarily rejected, apparently 
because of its style. Much of the content was included in the 
accepted paper [Rather 1993].  
This HTML version was reformatted from the original typescript. 
Minimal changes were made to the text. Examples of source code 
were suggested by reviewer Phil Koopman. They've not yet been 
added.  
Contents 
Forth  
MIT, SAO, 1958  
Stanford, SLAC, 1961  
Free-lance, 1965  
Mohasco, 1968  
NRAO, 1971  
Moral  
 
6
Forth 
Forth evolved during the decade of the 60s, across America, 
within university, business and laboratory, amongst established 
languages. During this period, I was its only programmer and it 
had no name until the end. This account is retrieved from 
memory, prompted by sparse documentation and surviving 
listings.  
Forth is hardly original, but it is a unique combination of 
ingredients. I'm grateful to the people and organizations who 
permitted me to develop it - often unbeknownst to them. And to 
you, for being interested enough to read about it.  
Forth is a simple, natural computer language. Today it is accepted 
as a world-class programming language. That it has achieved this 
without industry, university or government support is a tribute to 
its efficiency, reliability and versatility. Forth is the language of 
choice when its efficiency outweighs the popularity of other 
languages. This is more often the case in real-world applications 
such as control and communication.  
A number of Forth organizations and a plethora of small 
companies provide systems, applications and documentation. 
Annual conferences are held in North America, Europe and Asia. A 
draft ANSI standard will soon be submitted [ANS 1991].  
None of the books about Forth quite capture its flavor. I think the 
best is still the first, Starting Forth by Leo Brodie [Brodie 1981]. 
Another window is provided by JFAR's invaluable subject and 
author index [Martin 1987].  
The classic Forth we are discussing provides the minimum 
support a programmer needs to develop a language optimized for 
his application. It is intended for a work-station environment: 
keyboard, display, computer and disk.  
Forth is a text-based language that is essentially context-free. It 
combines 'words' separated by spaces, to construct new words. 
About 150 such words constitute a system that provides (with 
date of introduction) 
 
7
 
      SAO   
1958   Interpreter 
     SLAC   
1961   Data stack 
      RSI   
1966   Keyboard input 
                  
 
Display output, OK 
                  
 
Editor 
  Mohasco   
1968   Compiler 
                  
 
Return stack 
                  
 
Dictionary 
                  
 
Virtual memory (disk) 
                  
 
Multiprogrammer 
     NRAO   
1971   Threaded code 
                  
 
Fixed-point arithmetic 
 
Such a system has 3-8K bytes of code compiled from 10-20 
pages of source. 
It can easily be implemented by a single programmer on a small 
computer.  
This account necessarily follows my career. But it is intended to 
be the autobiography of Forth. I will discuss the features listed 
above; and the names of the words associated with them. The 
meaning of many words is obvious. Some warrant description and 
some are beyond the scope of this paper.  
That portion of the Forth dictionary to be mentioned is 
summarized here: 
Interpreter 
     WORD  NUMBER  INTERPRET  ABORT 
     HASH  FIND  '  FORGET 
     BASE  OCTAL  DECIMAL  HEX 
     LOAD  EXIT  EXECUTE  ( 
 
Terminal 
     KEY  EXPECT 
     EMIT  CR  SPACE  SPACES  DIGIT  TYPE  DUMP 
 
Data stack 
     DUP  DROP  SWAP  OVER 
     +  -  *  /  MOD  NEGATE 
     ABS  MAX  MIN 
     AND  OR  XOR  NOT 
 
8
 
     0<  0=  = 
     @  !  +!  C@  C! 
     SQRT  SIN.COS  ATAN  EXP  LOG 
 
Return stack 
     :  ;  PUSH  POP  I 
 
Disk 
     BLOCK  UPDATE  FLUSH  BUFFER  PREV  OLDEST 
 
Compiler 
     CREATE  ALLOT  ,  SMUDGE 
     VARIABLE  CONSTANT 
     [  ]  LITERAL  ."  COMPILE 
     BEGIN  UNTIL  AGAIN  WHILE  REPEAT 
     DO  LOOP  +LOOP  IF  ELSE  THEN 
 
MIT, SAO, 1958 
October, 1957 was Sputnik - a most exciting time. I was a 
sophmore at MIT and got a part-time job with SAO (Smithsonian 
Astrophysical Observatory, 14 syllables) at Harvard.  
SAO was responsible for optical tracking of satellites - Moonwatch 
visual observations and Baker-Nunn tracking cameras. Caught 
off-guard by Sputnik, they hired undergraduates to compute 
predictions with Friden desk calculators. John Gaustad told me 
about MIT's IBM EDPM 704 and loaned me his Fortran II manual. 
My first program, Ephemeris 4, eliminated my job [Moore 1958].  
Now a Programmer, I worked with George Veis to apply his 
method of least-squares fitting to determine orbital elements, 
station positions and ultimately the shape of Earth [Veis 1960]. 
Of course, this part-time job was at least 40 hours, and yes, my 
grades went to hell.  
At MIT, John McCarthy taught an incredible course on LISP. That 
was my introduction to recursion, and to the marvelous variety of 
computer language. Wil Baden has noted that LISP is to Lambda 
Calculus as Forth is to Lukasewcleicz Postfix.  
 
9
 
APL was also a topical language, with its weird right-left parsing. 
Although I admire and emulate its operators, I'm not persuaded 
they constitute an optimal set.  
The programming environment in the 50s was more severe than 
today. My source code filled 2 trays with punch cards. They had 
to be carried about to be put through machines, mostly by me. 
Compile took 30 minutes (just like C) but limited computer time 
meant one run per day, except maybe 3rd shift.  
So I wrote this simple interpreter to read input cards and control 
the program. It also directed calculations. The five orbital 
elements each had an empirical equation to account for 
atmospheric drag and the non-spherical Earth. Thus I could 
compose different equations for the several satellites without re-
compiling.  
These equations summed terms such as P2 (polynomial of degree 
2) and S (sine). 36-bit floating-point dominated calculation time 
so overhead was small. A data stack was unnecessary, and 
probably unknown to me.  
The Forth interpreter began here with the words 
 
     WORD  NUMBER  INTERPRET  ABORT 
 
They weren't spelled that way because they were statement 
numbers.  
INTERPRET uses WORD to read words separated by spaces and 
NUMBER to convert a word to binary (in this case, floating-point). 
Such free-format input was unusual, but was more efficient 
(smaller and faster) and reliable. Fortran input was formatted into 
specific columns and typographic errors had caused numerous 
delays.  
This interpreter used an IF ... ELSE IF construct, coded in Fortran, 
finding a match on a single character. Error handling consisted of 
terminating the run.  
 
 
10
 
 
Then, as now, ABORT asked the user what to do. Since input 
cards were listed as they were read, you knew where the error 
was.  
Stanford, SLAC, 1961 
In 1961 I went to Stanford to study mathematics. Although 
Stanford was building its computer science department, I was 
interested in real computing. I was impressed that they could 
(dared?) write their own Algol compiler. And I fatefully 
encountered the Burroughs B5500 computer.  
I got another 'part-time' job at SLAC (Stanford Linear Accelerator 
Center, 12 syllables) writing code to optimize beam steering for 
the pending 2-mile electron accelerator. This was a natural 
application of my least-squares experience to phase-space. Hal 
Butler was in charge of our group and the program, TRANSPORT, 
was quite successful.  
Another application of least-squares was the program CURVE, 
coded in Algol (1964). It is a general-purpose non-linear 
differential-corrections data-fitting program. Its statistical rigor 
provides insight into agreement between model and data.  
The data format and model equations were interpreted and a 
push-down stack used to facilitate evaluation. CURVE was an 
impressive precursor to Forth. It introduced these words to 
provide the capability to fit models much more elaborate than 
simple equations: 
     +  -  *  NEGATE 
     IF  ELSE  THEN  < 
     DUP  DROP  SWAP 
     :  ;  VARIABLE  !  ( 
     SIN  ATAN  EXP  LOG 
 
Spelling was quite different: 
 
     NEGATE  was  MINUS 
       DROP       ; 
       SWAP       . 
          !       < 
 
11
   VARIABLE       DECLARE 
          ;       END 
     ( ...)       COMMENT ...; 
 
 
The interpreter used IF ... ELSE IF to identify a 6-character input 
word called ATOM (from LISP). DUP DROP and SWAP are 5500 
instructions; I'm surprised at the spelling change. The word : was 
taken from the Algol label format, flipped for left-right parsing (to 
prevent the interpreter encountering an undefined word): 
 
  
    Algol     -   LABEL: 
     CURVE  -   : LABEL 
 
In fact, : marked a position in the input string to be interpreted 
later. Interpretation was stopped by ; . A version of : was named 
DEFINE.  
The store operator ( ! ) appeared in connection with VARIABLE . 
But fetching ( @ ) was automatic. Note the input had become 
complex enough to warrant comments. The sometime-criticised 
postfix conditional dates from here: 
     Algol - IF expression THEN true ELSE false 
     CURVE - stack IF true ELSE false THEN 
 
True is interpreted if stack is non-zero. THEN provides unique 
termination, the lack of which always confused me in Algol. Such 
expressions were interpreted: IF would scan ahead for ELSE or 
THEN.  
The word < introduces the convention that relations leave a truth 
value on the stack, 1 for true and 0 for false. The transcendental 
functions are, of course, library calls.  
Free-lance 
I left Stanford in 1965 to become a free-lance programmer in the 
New York City area. This was not unusual, and I found work 
programming in Fortran, Algol, Jovial, PL/I and various 
assemblers. I literally carried my card deck about and recoded it 
as necessary.  
 
12
 
Minicomputers were appearing, and with them terminals. The 
interpreter was ideal for teletype input, and soon included code to 
handle output. So we aquire the words 
 
     KEY  EXPECT 
     EMIT  CR  SPACE  SPACES  DIGIT  TYPE 
 
EXPECT is a loop calling KEY to read a keystroke. TYPE is a loop 
calling EMIT to display a character.  
With the TTY came paper-tape and some of the most un-friendly 
software imaginable - hours of editing and punching and loading 
and assembling and printing and loading and testing and 
repeating. I remember a terrible Sunday in a Manhattan 
skyscraper when I couldn't find splicing tape (nothing else works) 
and swore that 'There must be a better way'.  
I did considerable work for Bob Davis at Realtime Systems, Inc 
(RSI). I became a 5500 MCP guru to support his time-sharing 
service (remote input to a mainframe) and wrote a Fortran-Algol 
translator and file editing utilities. The translator taught me the 
value of spaces between words, not required by Fortran.  
The interpreter still accepted words with the first 6 characters 
significant (the 5500 had 48-bit words). The words 
 
     LIST  EDIT  BEGIN  AGAIN  EXIT 
 
appear, with BEGIN ... AGAIN spelled START ... REPEAT and used 
to bracket the editor commands 
 
     T  TYPE  I  INSERT  D  DELETE  F  FIND 
 
later used in NRAO's editor. The word FIELD was used in the 
manner of Mohasco and Forth, Inc's data-base management.  
One of Forth's distinctive features comes from here. The rule is 
that Forth acknowledge each line of input by appending OK  
 
13
 
 
when interpretation is complete. This may be difficult, for when 
input is terminated by CR a blank must be echoed, and the CR 
included with OK. At RSI, OK was on the next line, but it still 
conveyed friendly reassurance over an intimidating 
communications line: 
 
     56 INSERT ALGOL IS VERY ADAPTABLE 
     OK 
 
This postfix notation suggests a data stack, but it only had to be 
one deep.  
Mohasco, 1968 
In 1968 I transformed into a business programmer at Mohasco 
Industries, Inc in Amsterdam NY. They are a major home-
furnishing company - carpets and furniture. I had worked with 
Geoff Leach at RSI and he persuaded me to follow him up-state. I 
had just married, and Amsterdam has a lovely small-town 
atmosphere to contrast with NYC.  
I rewrote my code in COBOL and learned the truth about business 
software. Bob Rayco was in charge of Corporate data processing 
and assigned me two relevant projects:  
He leased an IBM 1130 minicomputer with a 2250 graphic 
display. The object was to see if computer graphics helped design 
patterned carpets. The answer was 'not without color' and the 
1130 went away.  
Meanwhile I had the latest minicomputer environment: 16-bit 
CPU, 8K RAM, disk (my first), keyboard, printer, card 
reader/punch, Fortran compiler. The reader/punch provided disk 
backup. I ported my interpreter again (back to Fortran) and 
added a cross-assembler to generate code for the 2250.  
The system was a great success. It could draw animated 3-D 
images when IBM could barely draw static 2-D. Since this was my 
first real-time graphics, I coded Spacewar, that first video game.  
 
14
 
I also converted my Algol chess program into Forth and was duely 
impressed how much simpler it became.  
The file holding the interpreter was labeled FORTH, for 4th (next) 
generation software - but the operating system restricted file 
names to 5 characters.  
This environment for programming the 2250 was far superior to 
the Fortran environment, so I extended the 2250 cross-assembler 
into an 1130 compiler. This introduced a flock of words 
      
     DO  LOOP  UNTIL 
     BLOCK  LOAD  UPDATE  FLUSH 
     BASE  CONTEXT  STATE  INTERPRET  DUMP 
     CREATE  CODE  ;CODE  CONSTANT  SMUDGE 
     @  OVER  AND  OR  NOT  0=  0<  
 
 
They were still differently spelled 
 
      LOOP  was   CONTINUE 
     UNTIL       
 END 
     BLOCK        
GET 
      LOAD        
READ 
      TYPE        
SEND 
 INTERPRET       QUERY 
    CREATE        ENTER 
      CODE        
the cent symbol 
 
The only use I've ever found for the cent symbol. The loop index 
and limit were on the data stack. DO and CONTINUE were meant 
to acknowledge Fortran.  
BLOCK manages a number of buffers to minimize disk access. 
LOAD reads source from a 1024-byte block. 1024 was chosen as 
a nice modular amount of disk, and has proven a good choice. 
UPDATE allows a block to be marked and later rewritten to disk, 
when its buffer is needed (or by FLUSH ). It implements virtual 
memory and is concealed in store ( ! ) words.  
 
15
 
BASE allows octal and hex numbers as well as decimal. CONTEXT 
was the first hint of vocabularies and served to isolate editor 
words. STATE distinguished compiling from interpreting. During 
compilation, the count and first 3 characters of a word were 
compiled for later interpretation. Strangely, words could be 
terminated by a special character, an aberration quickly 
abandoned. The fetch operator ( @ ) appeared in many guises, 
since fetching from variables, arrays and disk had to be 
distinguished. DUMP became important for examining memory.  
But most important, there was now a dictionary. Interpret code 
now had a name and searched a linked-list for a match. CREATE 
constructs the classic dictionary entry: 
 
     link to previous entry 
     count and 3 characters 
     code to be executed 
     parameters 
 
 
The code field was an important innovation, since an indirect 
jump was the only overhead, once a word had been found. The 
value of the count in distinguishing words, I learned from the 
compiler writers of Stanford.  
An important class of words appeared with CODE . Machine 
instructions followed in the parameter field. So any word within 
the capability of the computer could now be defined. ;CODE 
specifies the code to be executed for a new class of words, and 
introduced what are now called objects.  
SMUDGE avoided recursion during the interpretation of a 
definition. Since the dictionary would be searched from newest to 
oldest definitions, recursion would normally occur.  
Finally, the return stack appeared. Heretofor, definitions had not 
been nested, or used the data stack for their return address. 
Altogether a time of great innovation in the punctuated evolution 
of Forth.  
 
16
 
The first paper on Forth, an internal Mohasco report, was written 
by Geoff and me [Moore 1970]. It would not be out of place 
today.  
In 1970 Bob ordered a Univac 1108. An ambitious project to 
support a network of leased lines for an order-entry system. I 
had coded a report generator in Forth and was confident I could 
code order-entry. I ported Forth to the 5500 (standalone!) to add 
credibility. But corporate software was COBOL. The marvelous 
compromise was to install a Forth system on the 1108 that 
interfaced with COBOL modules to do transaction processing.  
I vividly recall commuting to Schenectady that winter to borrow 
1107 time 3rd shift. My TR4-A lacked floor and window so it 
became a nightly survival exercise. But the system was an 
incredible success. Even Univac was impressed with its efficiency  
(Les Sharp was project liason). The ultimate measure was 
response time, but I was determined to keep it maintainable 
(small and simple). Alas, an economic downturn led Management 
to cancel the 1108. I still think it was a bad call. I was the first to 
resign.  
1108 Forth must have been coded in assembler. It buffered input 
and output messages and shared the CPU among tasks handling 
each line. Your classic operating system. But it also interpreted 
the input and PERFORMed the appropriate COBOL module. It 
maintained drum buffers and packed/unpacked records. The 
words 
     BUFFER  PREV  OLDEST 
     TASK  ACTIVATE  GET  RELEASE 
 
date from here. BUFFER avoided a disk read when the desired 
block was known empty. PREV (previous) and OLDEST are 
system variables that implement least-recently-used buffer 
management. TASK defines a task at boot time and ACTIVATE 
starts it when needed. GET and RELEASE manage shared 
resources (drum, printer). PAUSE is how a task relinquishes 
control of the CPU.  
 
 
17
 
It is included in all I/O operations and is invisible to transaction 
code. It allows a simple round-robin scheduling algorithm that 
avoids lock-out.  
After giving notice, I wrote an angry poem and a book that has 
never been published. It described how to develop Forth software 
and encouraged simplicity and innovation. It also described 
indirect-threaded code, but the first implementation was at 
NRAO.  
I struggled with the concept of meta-language, language that 
talks about language. Forth could now interpret an assembler, 
that was assembling a compiler, that would compile the 
interpreter. Eventually I decided the terminology wasn't helpful, 
but the term Meta-compile for recompiling Forth is still used.  
NRAO, 1971 
George Conant offered me a position at NRAO (National Radio 
Astronomy Observatory, 15 syllables). I had known him at SAO 
and he liked Ephemeris 4. So we moved to Charlottesville VA and 
spent summers in Tucson AZ when the radio-telescope on Kitt 
Peak was available for maintainance.  
The project was to program a Honeywell 316 minicomputer to 
control a new filter-bank for the 36' millimeter telescope. It had a 
9-track tape and Tektronix storage-tube terminal. George gave 
me a free hand to develop the system, though he wasn't pleased 
with the result. NRAO was a Fortran shop and by now I was 
calling Forth a language. He was right in that organizations have 
to standardize on a single language. Other programmers now 
wanted their own languages.  
Anyhow, I had coded Forth in assembler on the IBM 360/50 
mainframe. Then I cross-compiled it onto the 316. Then I re-
compiled it on the 316 (Although I had a terminal on the 360, 
response time was terrible). The application was easy once the 
system was available. There were two modes of observing, 
continuum and spectral-line. Spectral-line was the most fun, for I 
could display spectra as they were collected and fit line-shapes 
with least-squares [Moore 1973].  
 
18
 
The system was well-received in Tucson, where Ned Conklin was 
in charge. It did advance the state-of-the-art in on-line data 
reduction. Astronomers used it to discover and map inter-stellar 
molecules just as that became hot research.  
Bess Rather was hired to provide on-site support. She had first to 
learn the Forth system and then explain and document it, with 
minimal help from me. The next year I reprogrammed the DDP-
116 to optimize telescope pointing. The next, Bess and I replaced 
the 116 and 316 with a DEC PDP-11.  
The development that made all this possible was indirect-
threaded code. It was a natural development from my work at 
Mohasco, though I later heard that DEC had used direct-threaded 
code in one of their compilers. Rather than re-interpret the text of 
a definition, compile the address of each dictionary entry.  
This improved efficiency for each reference required only 2 bytes 
and an address interpreter could sequence through a definition 
enormously faster. In fact, this interpreter was a 2-word macro 
on the 11: 
     : NEXT   IP )+ W MOV  W )+ ) JMP ; 
Now Forth was complete. And I knew it. I could write code more 
quickly that was more efficient and reliable. Moreover, it was 
portable. I proceeded to recode the 116 pointing the 300' Green 
Bank telescope, and the HP mini that was inaugurating VLBI 
astronomy. George gave me a ModComp and I did Fourier 
transforms for interferometry and pulsar search (64K data). I 
even demonstrated that complex multiply on the 360 was 20% 
faster in Forth than assembler.  
NRAO appreciated what I had wrought. They had an arrangement 
with a consulting firm to identify spin-off technology. The issue of 
patenting Forth was discussed at length. But since software 
patents were controversial and might involve the Supreme Court, 
NRAO declined to pursue the matter. Whereupon, rights reverted 
to me. I don't think ideas should be patentable. Hindsight agrees 
that Forth's only chance lay in the public domain. Where it has 
flourished.  
 
19
 
Threaded-code changed the structure words (such as DO LOOP IF 
THEN ). They acquired an elegant implementation with addresses 
on the data stack during compilation.  
Now each Forth had an assembler for its particular computer. It 
uses post-fix op-codes and composes addresses on the data 
stack, with Forth-like structure words for branching. The 
manufacturer's mnemonics are defined as word classes by ;CODE 
. Might take an afternoon to code. An example is the macro for 
NEXT above.  
Unconventional arithmetic operators proved their value 
 
     M*  */  /MOD  SQRT  SIN.COS  ATAN  EXP  LOG  
 
M* is the usual hardware multiply of 2 16-bit numbers to a 32-bit 
product (arguments, of course, on the data stack). */ follows that 
with a divide to implement rational arithmetic. /MOD returns both 
quotient and remainder and is ideal for locating records within a 
file. SQRT produces a 16-bit result from a 32-bit argument. 
SIN.COS returns both sine and cosine as is useful for vector and 
complex arithmetic (FFT). ATAN is its inverse and has no 
quadrant ambiguity. EXP and LOG were base 2.  
These functions used fixed-point arithmetic - 14 or 30 bits right of 
a binary point for trig, 10 for logs. This became a characteristic of 
Forth since it's simpler, faster and more accurate than floating-
point. But hardware and software floating-point are easy to 
implement.  
I'd like to applaud the invaluable work of Hart [Hart 1978] in 
tabulating function approximations with various accuracies. They 
have provided freedom from the limitations of existing libraries to 
those of us in the trenches.  
The word DOES> appeared (spelled ;: ). It defines a class of 
words (like ;CODE ) by specifying the definition to be interpreted 
when the word is referenced. It was tricky to invent, but 
particularly useful for defining op-codes.  
 
20
 
 
Nonetheless, I failed to persuade Charlottesville that Forth was 
suitable. I wasn't going to be allowed to program the VLA. Of any 
group, 25% like Forth and 25% hate it. Arguments can get 
violent and compromise is rare. So the friendlies joined forces 
and formed Forth, Inc. And that's another story.  
Moral 
The Forth story has the making of a morality play: Persistant 
young programmer struggles against indifference to discover 
Truth and save his suffering comrades. It gets better: Watch 
Forth. Inc go head to head with IBM over a French banking 
system.  
I know Forth is the best language so far. I'm pleased at its 
success, especially in the ultra-conservative arena of Artificial 
Intelligence.  
 
I'm disturbed that people who should, don't appreciate how it 
embodies their own description of the ideal programming 
language.  
But I'm still exploring without license. Forth has led to an 
architecture that promises a wonderful integration of software 
and silicon. And another new programming environment.  
 
 
 
21
References 
[ANS 1991] Draft Proposed ANS Forth, document number 
X3.215-199x, available from Global Engineering Documents, 
2805 McGaw Ave., Irvine CA 92714.  
[Brodie, 1981] Brodie, Leo, Starting FORTH, Englewood Cliffs NJ: 
Prentice-Hall, 1981, ISBN 0 13 842930 8.  
[Hart, 1968] Hart, John F. et al, Computer Approximations. 
Malabar FL: Krieger, 1968; (Second Edition), 1978, ISBN 0 88275 
642 7.  
[Martin, 1987] Martin, Thea, A Bibliography of Forth References, 
3rd Ed, Rochester NY: Institute for Applied Forth Research, 1987, 
ISBN 0 914593 07 2.  
[Moore, 1958] Moore, Charles H. and Lautman, Don A., 
Predictions for photographic tracking stations - APO Ephemeris 4, 
in SAO Special Report No. 11, Schilling G. F., Ed., Cambridge MA: 
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, 1958 March.  
[Moore, 1970] --- and Leach, Geoffrey C., FORTH - A Language 
for Interactive Computing, Amsterdam NY: Mohasco Industries, 
Inc. (internal pub.) 1970.  
[Moore, 1972] --- and Rather, Elizabeth D., The FORTH program 
for spectral line observing on NRAO's 36 ft telescope, Astronomy 
& Astrophysics Supplement Series, Vol. 15, No. 3, 1974 June, 
Proceedings of the Symposium on the Collection and Analysis of 
Astrophysical Data, Charlottesville VA, 1972 Nov. 13-15.  
[Moore, 1980] ---, The evolution of FORTH, an unusual language, 
Byte, 5:8, 1980 August.  
[Rather, 1993] Rather, Elizabeth D., Colburn, Donald R. and 
Moore, Charles H., The Evolution of Forth, in History of 
Programming Languages-II, Bergin T. J. and Gibson, R. G., Ed., 
New York NY: Addison-Wesley, 1996, ISBN 0-201-89502-1.  
[Veis, 1960] Veis, George and Moore, C. H., SAO differential orbit 
improvement program, in Tracking Programs and Orbit 
Determination Seminar Proceedings, Pasadena CA: JPL, 1960 
February 23-26. 
 
#### 
 
 
22
 
 
Charles H Moore 
Education:Born in McKeesport Pennsylvania, 
near Pittsburg, in 1938. He grew up in Flint 
Michigan and was Validictorian of Central High 
School (1956). Granted a National Merit 
scholarship to MIT where he joined Kappa Sigma 
fraternity. Awarded a BS in Physics (1960) with a 
thesis on data reduction for the Explorer XI 
Gamma Ray Satellite. Then went to Stanford 
where he studied mathematics for 2 years (1961).  
Programmer: He learned Lisp from John McCarthy. And Fortran II for the IBM 704 
to predict Moonwatch satellite observations at Smithsonian Astrophysical 
Observatory (1958). Compressed this program into assembler to determine satellite 
orbits (1959). On the other coast, he learned Algol for the Burroughs B5500 to 
optimize electron-beam steering at Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (1962). As 
Charles H Moore and Associates, he wrote a Fortran-Algol translator to support a 
timesharing service (1964). And programmed a real-time gas chromatograph on his 
first minicomputer (1965). Learned Cobol to program order-entry network at 
Mohasco (1968).  
Forth: Chuck invented Forth (1968) and collected his personal software library onto 
an IBM 1130 which was connected to the first graphics terminal he'd seen (IBM 
2250). Soon he used Forth to control the 30ft telescope at Kitt Peak for the National 
Radio Astronomy Observatory (1970).  
     And then helped found Forth, Inc (1973) with $5,000 from an angel investor. For 
the next 10 years, he ported Forth to numerous mini, micro and main-frame 
computers. And programmed numerous applications from data-base to robotics.  
     In 1980, Byte magazine published a special issue on The Forth Language. 
Gregg Williams editorial (2.5MB) provides a rare view of Forth from the outside.  
 
Chips: Finally, he determined to build a Forth chip to realize the architecture 
intrinsic to Forth. He was a founder of Novix, Inc and implemented the C4000 
(1983) as a gate array. He developed and sold kits to promote the chip. A derivative 
was eventually sold to Harris Semiconductor who marketed it as the RTX2000 for 
space applications (1988).  
As Computer Cowboys, he designed the standard-cell Sh-Boom chip (1985), a 
derivative still being marketed. Then he developed his own design tools for the 
MuP21 (1990), which has multiple specialized processors. And the F21 (1993) 
featuring a network interface. He was a founder of the iTv Corp, and designed the 
i21, a similar architecture with enhanced performance (1996) aimed at internet 
applications.  
      Back as Computer Cowboys, Chuck invented colorForth, ported his VLSI design 
tools to it and designed the c18 microcomputer (2001), a simple core that can be 
replicated many times on a chip. Each of his chips has emphasised high 
performance and low power. 
The latest enterprise:  http://www.greenarraychips.com/  and  a 144 core controller. 
