9 
Autotelic Responsive Environments and 
Exceptional Children 
OMAR KHAYY AM MOORE 
In every society there are those who fail to learn the things which are 
held to be essential for carrying out the role of a competent adult, or who 
learn so slowly that they are generally out of phase with the age-graded 
societal demands imposed upon them. Slow learners are apt to be prob-
lems to themselves and to their friends. It is recognized, in scientific 
circles at least, that there are many and diverse causes for failure to 
learn at the socially prescribed rate: brain damage, emotional disturb-
ance, social-cultural deprivation, and the like.1 
What is not perhaps so generally recognized is that prodigies are some-
times out of phase with societal demands also; they tend to make people 
as uncomfortable as retarded children do. Both retarded children and 
prodigies unwittingly violate social expectations-they need help if they 
are to reach their full potential. Both the ultrarapid and the ultraslow are 
exceptional children. The main topic of this paper is to describe some 
methods whereby the acquisition of complex skills can be accelerated, for 
both ultraslow and ultrarapid learners. 
For a number of years my staff and I have been conducting studies of 
early learning in prenursery, nursery, kindergarten and first grades, 
where children are in the process of acquiring complex symbolic skills. 
In the course of this work I formulated the notion of a responsive en-
vironment and decided to act on the assumption that an autotelic respon-
sive environment is optimal for acquiring such skills ( Moore, 1961). I 
will now try to make clear just what this assumption means. 
I have defined a responsive environment as one which satifies the fol-
lowing conditions: 
1 At present there is no way to measure the basic capacities of human beings 
independently of their experiences. Also, there undoubtedly are interactional effects 
between capacities and experiences. It is not assumed here that the retarded child is 
necessarily wanting in "basic capacity." The use here of such terms as "gifted" and 
"retarded" is simply intended to be consonant with standard usage in the fleld. 
For acknowledgements see the end of this chapter. 
PART IV 
169 
O. J. Harvey (ed.), Experience Structure & Adaptability
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 1966
1. It permits the leamer to explore freely. 
2. It informs the leamer immediately about the consequences of 
his actions. 
3. It is self-pacing, i.e., events happen within the environment at 
a rate determined by the leamer. 
4. It permits the leamer to make full use of his capacity for dis-
covering relations of various kinds. 
5. Its structure is such that the leamer is likely to make a series 
of interconnected discoveries about the physical, cultural or 
social world. 
My colleague, Alan Ross Anderson, and I have defined an activity as 
autotelic if engaging in it is clone for its own sake rather than for obtain-
ing rewards or avoiding punishments that have no inherent connection 
with the activity itself ( Anderson and Moore, 1959). The distinction be-
tween autotelic and nonautotelic activities is somewhat vague, but it can 
be applied in some cases without difficulty. Consider tennis playing as 
an example: we cannot play tennis without getting exercise, playing at 
all is a sufficient condition for exercising-so if we play for this reason, 
among others, this is an intrinsic reward. However, if we play for money, 
then the activity is not autotelic, since tennis and money need not go 
together-witness, amateur players. 
In general, setting up a system of extrinsic rewards and punishments 
for engaging in an activity makes the learning environment more com-
plex. As an illustration, consider a child who is leaming to read aloud a 
list of words such as "fat" and "fate," "mat" and "mate," and "rat" and 
"rate," etc.; pretend also that an experimenter rewards or punishes the 
leamer depending upon success or failure. Imagine that the reward is 
candy and that the punishment is mild electric shock. 
Under these circumstances, the child not only has the task of leaming 
to read and pronounce these words, but also that of figuring out the 
relation between candy and electric shock, on the one hand, and his own 
eHorts, on the other. There is no intrinsic relation between the words to 
be leamed or between the letters of the words and the pronunciation, or 
between candy and the sensation of being shocked. It should be easy to 
see that leaming to read and to pronounce words and also to anticipate 
the candy or the shock introduces irrelevancies which may distract or 
confuse the leamer. It is not irrelevant, however, that after the child 
masters the words "fat" and "fate," he may be able to generalize to the 
words "mat" and "mate," orthat he may be able to decipher new words 
not on the list such as "tin" and "tine." Children are pleased, and some 
become ecstatic, when they make discoveries of this kind. Pleasure thus 
derived, unlike the pleasure of eating candy, is inherently related to the 
170 
PART IV 
internal structure of the task ( and more broadly to the structure of the 
spoken and written language )-it is not a pleasure arbitrarily associated 
with the task by the experimenter acting in accord with his own ad hoc 
rule. Of course, sophisticated adults manage to disentangle nonautotelic 
irrelevancies from the essential features of many tasks; but we hold that 
this is not an optimal situation for learning difficult things. 
The distinction between autotelic and nonautotelic activities is some-
times confounded with the issue as to whether rewards and punishments 
are either necessary or sufficient for leaming to occur at all. Our objection 
to the use of extrinsic rewards and punishments is that they make learn-
ing situations unnecessarily complex. In effect, they add relations to be 
learned. However, to grant that, generally, there are intrinsic rewards 
and punishments associated with learning is not to prejudge the ques-
tions as to whether leaming could take place without them. 
As a theoretical matter it is very difficult to see how a leaming experi-
ment could be designed, which would be in any way meaningful to the 
learner, and in point of fact, we assume ( for the sake of conceptual 
clarity vis-a-vis the making of a distinction between leaming and per-
formance, i.e., practicing what has been learned) that rewards and 
punishments, whether intrinsic or extrinsic, are neither necessary nor 
sufficient for the occurrence of learning. But of course no one would want 
to deny that they are highly relevant to the willingness of the leamer to 
continue to learn more and to his desire to practice what he has leamed. 
From what has been said above it is undoubtedly clear that not all 
responsive environments are autotelic, nor are all autotelic activities 
carried out within the context of responsive environments. It is the pur-
pose of this chapter to describe an environment which is both autotelic 
and responsive. I feel that I have been able to contrive an environment 
of this kind, which takes the form of a research laboratory, for young 
children. Some aspects of the autotelic "responsive environments labora-
tory" to be described here are novel; for example, the children play with 
a "talking typewriter." But in order to interpret the behavior of children 
within this environment, it is well to keep the system as a whole steadily 
in view-to see it as a social as weil as a mechanical system. For this 
reason, a physical description of the laboratory is followed by a descrip-
tion of the norms under which the laboratory is operated. A cultural 
characterization of what is to be leamed is counterbalanced by a de-
scription of equipment and procedures which facilitate the learning. No 
one aspect of the environment should be thought of as constituting its 
essence; the laboratory was designed to fulfill all the conditions of an 
autotelic responsive environment. ~e techniques of operation are intri-
cate and presuppose careful planning. And since the description of an 
environment without some reference to the behavior of its denizens is 
CHAPTER 9 
• 
Moore 
171 
incomplete, at the end of this chapter information is given about the back-
ground and laboratory behavior of five children: two "educable retar-
dates," one child on the borderline between the "educable retardate" and 
the "dull normal," one who is on the borderline between the "very bright" 
and the "gifted," and one "gifted" child ( to use standard terminology). 
The emphasis in this paper on exceptional children should not be con-
strued as a Iack of interest in those who are within the normal range. As 
a matter of fact, most of my work has been with normal children. How-
ever, extreme cases are sometimes illuminating. I hope that this is true 
here. 
To return to the problems of those who do not meet the age-graded 
demands imposed upon them, the relevance of the research reported 
here on retarded youngsters is patent: anything which may help them 
become more competent is of educational interest. On the other hand, 
it is not at all obvious that accelerating prodigies is a socially useful thing 
to do; society seems to be organized so as to slow them down, if anything. 
However, a case can be made for the acceleration of prodigies. Indica-
tions will be given as to how prodigies can develop some of their own 
potentialities while helping other children in the development of theirs. 
LABORATORY-PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION2 
The Responsive Environments Labaratory is located at Harnden Hall 
Country Day School, Hamden, Connecticut, a few yards from the Harn-
den Hall preschool classrooms. It consists of two adjoining prefabricated 
metal sheds, each 20' x 40', set on concrete foundations. One shed is 
windowless and the other has windows only in a small office area; they 
are centrally heated and air conditioned. The sheds are as simple as 
modern construction permits; they are made up of one-foot modular sec-
tions, have exposed ceiling and wall beams, and so on. In Shed 1 are five 
portable soundproofed booths, 7' x 7' x 7', lined along two 40' walls, leav-
ing a middle aisle as weil as small aisles between booths for observation 
through windows with one-way glass. Through a face and by-pass system 
the booths are separately air conditioned. One booth has camera ports 
and built-in lighting equipment so that sound motion pictures can be 
made on a semi-automatic basis. Shed 1 also contains a desk, a conference 
table and a secretary's desk. 
2 The Responsive Environments Laboratory described here served as the model for 
four other laboratories. Two of the laboratories operate under my personal direction 
-the others work cooperatively with me. 
In order to avoid confusion, everything that is said here pertains to the Harnden 
Hall laboratory although the children discussed in the section ( below) "Children in 
a Responsive Environment," did not necessarily come to this laboratory. 
172 
PART IV 
A central two-way communication system permits the staff to speak 
or Iisten either at the main console or at the booths themselves. 
The interior of Shed 1 gives an impression of psychological warmth 
despite its spartau construction. Perhaps this is because the booths, which 
are its most prominent feature, have a natural wood finish. ( Booth in-
teriors are finished with off-white, sound-absorbent tiles.) 
Shed 2 is divided into three areas separated by natural wood partitions: 
a small classroom, an office-conference room which also contains a booth 
for testing, and a bathroom. From the standpoint of construction the 
16' x 20' classroom is an over-sized booth. Like the booths it is sound-
proofed, air conditioned, equipped with one-way glass, finished in natural 
wood ( exterior) and natural wood and sound-absorbent tile ( interior). 
Again there is provision for the making of motion pictures on a semi-
automatic basis. Shed 2, like Shed 1, is warm and pleasant in emotional 
tone; together they form one functional unit. 
This laboratory was designed in accord with one overriding objective, 
that of making it conducive to carrying out autotelic activities by young 
children: it is simple, distinct, and separate. a) Simple in the sense that 
a game board or a playing field is devoid of irrelevancies, b) distinct in 
the sense that a playing field has clear-cut boundary lines, and c) separate 
in the sense that a grandstand sets barriers between participants and 
spectators. 
The parts of the laboratory used by children are windowless; windows 
are an open invitation to digress. The absence of windows also increases 
the children's sense of privacy. Inspection of Figure 1 makes it clear that 
the booth interiors are free of the attention-grabbing pattems and whirli-
gigs so typical of nursery and elementary classrooms. The soundproofing 
mufßes irrelevant noises and further enhances a sense of privacy. The 
buildings are air conditioned in order to produce a constant comfortable 
enxironment; it makes no difference whether it is raining or snowing, 
sunny or cloudy, the generallaboratory atmosphere is invariant. One-way 
windows, camera ports, semi-automatic motion-picture controls, and the 
like, make it possible to observe and document children's behavior with-
out intruding upon them. 
It is important to note that children spend only a small fraction of their 
day in this laboratory. It is not suggested here that gay designs and in-
triguing novelties are not appropriate in many other contexts. 
LABORATORY -AUTOTELIC OPERATION AL NORMS 
Behavioral scientists take it for granted that human organizations func-
tion within the context of sets of interlocking social norms; this is cer-
tainly true of the Responsive Environments Labaratory as a social organ-
C HA PT E R 9 
• 
Moore 
173 
Figure 1. Automated Booth, showing interior and exterior 
ization. By operatioruzl norms I mean the social rules which govern the 
relations between Iabaratory activities, on the one hand, and the school, 
the parents, and children, on the other. 
One problern with which I have been concerned in constructing a new 
environment is that of being explicit about its normative aspects. A funda-
mental part of the task of creating a special environment for carrying 
on activities autotelically is to differentiate these activities from other 
important aspects of children's lives. 
It is worth noting that, in addition to the educational problems men-
tioned at the outset, all, or nearly all, human societies make provision for 
engaging in autotelic activities. This is not only a matter of specifying 
times and places for these activities-the basketball court at game time, 
the theater at 8:40-but it is also a matter of creating and observing 
norrns which safeguard these activities as autotelic. For example, one is 
not supposed to bribe a basketball player to shave points. The general 
public reacts with moral indignation whenever it is discovered that a 
norm of this kind has been violated. A distinction should be drawn be-
174 
PART IV 
tween the norms which surround or protect an activity in its autotelic 
status and the rules of the activity itself. For example in bridge, onlookers 
are forbidden to kibitz, but this injunction is not a rule of the game of 
bridge. More generally, it is always possible to relax the norms which 
make an activity autotelic while leaving the rules of the "game" intact. 
Conversely, autotelic conventions can remain invariant while the rules of 
the game are changed. 
With respect to the Responsive Environments Laboratory, every effort 
is made to maintain a setting in which "kibitzing" by parents and friends 
of the children is virtually impossible [ there is a rule against their visit-
ing3 and the physical arrangement ensures privacy vis-a-vis the "signif-
icant persons" in the child's life-more technically, the "significant others," 
in the sense of Mead ( 1934), are excluded]. 
The staff seeks to make the laboratory a child-centered milieu. Even 
the introduction of a child to the laboratory is done by another child 
rather than an adult. A child guide takes the newcomer through the 
laboratory ( equipment is turned off; the introduction to its operation is 
made later). Sometimes three introductory visits are needed before a 
newcomer seems to be at ease, although one visit is sufficient for most 
children. The guide also explains some of the relevant rules: 1) that he 
need not come to the laboratory unless he wants to, 2) that he can leave 
whenever he wishes, 3) that he must leave when his time is up (SO 
minutes maximum stay), 4) that he need not explain his coming or going, 
5) that he go to the booth to which he is assigned for the day, 6) that if 
he says he wants to leave, or starts to leave, he can come back again the 
next day (but not the same day). Newcomers have the opportunity to 
explore every nook and corner of the laboratory. The guide watches this 
activity but does not interfere. After a while newcomers seem to feel 
satisfied that they have seen everything and are ready to leave. 
It should be obvious that the role of the guide requires the ability to 
communicate clearly and to exercise self-restraint. The task of being a 
guide is assigned to gifted children; this is but one of many special tasks 
which they are given. 
The laboratory staff is carefully instructed about treating the children. 
The import of the rules is that we want children to initiate activities. The 
staff is to respond to them rather than to teach them. Those who are in 
daily interaction with the children are not permitted to see the back-
3 As a matter of practice, parents are allowed one visit per school year. The visit 
is arranged so that they do not see their own child in a booth and the child does not 
see his parents in the laboratory. However, the laboratory has many visitors-roughly 
600 in the past three years. Most visitors are either behavioral scientists or profes-
sianal educators. 
C H A PT Ei R 9 
• 
Moore 
175 
ground information gathered by the project's professional staff; for ex-
ample, the operating personnel do not know I.Q. test scores. Operating 
personnel are randomly assigned to booths every day. (There are two 
kinds of booths, automated and nonautomated. In nonautomated booths 
an adult is with the child. Since adults do not teach, we prefer to cail 
them "booth assistants." 4 The members of the staff who are professional 
teachers5 serve as supervisors of the laboratory as a whole, as weil as 
booths.) No booth assistant should be uniquely associated with any given 
booth and its equipment, or with any particular child. ( Children, as weil 
as booth assistants, are randomly assigned to booths each day.6 ) The 
conduct of the operating staff is monitored by a supervisor who can talk 
directly to the booth assistant without interrupting a child. This is espe-
cially important in training new booth assistants. ( The foregoing remarks 
are applicable to nonautomated booths. At present there is one fully 
automated booth, which requires no adult in the booth with the child; 
further details about automation appear below.) 
The Harnden Hall children leave their classrooms ( nursery, kinder-
garten and first grade) to come to the laboratory every school day. When 
4 Booth assistants generally have been the wives of graduate students. ( This means 
we have to train new assistants quite frequently because their husbands graduate.) 
One of the qualifications for the job of booth assistant is a strong aesthetic sense. 
Teacher training is not necessary. The importance assigned to aesthetics is perhaps 
a prejudice an my part. I assume that those who are artistically inclined are likely to 
find the subtle workings of children' s minds to be of continuing interest, and that 
they are not apt to impose their views an children. This assumption may be un-
warranted but it has resulted in the selection of remarkably empathic, nondirective 
and patient booth assistants. 
5 It has been my experience that professional teachers who work out weil as Iabara-
tory supervisors have both the ability to to empathize with children and to organize 
efficiently. The role of Iabaratory supervisor is a critical one for the successful em-
ployment of the methods we are considering. It is in this role that the teacher, as a 
professional, can use her training and experience to good advantage. The seasoned 
professional teacher can draw on her years of experience to do such things as spot 
the child who is ill and should be harne, or to analyze the hitches which arise in the 
process of performing a task which requires nicely coordinated effort on the part of 
the staff. 
6 Of the 102 children that I have studied there have been a few who, at times, 
have responded so much better to a particular booth assistant, or to the nonautomated 
equipment, or to the automated instrumentation than they did to the other condi-
tions, that the Iabaratory departed from the usual procedure of random assignment 
until these children were able to play with pleasure wherever they found themselves. 
lt will be made clear in the section "Children in a Responsive Environment" that it 
is important to take individual variability into account. 
176 
PART IV 
it is a child's turn to come, his classroom teacher7 lets him know. He then 
either accepts or rejects his turn for the day. If he decides to come he 
takes his "pass" and goes by hirnself the few yards to the laboratory 
where he is checked in and goes to the booth assistant to whom he has 
been assigned. One of the most remarkable things about this environ-
ment is that, day in and day out, children elect to come to it. Sometimes 
several months go by without one child of the current group ( which num-
bers 60) refusing his turn. However, it frequently happens that a child 
does not want to leave when his time is up, in which case he is gently 
picked up and told that another child is waiting. 
From what has been said it should be clear that the adults the child 
encounters in the laboratory are not the significant adults in bis life-they 
arenot his mother, father, grandmother, etc. Those significant adults who 
ordinarily are in the best position to reward or punish him have no way 
of knowing how he spends his time in the laboratory on a day-to-day 
basis. It is therefore unlike Little League Baseball, with relatives and 
friends observing from the sidelines; the laboratory time represents 30 
minutes away from the significant persons in his life. 
To "cut off" 30 minutes from the rest of the day in this fashion does 
not necessarily mean that the experience is without consequences for the 
remainder of the child's day. Just as most autotelic activities make use of 
cultural objects (Anderson and Moore, 1957; Moore, 1958; Moore and 
Anderson, 1963; Moore and Lewis, 1963), which are formally isomorphic 
with significant features of many serious activities [ as Anderson and I 
have argued before (Moore and Anderson, 1962): a) puzzles, b) games 
of chance, c) games of strategy, and d) aesthetic objects are formally 
similar to a) puzzling situations, b) the aleatory features of experience, 
c) cooperative and competitive undertakings, and d) the affective side 
of living] so, too, it is possible to design autotelic responsive environ-
ments in which a child can play with cultural objects, which though not 
ordinarily treated autotelically, are still structurally isomorphic with 
selected aspects of the world outside the laboratory. 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE CURRICULUM 
As remarked above, a responsive environment is so structured that the 
learner is likely to make a series of interconnected discoveries about the 
7 The regular classroom teacher, like the laboratory supervisor, is important to the 
successful employment of these methods in the context of a school. She must be 
flexible enough to organize her own classroom activities so that the short individual 
trips to the laboratory do not unsettle the general routine. Her attitudes toward early 
learning are also important. 
CHAPTER 9 
• 
Moore 
177 
physical, cultural or social world. A responsive environment may occur 
naturally, or it may be planned. In this chapter the main interest is in 
the latter, i.e., environments that are artificially contrived to achieve 
certain objectives. Therefore, it is essential to decide what the learners 
are to be exposed to in the way of a curriculum. It will be explained in 
the section, "Procedures and Equipment," that there is a wide range of 
subjects which can be learned in a responsive environments laboratory. 
Recently, and for the past several years, attention has been focused on 
acquiring languages, especially languages in their written form. From the 
perspective of a cultural analysis, the topic is a naturallanguage and the 
children's task is to learn how to handle it more effectively. It was taken 
for granted that the children would already be able to use their native 
tongue ( to date, most of the work has been done with English). My 
objective, then, was to design an environment ( within the microworld of 
the booths) in which children would learn another form of their lan-
guage: its written form. This enterprise presupposes that, in the broadest 
sense, spoken English and written English are isomorphic. From this 
standpoint, we can think of written English as visible speech and spoken 
English as audible writing. It is true that written English is a very im-
perfect phonetic transcription of speech; nevertheless, in planning this 
environment, I decided to work on the assumption that the spoken and 
written forms of English are sufficiently isomorphic8 to enable children 
to find for themselves some set of rules which would permit them to 
move back and forth between these two linguistic forms. Certainly, 
spoken and written English are more nearly isomorphic than are spoken 
English and written German or spoken Chinese and written Chinese. 
One of the obvious differences between spoken and written English is 
that they are handled through two distinct sensory systems: auditory and 
visual. There are also social differences between the two linguistic forms 
in their appropriate occasions of use. But young children do not know this 
and perhaps by constructing an environment in which writing is on a par 
with speaking and reading with listening, it might be possible to avoid 
some of the more unfortunate consequences of our educational system; 
a system which tends to produce speakers who have difficulty in writing, 
8 By an isomorphism I mean something like the vague, usual use of the word in 
mathematics. Two structures are said to be "isomorphic" if there is a one-to-one 
correspondence between their ·elements which "preserves order" in some appropriate 
sense, i.e., which preserves corresponding relations defined on each structure. In 
practice we have to define isomorphisms, one at a time, for each structure in which 
we are interested. But the idea is at least sufficiently clear so that we can usually teil 
when we have one. 
178 
PART IV 
and tongue-tied writers. There also are avid readers who find it almost 
impossible to write-and good listeners seem to be in short supply all the 
way around. 
I should like to make it clear ( once and for all, I might add) that the 
Responsive Environments Labaratory is not just a place where children 
learn to read: approximately equal emphasis is given to speaking, writing, 
listening and reading. The underlying rationale is not only to treat speak-
ing and listening, on the one band, and writing and reading, on the other, 
as correlative processes, nor is it only to treat these two pairs of correla-
tives as elements of a four-cell matrix of linguistic relations. It is also 
to develop higher-order symbolic skills which are superordinate to these 
relations. 
Speaking and writing are active processes and listening and reading are 
passive ones. An attempt is made to tie each of these four activities ( or 
passivities) to the others, not only maintaining a balance between active 
and passive processes, but also avoiding the pitfalls of under-emphasizing 
or over-emphasizing any one of them at the expense of the others. The 
overall objective is to develop higher-order intellectual abilities which 
may be thought of as rauging over this complex of linguistic processes. 
In order to determine whether such overall abilities are developing and, 
at the same time, to facilitate their development, it is necessary to set 
some task for the children which involves all four of the processes. There 
are many jobs which would do the work. The one which was chosen as a 
part of the Iabaratory curriculum was publishing a newspaper. The first 
grade class publishes its own newspaper ( there are also contributions by 
nursery and kindergarten children) and the four processes ( speaking, 
writing, listening and reading) are subordinate to the superordinate skill 
of publishing a newspaper. A child may begin a newspaper story by 
speaking into a microphone; later, he will type his own story from dicta-
tion-this means that he goes directly from the spoken word to the written 
word. After he has completed his transcription he may then read it criti-
cally before turning it over to one of the other children who is an editor. 
The editor first reads the typescript, perhaps reading it aloud to a fellow 
editor, and suggested changes are then discussed with the author. Next 
step: the children type the story on stencils along with other stories. 
Finally, they mimeograph, collate, staple and distribute the paper. If they 
wish to discuss the newspaper in their regular classroom, they may do so 
( with their teacher' s permission). It is also permissible to take the news-
paper home where it is sometimes subject to further discussion. 
It can be seen, then, that publishing a paper, as the children do it, is 
an achievement which embraces speaking, writing, listening and reading. 
This activity provides guide lines on the basis of which the children set 
standards for spelling, punctuation, intelligibility, general relevance and 
CHAPTER 9 
• 
Moore 
179 
interest. The emergence of such a higher-order skill helps give to reading 
and writing the same kind of direction and meaning that listening and 
speaking have by virtue of their ordinary social uses. 
Publishing a newspaper is an activity which ordinarily would be be-
yond the ability of a first grade class. Permitting the children themselves 
to set the standards for the newspaper seems like a risky educational 
practice; however, here again is another vital role for gifted children to 
play. They are capable of serving as editors and coordinating the efforts 
of the other children, which allows them to make extensive use of their 
intellectual abilities within the social context of their peer group. 
By the time the laboratory children are able to publish a newspaper 
the subordinate skills have been leamed weil enough so that the learning 
problern has been replaced by the practicing problem. There are many 
intrinsic rewards and punishments associated with tuming out a news-
paper. To be sure, when the proud parents get copies there may be 
additional extrinsic rewards and punishments-but by this time it is too 
late for anyone to interfere with the leaming of the subordinate skills. 
The actual work of tuming out the newspaper is done under the super-
vision of a teacher who introduces the children to the equipment ( copy 
aid, mimeograph, Thermofax, etc.) and guides their first efforts. This takes 
place within the small classroom in the laboratory, already mentioned. 
This classroom is called the "transfer room." What this name connotes is 
the transfer of skills acquired individually within the privacy of the booths 
to social activities. Just as we make explicit provision for the introduction 
of children to the laboratory with the help of gifted child guides, we also 
make explicit provision for relating laboratory activities to outside inter-
ests through the help of our more precocious children who serve as 
editors. The children are very proud of their newspaper-everyone con-
tributes in bis own way and most importantly it really is theirs. Several 
articles taken from the fourth issue of the paper are included in order 
to give the reader some notion of the general Ievel of competence of the 
children. (See Figure 2). 
In many schools the curriculum for the first six grades tends to treat 
reading and writing as separate subjects. Writing in the sense of compos-
ing original stories is yet another subject. Spelling and particularly punc-
tuation are handled as special topics; and some punctuation marks ( say), 
the ampersand, asterisk, colon, or semicolon, are entities whose appear-
ance on the printed page remain a mystery to many even beyond the 
Ph.D. dissertation. The laboratory curriculum represents an attempt to 
deal with these skills and topics as part of an integrated complex of 
linguistic processes. In the next section we describe some procedures and 
equipment by which children can be led to such excellence. 
180 
PART IV 
FURRY AND NT.rrTY 
by Venn Moore 
Once upon a time there were two 
squirrels named Furry and Nutty. 
They were very cute squirrels; they 
would scamper up and down the trees 
to play. Also they would do cute 
tricks on telephone wires. These 
squirrels liked acorns, peanuts and 
walnuts. At night they hunted for 
food and dug a hole to store it in 
a secret place. They lived in holes 
in trees; sometimes they moved away 
to build a different kind of home. 
One spring they had a baby and 
named it Bushy. The reason they 
wanted to name it Busbey was that 
they lived in bushy trees and they 
had bushy tails. 
One day when they were doing tricks 
on the telephone wires, it was 
stormy and it lighteninged. It 
caught on to the wire, and Furry was 
electrocuted. Poor Purry was dead! 
Poor Bushy and Nutty were alone. 
From that time Nutty and Bushy were 
more careful than they used to be. 
TWO FIRES 
by Jeffrey Batter 
THE PEABODY MUSEUM 
by Hary Ellen Burns 
During vacation I went to the 
Peabody Museum with my Daddy 
and my brother, Joseph. We saw 
a big dinosaur, and it was so big 
that Joseph had to look up. In the 
same room we saw the largest turtle 
in the whole wide world. 
OUR TRIP TO BOSTON 
by Lisa Whitcomb 
We went to Boston and when we were 
driving we had to stop to have 
supper. We stayed with some friends. 
When we got there, it was ten o'-
clock-- way past our bedtime. 
We woke up Mom and botbered her. 
I mostly watched TV. Daddy watched 
TV with me, and Mom talked with 
Ellie Priess. When Daddy was not 
watchinB TV, he was talking to Uncle 
Al. We had fun! 
MY LOOSE TOOTH 
by Kathy Johnstone 
I have a loose tooth and it is my 
first one. Whwn it come out I will 
put it in a glass of water and in 
Once when we were going to school, 
the morning I will find a quarter 
there was a fire on Laurel Road. 
under my pillow. 
When the fire started, the children 
The fairy will leave the money for 
were already outside, and the mother me. I may buy some groceries with 
was badly hurt. On March 31, my 
it for my mother. 
brother lit a fire beside the garag~ 
The firemen next door put it out. 
THE FUNNY BUNNY 
by Shirley Horne 
If I were a bunny, 
I'd be funny. 
I'd earn money 
By selling honey. 
In the sunny 
It would get all runny. 
Isn't that funny? 
Figure 2. Selections from the "Lab Record" 
CHAPTER 9 
• 
Moore 
THE WOODPECKER 
by Tamara Flakins 
I saw somebody peck 
And did wreck, 
But I never saw anybody smack 
Someone in the back. 
( continued) 
181 
The boys and girls in Kindergarten are one year younger than we are, 
They all made up their stories, and then they typed them for our 
newspaper, We showed them how to cut a stencil. "Lab Record" Editors, 
THE ELEPHANT 
by Spencer Taylor 
Once upoa a time in the far away 
land lived a little elephant named 
Timmy, He ran away, He almost got 
run over. 
THE HAUNTED HOUSE 
by Susan Connelly 
The haunted house has ghosts and 
goblins and demons. It's scarey to 
go in, and you might get killed, 
SUSAN SQUIRTED ME 
by Pam Malley 
My friend Susan squirted me with 
water on my new dress, Susan had to 
put her head down. 
MY BIRTHDAY 
by Richard Wright 
May 3 is my birthday, I will blow 
out the candles on my birthday cake, 
I want a fire engine, 
MOTHER 
by Helen Greenspan 
Hother is well now, The cast is 
off her leg. Now she can drive me 
to school, I am glad. 
SOLDIERS 
by Jonathan Cahn 
This is fun, We play combat 
soldiers, Davie and Stevie break 
through our team, We break through 
their team, 
The Nursery school children just started to type their stories for the 
"Lab Record" and we helped them type the stencils, The Editors. 
PAM 
by Melanie Canadeo 
Pam, you could be a nurse some-
day, But when you be a nurse, you 
can not scream like you do now, 
A MONKEY 
by Brian Syomes 
I saw a monkey feeding peanuts 
to lots of people, 
I LIKE SCHOOL 
FISHING 
by Larry Batter 
I went fishing with my Father and 
my brother and we caught a goldfish 
and a whale! 
PI RATES 
by Charles Stainton 
Larry and Charles are pirates, 
When my baby brother sleeps, my 
sister and I play outside, 
by Carissa Whitcomb 
KITES 
by David Black 
I paint at Sharon's house, I 
like Ricky, I like God, He makes us 
I went to the ball field and flew 
healthy, 
kites, He didn't get to stay long, 
Figure 2 ( continued) 
182 
PART IV 
PROCEDURES AND EQUIPMENT 
Useful as the idea of an autotelic responsive environment proved to be 
in constructing the laboratory and in laying down guide lines for its 
operation, it still did not have a sharp enough cutting edge to be of much 
help in planning the procedures and equipment to be used by children 
within the microworld of laboratory booths. I found that it was worth-
while, as an aid to my thinking at least, to make additional assumptions 
of a psychological kind about personality and human learning processes 
in order to get a purchase on the problern of designing practical pro-
cedures and equipment. Fortunately, I had been working for a number 
of years on the more general problems of formulating a theory of social 
interaction. This theory is still in an unsatisfactory state; nonetheless, the 
procedures and equipment described here are an application of some of 
its fundamental ideas. It lies beyond the scope of this paper to present 
even as much of the theory as has been worked out, but for present 
purposes it probably will be sufficient to say that this theory builds on 
the work of George Herbert Mead ( 1934), or, more accurately, it builds 
upon his work as I understand it. It also takes some account of the sub-
ject matter of other important psychological and social psychological 
theories. 
Phase 1. Free Exploration. Let us turn our attention now to the interior 
of a booth and imagine that a child, already introduced to the laboratory 
in the manner previously explained, is ready for his first booth session. 
For convenience of exposition, pretend that he is to begin learning in an 
automated booth. ( The reader may find it helpful to re-examine Figure 
1 which shows a 2-year 11-month old child sitting at E.R.E.,9 or what the 
laboratory children call a "talking typewriter.") The booth assistant helps 
him get into the elevated chair ( because some children do not like to sit 
in a high chair, in the laboratory we call it an "elevated chair"), turns 
one switch, teils the child to enjoy hirnself and to raise his hand if he 
wants anything. Without further comment the assistant leaves the booth, 
closes the booth door and then goes to a control panel ( shown in Figure 
1) mounted on the exterior wall of the booth, presses appropriate but-
tons and begins to watch the child through a one-way window located 
just below the control panel. 
The child is alone in the booth confronted with what may appear to 
him to be a typewriter with colored keys. (Prior to entering the booth 
9 E.R.E., the Edison Responsive Environment, is the product of a three-year col-
laborative effort with an engineering team of the Thomas A. Edison Research Labara-
tory of West Orange, New Jersey, a division of the McGraw-Edison Company. 
CHAPTER 9 
• 
Moore 
183 
his fingemails have been painted with non-toxic water colors. There is 
a match between the nail colors and the colored typewriter keys so that 
striking keys with matehing fingers constitutes correct fingering. Also, 
there is a noticeable difference in pressure between the left-hand and 
the right-hand keys to help the child orient his hands. Behind the key-
bo&rd is a lucite housing which permits him to see everything in front 
of him, but which keeps his fingers out of the moving parts of the type-
writer.) Whether or not he believes that the object in front of him is 
some kind of a typewriter, he is in fact in charge of much more than an 
electric typewriter-he is at the controls of a computer in-put and read-
out device, three distinct memory systems, an audio-recording system, 
and two visual exhibition systems, all of which are integrated by a cen-
tral electronic logic and control system. Nevertheless, the operation of 
this complex instrument is under his management. 
Of course, not all of the abilities of the instrument are needed for the 
child's first session. The booth assistant has set E.R.E. in what is called 
Phase 1, Free Exploration, i.e., the instrument is set so that the child can 
explore the keyboard freely. Whenever a key is struck, E.R.E. types the 
letter (in large type) and pronounces the name of the character that has 
been typed. ( The "reaction time" of E.R.E. to a key operation averages 
I/10th of a second.) When a key has been depressed and released no 
key can be operated for about one second; this gives E.R.E. time to pro-
nounce the name of the character. No two keys can be depressed 
simultaneously; this makes it impossible to jam keys or to garble pro-
nunciations. The moment any given pronunciation is completed, the key-
board is automatically unlocked so that the child can go on exploring. 
The keyboard of E.R.E. is, essentially, a full standard one. ( It has some 
additional keys which are needed for foreign languages-E.R.E. can be 
switched to any of six languages and special accent marks are provided-
the extra keys are covered when not in use.) Because the standard key-
board has both upper and lower case, and the young child probably does 
not know this, there are small lights next to the upper and lower case 
keys to show which case is operative. If the child were to play by hirnself 
with an ordinary typewriter he might get "stuck" at the end of a line 
because he does not know about the carriage return. E.R.E. automatically 
returns the carriage at the end of a line even though there is a carriage 
return key whose function the child will catch on to sooner or later. His 
exploration will not be interrupted by using up a sheet of paper; E.R.E. 
has a fan-folded tape of paper several thousand feet long. It should also 
be mentioned that E.R.E. is rugged; it withstands the pounding it some-
times receives. 
Returning to the hypothetical child, the intriguing question is: What 
will he do when he is alone at the keyboard of the "talking typewriter''? 
184 
PART IV 
Until be strikes tbe first key be does not even know tbat tbe typewriter 
talks. ( A motion picture was made of the first few minutes of a normal 
2-year 7 -montb old boy' s initial exploration of a keyboard (Moore and 
Anderson, 1960). This film sbows nonautomated equipment witb a bootb 
assistant carrying out tbe various functions performed by E.R.E. Tbis 
boy's bebavior is typical of many normal cbildren.) One tbing we can 
say witb near certainty about our bypotbetical child is that he will not 
sit there for a half an hour simply looking at the instrument. Only one 
child out of the 102 children whom I have studied sat for as Iong as 10 
minutes before striking a key. Most children begin immediately, using 
fingers, fists, elbows and an occasional nose-if tbe instrument were not 
jam-proof, tbe game would be halted in less tban a minute, or if the key-
board were not locked during pronunciations, E.R.E. would babble. 
There are some children wbo proceed in a very thoughful way; looking, 
listening, repeating what tbe instrument says, reflecting-in brief, they 
explore systematically. Some notice at once the relation between their 
colored fingemails and the colored keys and painstakingly match fingers 
to keys. If, at first, a finger is wayward, they use their other band to guide 
it. Some cbildren go on exploring for tbeir full 30 minutes; otbers raise 
tbeir hands and want to leave after a few minutes. 
In order to guess wbat our bypothetical child is likely to do, it would 
be necessary to posit a great deal more about him. I will make one over-
all comment based on my experience with the Iabaratory children: he will 
like bis first session and be will want to return to play with this fascinat-
ing "toy." 
A daily record is kept of each child's performance in the laboratory. 
Some parts· of this cumulative record are quite objective. E.R.E., for 
example, keeps track of the time the child spends in the booth and his 
stroke count, i.e., the number of times he depresses keys. Other aspects of 
the record are less objective, for instance, booth assistants' notes about a 
cbild's attitude. Tbere is a daily staff conference at which each child's 
performance is reviewed. It is the laboratory supervisor's responsibility 
to decide when a cbild is beginning to lose interest in any given phase 
of the curriculum. There are children who will go on happily in Phase 1 
for a number of weeks, whereas others' interest in this phase declines 
rapidly after as few as two sessions. Sooner or later every child's interest 
in Phase 1 will wane ( at least every child the laboratory has encountered 
behaved this way) and before bis interest completely disappears, he must 
be shifted to the next pbase. If a child were permitted to completely 
exhaust bis interest, he might very weil not return to the laboratory. 
Quite clearly, tbe decision as to when to shift a child from one phase to 
anotber still is a matter of experience and judgment. In the very early 
days of this research I bad to make this decision. Later, I trained super-
CHAPTER 9 
• 
Moore 
185 
visors who now are fully capable of perfonning this task. For the most 
part, the more objective indicators of declining interest are a sufficient 
basis for judgment; for example, a child's sessions become markedly 
shorter and his strake count drops off. Sometimes a child will simply say 
that he is tired of what he is doing-his opinion counts. As a general rule, 
it is safer to err on the side of shifting the child too soon. It will be made 
clear below that explicit provision is made for regressing from advanced 
phases to more elementary ones, and since no significant persans in his 
life are there to see this regression, there is little stigma attached to it. 
All the children whom I have studied have regressed from time to time. 
The children call Phase 1 ( Free Exploration) "plain typing." It is not 
unusual for even a gifted child to say with a little laugh, "Today I just 
want to plain type." 
Phase 2. Search and Match. When the laboratory supervisor makes the 
decision to shift a child from Phase 1 to the next phase, the learner re-
ceives no warning; he has to discover for hirnself that he is playing a 
new game with new rules. Phase 2 is called "Search and Match." In order 
to understand what this game involves, let us examine Figure 3. 
Figure 3. E.R.E. ( The Edison Responsive Environment ) or "Talking Typewriter" 
!his is a close-up view of E.R.E. "opened up." The lucite housing is 
ra1sed part way to show how the booth assistant can remove the child's 
paper. There is a picture of a barn on a rear-view projection screen ( the 
open panel to its right shows where the projector is loaded). To the left 
186 
PART IV 
of the barn is an illuminated reetangular window ( exhibitor eards ean be 
inserted into this spaee through the open door on top). On the upper 
right side of E.R.E. is a triangular shaped open panel; this exposes eon-
trols for some of E.R.E.'s funetions whieh are set by the booth assistant. 
In Phase 2 the exhibitor system on whieh the pieture of a barn is pro-
jeeted is not used. The only new thing about this phase, in terms of visual 
display, is the use of the reetangular window. In this window eharaeters 
ean be exhibited in four different wa ys: 1 ) one eharaeter at a time with 
a red arrow pointing down to it; 2) a eumulative exhibit in whieh the 
red arrow points to a newly exposed eharaeter while all previously ex-
posed eharaeters on the same line remain visible; 3) all eharaeters on 
one line are visible with the red arrow pointing to the one to be typed; 
and 4) all characters on the four lines in the reetangular window are 
exposed, again with the red arrow pointing to the one to be typed. 
In Phase 2, unlike 1, E.R.E. takes the initiative in starting the game. 
All typewriter eharaeters appear in the reetangular exhibitor window one 
at a time in random order. When a eharaeter appears with the red arrow 
pointing to it, E.R.E. automatically locks the keyboard with the excep-
tion of the appropriate matehing key and pronounces the name of the 
eharacter. If the child wants to get a response from E.R.E., he must find 
the right key. As soon as he strikes the matehing key which causes the 
eharaeter to be typed, E.R.E. repronounces the eharaeter and then eovers 
it up before exposing a new one. The game becomes a little more diffi-
eult when the new character is in a different case. Under this circum-
stanee, E.R.E. first says "upper case" or "lower case" ( as the ease may 
be), the appropriate case light fliekers, and the keyboard must be 
changed to the proper ease ( when thi~ is done, E.R.E. again pronounees 
it) before the matehing character is named by E.R.E. and can be struck 
by the ehild. It should be mentioned that if a ehild is fast enough at 
pressing the appropriate key, he can cause E.R.E. to speed up by omitting 
redundant pronunciations. If a child's attention has wandered so that he 
missed the first pronunciation, or if he has forgotten it, there is a repeat 
eycle which the booth assistant can start, using a delay appropriate for 
the given ehild. A dial can be set which will delay E.R.E.'s repronuncia-
tion in order to give the ehild a ehance to speak first. E.R.E. is not 
restricted to pronouncing the names of eharacters-it also ean give 
phonetie values for them ( or, for the linguistie purist, hints as to phonetie 
values ). 
What has just been described is the siruplest version of Phase 2, Seareh 
and Match. As interest wanes in this first version of Phase 2, the booth 
assistant (following the laboratory supervisor's instructions) can make 
the game more ehallenging in many ways. For example, the assistant can 
eause ( by pushing buttans or setting dials) E.R.E. to omit its first pro-
CHAPTER 9 
• 
Moore 
187 
nunciation of characters, or the second, or both. The window display 
can be changed to show characters cumulatively, one line at a time, or 
four lines at a time. A blank card can be used in the window so that the 
matc~ is solely between pronunciations and keys. 
I have found that adults, as weil as children, like to play with E.R.E. 
in both Phase 1, Free Exploration, and the various versions of Phase 2, 
Search and Match. These activities are especially interesting to adults 
when E.R.E. is switched to a foreign language-one unfamiliar to the 
players. Of course, for children who are learning to read, the written 
form of English is a new language. Both children and adults discover 
that they always can succeed in finding the appropriate key in Search 
and Match by the simple-minded expedient of trying each key. This is a 
tedious and boring way to go at it on a continuing basis; both children 
and adults prefer to learn the characters. 
Phase 3. W ord Construction. When a child has eliminated nearly all of 
the "search" from the Search and Match game, it is time to shift to a new 
phase of the curriculum. Phase 3 is called "W ord Construction." There 
are two forms of this game. One form leads to reading, the other to writ-
ing, i.e., writing in the sense of composing original stories. We will 
designate the formeras "WC-R" (Word Construction-Reading) and the 
latteras "WC-W" (Word Construction-Writing). When a child has been 
shifted to Phase 3 he alternates in his booth sessions between these two 
forms of the game. Let us take up WC-R first. 
Phase 3. WC-R. Up to this point, the child has been dealing exclusively 
with the building blocks, or primitive elements, of the written language 
(in this, punctuation marks have not been neglected). He has been 
exposed to and can discriminate among the basic set of elements from 
which all meaningful written expressions are formed. He is in a position 
to begin to get some sense of the formation rules of the written language. 
Now other of E.R.E.'s abilities can be brought into play. 
Imagine that a child, who has become quick at finding individual 
characters, is confronted without notice with several of them at a time, 
isolated either by a margin and a space or by spaces. For instance, the 
first letters might be b-a-r-n. So, the child types b-a-r-n. E.R.E. pro-
nounces these letters before and after each is struck and then, following 
the pronunciation of n, it calls for a space. A light flickers just under the 
space bar, and after the bar is pressed, E.R.E. says, "Space, b-a-r-n, barn." 
E.R.E. may also exhibit a barn on the projector as shown in Figure 1. 
( As a matter of fact, pictures have been used very sparingly because they 
can be quite misleading in the early phases of learning to handle written 
symbols. The referent of many important words such as "if," "then," 
"either," "or," "some," etc., cannot be pictured in the same way that the 
188 
PART IV 
referent of the word "barn" can be. Other words which are relational, 
but not obviously so, such as "mother," "father," "sister," etc., are not as 
easily denoted through pictures as some writers of children's primers 
seem to think. The use of pictures comes into its own when E.R.E. is 
"teaching" foreign languages or in Phase 4 where content, e.g., maps for 
geography, is important.) 
From the standpoint of planning the curriculum, WC-R offers an in-
definitely large number of choices with respect to the selection of a 
beginning or basic vocabulary. The question is: What words should come 
first? There are a great many plausible criteria which have been offered 
by reading experts, linguists and others who have concerned themselves 
with this topic. For example, 1) word frequency, 2) letter frequency, 
3) pronounceableness, 4) word length, 5) familiarity, 6) stimulus similar-
ity, 7) grapheme-phoneme correspondence, etc. lt is apparent that at 
least some of these conflicting criteria, for instance, many familiar words 
are phonetically irregular. A sophisticated analysis could be carried 
through in which a vocabulary was selected in terms of a multidimen-
sional weighting system based on the contribution various "dimensions" 
of words make to easy learning. I have no doubt that careful experimental 
studies would be of value in selecting an optimal basic vocabulary. 
For my own part, faced with the problern of selection, I preferred a 
direct solution, namely, to choose those words which are constituents of 
interesting stories-that is, stories which have proved to be intriguing to 
children and adults over a long period of time, for example, Aesop's 
Fables. 10 Many children can be expected to have lost interest in WC-R 
long before they have mastered a vocabulary large enough to enable them 
to read a wide variety of stories. Therefore, it is essential to be able to 
shift them to at least some stories-this only can be clone if they have 
mastered enough of the words to get started reading stories. If the stories 
are of some intellectual and aesthetic value, it is highly probable that the 
words out of which they are composed will offer a sufficient basis for 
making sound inferences about the relations between letters and sets of 
letters, on the one band, and appropriate verbalizations, on the other. 
The inventor, Samuel Morse, was faced with a similar problern when 
he was devising bis code consisting of spaces, dots and dashes. He 
wanted, in the interest of efficiency, to have the shorter symbols for the 
more frequntly used letters, and the Ionger symbols for those less fre-
quently used. If he bad been like some contemporary investigators, he 
might have launched a rather extensive research project sampling the 
distribution of letters of the alphabet in various writings-but he did 
10 I have also made use of word lists suggested by linguists and at times have com-
bined these lists with those compiled from interesting stories. 
C HA PT E R 9 
• 
Moore 
189 
nothing of the sort. What he did instead was to count the number of 
types in the various compartments of a printer' s type box. He assumed 
that printers would have discovered empirically the right proportians of 
letters to keep on hand in order to set type, and incidentally, this solu-
tion to his problern was within 15 percent of an optimal one.H 
I assume that stories that have stood up over long periods of time use 
words in ways that are compatible with the intricate sets of relations 
holding between the spoken and the written forms of the language. I am 
not quite as sanguine about some of the concocted stories found in con-
temporary "basal" readers, although children can leam to read using 
basic vocabularies that are, in all likelihood, far from optimal. 
Phase 3. WC-W. The WC-R form of the Word Construction game, 
explained above, is somewhat arbitrary from a child's standpoint. The 
experimenter has decided, in advance, what is good for him. lt is espe-
cially important, from the point of view of sustaining children's interest, 
to let them take the initiative. lt is also important to see to it that at times 
there is an almost perfect correspondence between their verbal skills and 
the written symbols with which they will be dealing. WC-W serves these 
purposes. The first step in this activity is to have the child go to the 
Transfer Room ( the small classroom) where he is encouraged to talk-
he may talk about anything he pleases-and everything that he says is 
recorded. Later, an analysis is made of his utterances and a list is com-
piled consisting of those words which are constituents of coherent state-
ments on some topic in which he was engrossed. Sometimes it has taken 
weeks with a child to elicit such material. The next step is to program 
this word list in E.R.E. ( E.R.E. is easily programed-it is not necessary 
to translate material into a machine language, hence, there are no tech-
nical difficulties to get in the way.) The child is virtually certain to find 
some of his own words meaningful. 
An alternative version of WC-W involves the use of a standard record-
ing-reproducing unit attached to E.R.E. or to an electric typewriter. This 
version does not require programing. The child simply talks into a micro-
phone and then takes his own dictation, word by word. In this version 
of the game, he responds to his own voice. ( Interestingly enough, from a 
social-psychological perspective, some children reject their own voice, 
but will type other children' s dictation.) A motion picture (Moore, 1960) 
was made of a girl 3-years 11-months in which she first read a story-her 
voice was recorded-and then typed the story from listening only; she 
handled the dictation controls ( start, stop, repeat) by herself. 
11 The foregoing information about Morse is found in Pierce's valuable book on 
Information Theory ( 1961). 
190 
PART IV 
This second version of WC-W eliminates the presentation of written 
symbols; the child goes directly from verbal utterances to the correspond-
ing written symbols. Visitors who have watched this process are often 
surprised by children's ability to speil new words that are nonphonetic, 
or markedly irregular. Indeed, this is extraordinary! I have concluded 
that there must be some subtle lawfulness holding between the spoken 
and written forms of English, otherwise young children would not spell 
as weil as they do in this version of WC-W. This should give pause to 
enthusiasts for speiling reform. In any case, this relation seems worthy of 
serious study. 
Phase 4. Reading and Writing. Anyone who has foilowed children's 
progress from Free Exploration to Search and Match and on through 
W ord Construction easily can see that the shift to Phase 4 comes very 
naturally. E.R.E. is at its best here. It can read a sentence, a paragraph, 
or teil a story before or after a child types, while at the same time it can 
continue to respond to individual characters and words. In sum, it can 
deal with reference to the earlier leaming sequences. 
E.R.E., of course, can ask questions, just as teachers do. The questions 
may pertain to what is visuaily exhibited in the reetangular window or 
on the projection screen. The questions may call for subtle interpreta-
tions. Answers can either be typed out or expressed verbaily on E.R.E.'s 
own recording-reproducing unit. 
The material programed for E.R.E. can be as banal as the dullest 
courses in school or it can be as stimulating as the best of new programs, 
for example, some in modern mathematics or science. ( It should be noted 
that E.R.E. can handle many aspects of mathematics and of science pro-
grams-numbers and some arithmetic symbols are on the keyboard.) 
Every effort is made to select materials which give children a chance 
to make imaginative interpretations. As a general principle, it seems 
advisable to select materials that permit several levels of interpretation. 
A good case in point is Alice' s Adventures in W onderland. Retarded, 
normal, and gifted children can all begin reading this story with enjoy-
ment just because it starts off with a little girl and an extraordinary 
rabbit. Even though gifted children like the manifest content of Alice's 
adventures, at the same time, they can begin to get glimpses of deeper 
meanings. A serious objection to many stories found in beginning read-
ers is that they confine children to one interpretation since the manifest 
content of such stories is ail there is to them. 
It is in Phase 4 that the methodology presented in this chapter must 
C HA PT E R 9 
• 
Moore 
191 
come to terms with the traditional school curriculum.12 The bridging 
mechanism between the laboratory booths and the school classroom is 
the Laboratory's Transfer Room. Here, children who have been working 
alone have an opportunity to engage in cooperative activities, for ex-
ample, publishing a newspaper, under the guidance of a teacher. Disci-
pline emerges from the interaction of the children with each other. 
When children go to fust grade, having reached Phase 4 both in read-
ing and composing original stories, a new curriculum is needed. Most of 
the things which ordinarily are taught in first grade lie far behind them. 
(At the end of first grade, the Harnden Hall Country Day School chil-
dren who had been in the E.R.E. program at least two years, read, on 
the average, at the beginning sixth-grade level, according to the Metro-
politan Achievement Test. Their competence in composing original stor-
ies can be judged by examining their newspaper ( Figure 2). For 
second grade they again will require a totally new curriculum.) The half 
hour a day the children can spend in the laboratory is certainly not a 
substitute for the rest of the school day. Fortunately, at Harnden Hall 
there has been strong administrative support for curriculum revisionP 
However, an adequate curriculum is not the whole answer either. Com-
petent teachers are equally necessary. Teachers find that they have 
independent students on their hands, students who are accustomed to 
solving problems on their own or in cooperation with their peers. 
Handwriting. One of the five booths is reserved for learning to write by 
band. The writing equipment in this booth is primitive. lt consists of a 
lined blackboard, chalk and eraser. On a random basis children spend 
about one-tenth of their time in this booth after they have completed 
Phase 1. I assumed that after children had been exposed to the charac-
ters on the typewriter they would begin to reproduce them manually if 
they had the opportunity. Children begin by scribbling or drawing pic-
tures on the board, but it appears that some would go on doing this 
indefinitely if they were not subtly guided by a patient booth assistant. 
12 There is a Phase 5, the Dialogue (Moore, 1961), which is not presented here for 
two reasons: 1) to keep this chapter within reasonable bounds, and 2) as yet, I have 
had no experience with children in this phase. Essentially, the Dialogue has to do 
with children's interpreting group interaction and taking what is said in dictation, 
adding the necessary punctuation and connecting commentary so as to create a 
plausible reconstruction of on-going social situations in which they were participants. 
The Dialogue is of theoretical importance because of its connection with the Mead-
ean concept of the "generalized other" ( Mead, 1934). 
13 It is not within the scope of this chapter to present the school Curriculum which 
is still being developed. However, in broad outline, the curriculum is based upon the 
notion of folk models ( Anderson and Moore, 1959) and their scientillc formalization. 
192 
PART IV 
The difficulty lies in the fact that the environment is not suffi.ciently re-
sponsive. ( Automated equipment could be devised for facilitating the 
development of this skill.) 
The children are exposed to cursive or manuscript writing, as opposed 
to printing, through the use of typewriters with cursive type. This serves 
to familiarize them with this form of writing. Even two- and three-year-
olds, including retarded children, can leam to print and write in the 
cursive style. A motion picture has been made of the printing of a few 
preschool children in order to show what they can do (Moore and 
Anderson, 1960, 1960, 1960). 
I promised at the beginning of this section to try to explain the various 
phases of the leaming sequence in terms of the use of automated instru-
mentation. However, in the development of this program of research, 
work began with nonautomated equipment-modified electric type-
writers, projectors, recording-reproducing units, and so on. The func-
tional specifications for automated equipment were obtained by coding 
the activities of booth assistants using nonautomated devices. 
In the nonautomated form of Phases 1 through 4, the booth assistant 
sits in a chair beside the child who is at a modified electric typewriter. 
The booth assistant has a switch which is used to control the typewriter 
in the same way that E.R.E.'s logic and control circuitry does. The booth 
assistant is instructed to be passive just as is E.R.E. Of course, not all 
booth assistants carry out this role perfectly day after day- some have 
a strong tendency to intrude upon children. It requires constant monitar-
ing by the laboratory supervisor to keep booth assistants from teaching. 
At present, four of the five laboratory booths are nonautomated, thus 
.there is a human instructor with the child on an average of four sessions 
out of five. In time, all booths will be automated, but this does not mean 
that they always will be operated in a fully automated way-with no 
human being in the booth with the child. It is not known whether chil-
dren would continue to come to the laboratory on a daily basis over a 
long period of time if they were interacting with automated equipment 
only. Even if they were able to go through all phases on automated 
equipment this might produce undesirable psychological or social psycho-
Iogical side effects. No one knows now the optimal mixture of automated 
and nonautomated equipment. It is reasonably certain, however, that a 
one to four mix will work; at least it has worked with the children who 
have come to the laboratory. 
One of the interesting consequences of having a fully automated booth 
has been its effect on assistants. Before such equipment was available, it 
was difficult to explain to new personnel what was expected of them. 
Also, some of them apparently did not believe that children would work 
out problems for themselves-so they tended to be too helpful. The auto-
CHAPTER 9 
• 
Moore 
193 
mated equipment proved to be a good instructor for new booth assistants. 
With reference to this point, there is an illuminating film made of some 
laboratory children working on a prototype of E.R.E. In one sequence, 
a little girl ( Moore 1962, last sequence), who was in Phase 4, forgot 
where the lower case key was. At first she seemed to be nonplused; 
finally, she regressed to a systematic trial of every key-the right key 
was almost the last to be tried. Many viewers of this search sequence 
said that they feit an almost irresistible urge to help her. She, unlike 
these viewers, was calm about the whole matter-confident in her ability 
to find her way. Like E.R.E., well-trained booth assistants do not intrude. 
In my opinion, in too many situations in everyday life adults rush to the 
aid of children, thus depriving them of the opportunity of making dis-
coveries and consequently undermining their confidence in their own 
resourcefulness. 
CHILDREN IN A RESPONSIVE ENVIRONMENT 
Before a child enters the Labaratory for his introductory session quite 
a bit is known about him. Each child is given a general physical examina-
tion, an eye examination, and a hearing test. A speech evaluation is made 
with special attention paid to a child's ability to produce utterances in 
conformity with the phonemic structure of the language. A clinical psy-
chologist obtains a developmental history from the mother and gives 
the child an intelligence test as well as projective tests. A sociological 
analysis is made of the family in terms of socio-economic variables. In 
sum, an attempt is made to characterize the child' s family with reference 
to its position in the broader society, to see the child within the context 
of his family, and to understand something about the child hirnself in 
the light of this developmental history. The various tests and observations 
are repeated on a semiannual or annual basis depending upon their 
nature; for example, I.Q. tests are given annually. 
A daily record is kept of each child's behavior in the Laboratory, and 
the child is examined periodically to determine his level of skill. 
Let us now consider children who have gone through the phases pre-
sented in the preceding section. Some background information is given 
with each case. The first two children to be discussed are in the nebulous 
range between the normal and exceptional. The last three are clear-cut 
cases of exceptional children-two are educable retardates, the third is 
gifted.14 
14 Since it has been the policy of the Responsive Environments Project to protect 
the anonymity of children and their families, we have seen to it that there is not a 
one-to-one correspondence between children shown in pictures ( either stills or 
194 
PART IV 
Billy 
Billy's mother enrolled him in an integrated public school kindergarten 
when he was five years old. After a few weeks his teacher reported to 
her supervisor that he was unable to follow directions and that he dis-
rupted the classroom-for instance, he rolled on the tables and stubbornly 
refused to move. Nothing was done about her complaints until a month 
later when she delivered an ultimatum: "Either Billy goes or I go." At 
this point the school psychologist was called in and Billy was given a 
Stanford-Binet intelligence test with the result that he was classified as 
an educable retardate with an I.Q. of 65. It was recommended that he 
be placed in a nursery group for the mentally retarded. The mother, a 
former special-dass student herself, was irate about this recommendation; 
she caused so much difficulty over it that the school, in self-defense, sent 
Billy to an outside expert 'who confirmed the prior evaluation. ( This 
second examination was slightly more hopeful in that it placed him on 
the borderline between the educable retardate and the dull normal.) 
With great reluctance, Billy's mother acquiesced to his removal from 
public school at mid-term and to his placement in a nursery group for 
educable retardates. 
When Billy was six years old, he came to the Labaratory under the 
auspices of a state agency. The Laboratory's initial evaluation of Billy's 
intelligence ( I.Q. 72) agreed with the more promising of the two prior 
reports. However, it was obvious at once that there were at least two 
sides to Billy in terms of his ability to get along with adults; for example, 
the examiner commented, "In the testing situation, Billy was a pleasant 
child, friendly and responsive and anxious to please." This judgment 
says something about both Billy and the examiner. This examiner is very 
skillful in establishing rapport with children and it is a difficult child 
indeed who does not respond positively to her. 
So we have Billy, age six, already out of the mainstream of education. 
He either could not or would not take directions; what is more, he was 
willing and able to cause disturbances. 
Billy, a light-colored Negro, is always neatly dressed. His appearance 
is normal but his physical movements are somewhat clumsy although 
he has an alert manner. He always has been in excellent health; his 
vision and hearing are normal. However, his speech was very difficult to 
motion pictures) and case history material. In addition, the children described here 
are drawn from several responsive environments centers located in five cities and 
three states. Background and personal data which would be sufficient to identify a 
particular child and his family have been changed so as to protect their privacy. 
Although I have personally worked with only 102 subjects on a day-to-day basis, 
there are over 250 children who have been part of the Project, taken as a whole. 
C HA PT E R 9 
• 
Moore 
195 
understand even at six; the speech evaluation showed, for instance, that 
he omitted most final consonants. Also, there were many repetitions and 
hesitations in his speech and his mother said that he, unlike her other 
children, did not talk until he was four. Whatever else, Billy had not 
done a very good job of mastering his native tongue-he had not de-
veloped the requisite verbal skills to express his needs or interests. 
The eight members of Billy's family share five rooms in a low-income 
row hause: a reasonably large living room (with a record player and a 
monstrous TV set), a large kitchen, and three bedroorns. There are three 
older boys in their middle teens and Billy and his younger brother and 
sister, ages 5 and 4. The family is crowded but the apartment is spotless 
and tastefully decorated. There is a large bookcase nearly full of books 
topped by a complete set of super-market encyclopedias. At present, the 
family is wholly self-supporting, though off and on in the past it has been 
on welfare. Billy's father, a small, meek, self-effacing person, is an un-
skilled laborer who generally works in construction. A social worker, 
who has known the family for years, classifies the whole family as dull 
normal. 
Billy' s mother is the dominant figure araund whom everything tums. 
She is a heavy-handed, strict disciplinarian who can wither her busband 
and children with a glance. In or out of the family, she is a formidable 
woman who is articulate about her ambitions for her children, but she 
Iacks knowledge about how to advance them. She had hoped that the 
older boys would be able to go to college, but their academic records 
are so poor ( she is forcing them to stay in school) that the guidance 
counselor has told her that college is out of the question. Though the 
older children are disappointing to her, she still has great hopes for her 
two youngest children who are developing more rapidly than any of the 
others did. Billy is the only child who has her worried. He was later than 
the others in standing, walking, talking and toilet training. Toilet training 
must be a nightmare for Billy, because as she says, "Whenever he goes 
in his pants, I whack him in front of everybody." ( Billy still has accidents 
quite frequently). The other members of the family are very fand of 
Billy, baby him, and try to cover up his many mistakes before they are 
discovered by his mother. His mother says that Billy is not dumb, he is 
"stubbom and lazy." When Billy does something that really pleases her, 
she picks him up and enfolds him in her enormaus arms while smother-
ing him with kisses. 
Billy's introductory session was calm. He quietly followed the guide 
around; he could not be drawn into conversation. Once in a while he 
smiled and in general was wide-eyed. In bis second introductory session 
he explored some on bis own but spent most of the time holding the 
guide's band. By the end of this session he was becoming curious about 
196 
PART IV 
the equipment and seemed quite relaxed, and so he was scheduled for the 
automated booth the following day. The third day he came in, noisy and 
confident, and permitted the booth assistant to help him into the elevated 
chair. He watched her leave and then turned his attention immediately 
to the keyboard. What happened next is best described as an attack 
upon the instrument. In 30 minutes he typed 1302 characters. The booth 
assistant had to turn off the instrument and lead him out of the booth 
when his time was up. For the next nine sessions he continued to "ma-
chine gun" the instrument at a gradually slowing pace. In his eleventh 
session there was a sharp drop in strokes; the booth assistant wrote, "He 
seems to be getting interested in looking at what he has typed." The 
laboratory supervisor shifted him from Phase 1, Free Exploration, to 
Phase 2, Search and Match. Billy was startled and angry-he put up his 
hand over and over to call the booth assistant in. Billy evidently thought 
the instrument was broken and that the assistant would not fix it. All 
previous sessions had lasted 30 minutes but Billy stopped this one after 
9 minutes. He had made five matches by accident ( he had not come up 
with a way of systematically trying all keys). The laboratory supervisor 
switched him back to Phase 1 for his next session and he was very 
pleased, although he proceeded more cautiously than he had before-
looking, listening, and occasionally repeating what was said. After an-
other five days his time dropped to 15 minutes and the supervisor again 
switched him to Phase 2 for the following session. 
This time he was calmer about the change. After five minutes he was 
pressing every key with his thumb-he clapped his hands when he made 
a match. At the end of this SO-minute session he said he wanted to take 
the "typewriter" home. For the next 60 days he played Search and Match 
in its increasingly difficult versions. There seemed to be no diminution 
in his interest. This was the game for Billy-he made it more complex 
for hirnself by shutting his eyes while finding keys, by "dive bombing" 
the keyboard, by first using one hand and then the other. He was still 
not using the color coding of fingers to keys, however. The supervisor 
switched him to Phase 3, Word Construction, R and W, even though his 
interest had not waned. He could find the characters to make words but 
he did not want the words; he told the instrument to "shut up." His time 
dropped down to 3 minutes after five days. He was shifted back to Phase 
2. In WC-W he had been nearly mute; he kept mumbling something 
about "it's not broken." Billy continued in Phase 2 for another 30 days, 
still eager and interested. His refusal to go on to words was perplexing 
because by this time he was very expert at finding all characters and was 
using the color-coding system. Also, he had learned to print all the char-
acters in the handwriting booth ( this included the ampersand which most 
booth assistants have to learn, too). 
C HA PT E R 9 
• 
Moore 
197 
An interviewer was sent to Billy's home to find out if something 
unusual was going on there. His mother said that she had caught Billy 
"playing with himself," and that she had whipped him and told him he 
would hurt himself. This made it much dearer what Billy was mumbling 
about. In WC-W the assistant pointed to his penis when he said "it's not 
broken." She said the word "penis" and spelled it. It was put on the 
dictation equipment for him in a nonautomated booth. He typed the 
word "penis" twelve times with manifest enjoyment. In his next WC-W 
story-telling session he said, among other things, "When my dad took 
the prayers away, my mother got sick and died." The constituent words 
of this story were made into a word Iist for the next WC-W typing 
session. Billy liked these words and now was willing to accept word lists 
in WC-R. 
Billy was shifted to Phase 4 in his 130th session. At the end of his 
laboratory experience ( 172 sessions) he was reading pre-primer and begin-
ning first-grade stories, he could print nicely, and he could type 5 words 
a minute with correct fingering on the automated equipment. His typing 
was comparable to that exhibited by other children dassifiable as educa-
ble retardates. 
When Billy was transferred from public school to the nursery for 
educable retardates at mid-year, he established a satisfactory relation 
with the skillful teacher in charge of this group. However, he would not 
accept her assistant. The end-of-the-term report stated, "When he is 
helped or scolded by the assistant he becomes very belligerent and dis-
respectful." Billy began his laboratory sessions in late spring while still 
in this nursery dass. Public school officials were invited to watch Billy 
in booth sessions. They were so impressed by his good manners and by 
his ability to concentrate that arrangements were made to re-admit him 
to public school kindergarten in the fall. Given this second chance he 
managed to get on with this new teacher, and at the end of the year she 
passed him to first grade. 
Billy entered first grade with 172 Iaboratory sessions behind him as 
weil as with the benefits of a constructive experience in the nursery 
group and kindergarten. The laboratory, of course, was interested in 
following his progress even though he was no Ionger in its program.15 
Billy was placed in a "combined" first grade, that is, a dass with a 
reading readiness group and a first-grade group. He was assigned to the 
15 The project, taken as a whole, has conducted a number of pilot studies to deter-
mine whether it was feasible to work with various kinds of exceptional children. 
Billy was part of one such study ( and an evaluation of its success or failurc) and the 
establishment of long-term programs. Billy, his family and the Project would have 
liked to have had him go on. 
198 
PART IV 
latter section on the basis of a reading-readiness test. His teacher wrote, 
"When we began our work, Billy was ahead of the other children. He 
could write and recognize his numbers to 10 and count up to 29. He 
knows his colors, alphabet, and his knowledge of phonics is very good in 
that he knows the sounds of each isolated consonant and can teil with 
what letter various words begin. What he needs now is to develop his com-
prehension not only in reading words but in picture interpretation. As 
you know, to get the idea of a story in the pre-primers and primers, the 
child should understand the picture. Billy's reasoning and associations 
are oft times far fetched. I must ask him many questions before he gets 
the point of the picture. He finds it hard to follow directions, but he will 
ask many questions in order to get the directions correct. There are now 
children who have caught up to Billy but he still has an edge on them 
because he has a better background and the work I am doing now is not 
completely new to him. The proof of the pudding must wait until I 
begin to teach in completely new areas, for example, addition and sub-
traction." 
Billy finished first grade successfully and will be in second grade next 
year. He did have trouble with arithmetic. 
Billy was retested by the Laboratory at the end of first grade. His I.Q. 
score is now 79. The appraisal of his speech placed him in the normal 
range with respect to the making of phonemic discriminations in speech 
production; the repetitions and hesitations have disappeared. Billy now 
can express his needs and interests verbally in a much more adequate 
way and, as his teacher mentioned, he is able to ask many questions in 
order to understand directions. One year of first grade did not improve 
Billy's reading significantly-for all practical purposes, he was held back, 
though his skill at picture interpretation undoubtedly improved. It is my 
overall impression that Billy is still a vulnerable dependent child who 
will rebel if he is not skillfully handled. A second year in the Laboratory 
would have afforded him a good deal of protection. It would have been 
especially helpful if his introduction to arithmetic could have been 
carried out within the context of a responsive environment. 
Billy's family is proud of him and now they let him work more things 
out for himself. His mother feels completely vindicated: all the psycholo-
gists, social workers and teachers were wrong-Billy is not dumb, he is 
simply a "stubborn and lazy" child who needs a good whack. 
Edward 
Edward's mother was slim, attractive and beautifully groomed. She 
graduated summa cum lande from a midwestern college at 20 and married 
immediately after graduation. The marriage ended in divorce three years 
later, with the busband keeping their two-year-old daughter. After a 
C HA PT ER 9 
• 
Moore 
199 
year she married Edward's father who was three years her junior and 
who was working as a tennis instructor at the time-he had completed 
only two years of collegeo A year after they were married, Edward was 
born; she went to work part-time at a style shop to help pay for her 
husband's education (she also had an annual income from a trust fund), 
and voluntarily began what turned out to be three and a half years of 
psychotherapyo 
Edward came to a Project laboratory at four years of age as a referral 
from a private psychiatric clinico At three and a half years of age, he had 
developed food allergies and was having difficulty in sleeping through 
the night ( he would wake up screaming) 0 When Edward first came to the 
Laboratory his father was just leaving for another part of the country 
to take a good position in a !arge firm ( by this time he had gotten his 
BoAo and an MoAo in business administration) 0 Edward's mother did not 
think it advisable to breakoffher psychotherapy, so she and Edward did 
not go with himo 
Edward and his mother lived alone, then, in an elegant apartment dur-
ing the time in which he came to the Laboratoryo His mother had stopped 
working and so she was free to make the daily trip to bring Edwardo 
Up to the age of four, Edward had spent most of his time with "sitters," 
except for the hours from 5 to 7 in the evening when the family had 
dinner and his mother devoted herself exclusively to himo His father had 
spent almost no time with the boyo Edward hirnself was the very oppo-
site of an athleteo He was a thin, frail little boy who was afraid of almost 
everything physical-cats, dogs, playground equipment-but who was 
extremely verbal. His mother reported that he began saying words at one 
year of age, and she had used those daily two-hour devotionals to teach 
Edward all manner of thingso Edward looked and acted like what many 
people think of as a prodigyo He enjoyed embarrassing children and 
adults by asking such questions as, "How many planets does Saturn 
have?" and before an answer could be given he would add, "Stupid! It 
doesn't have planets, it has rings!" His mother said, "Edward could read 
at three 
0 
0 
0 he picked it up entirely on his own, but now he will have 
nothing to do with bookso" She also said, "I really don't care whether 
Edward learns to read at the Labaratory so long as it is a creative experi-
ence for himo" His increasingly negative attitude toward learning, his 
allergies, and his sleeping problern upset her a great deal. 
Edward's laboratory experience almost ended before it began when 
his mother found out about the rule prohibiting parents from watehing 
childreno She had seen the film, Early Reading and W riting (Moore and 
Anderson, 1960, 1960, 1960), and was looking forward to watehing 
Edward every dayo She wanted to know what she could do with herself 
while he was having his session; it was annoying to her to have time on 
her handso Arrangements were made for her to go to a libraryo 
200 
PART IV 
She bad purchased a typewriter for Edward to use at home. In her 
first interview she wanted to know the color coding system so that she 
could duplicate it. The information was given to her, but as it turned 
out, Edward would not type at home until much later. 
The Laboratory's evaluation of Edward was virtually a duplicate of 
the clinic's, including the analysis of bis responses to projective material. 
Edward was an extremely tense child, impersonal in outlook, with ex-
cellent speech, and bis I.Q. placed him on the borderline between very 
bright and gifted ( I.Q. 139). He was difficult to test and free with in-
sulting remarks. He was very much aware of bis failures and he cate-
gorized difficult test items as "stupid." In fact, everybody was stupid but 
Edward, with the possible exception of bis mother. Edward's mother feit 
that he should spend more time with children bis own age, but there 
were no acceptable children in the apartment house. He played occa-
sionally with a thirteen-year-old girl who sometimes filled in as an emer-
gency sitter. 
Edward greeted bis child guide, a girl of four, with the statement, 
"You have an ugly face," followed by, "What are you doing here, I bate 
it!" The guide sbot back, "Don't be ridiculous!" and took bim by tbe 
band. He followed meekly. Wben be went into a bootb witb a typewriter, 
be said, "My typewriter at home is better." He did not explore tbe 
Labaratory on bis own. During bis second visit, be was equally prickly 
and paced back and forth by himself. In bis tbird introductory visit, be 
quizzed tbe guide and was taken aback to find that sbe knew "bigger" 
words tban be did. He asked if sbe could type. When sbe said, "Yes," be 
said, "Show me!" The guide replied that sbe did not bave to prove it. 
He sbouted derisively, "You can't! You can't!" Tbe guide laughed and 
Edward announced tbat be was going to "learn tbe typewriter'' and tbat 
he would be much better than the guide. The supervisor scheduled bim 
for bis first bootb session the next day. 
Edward went willingly into a nonautomated bootb. He was extremely 
serious. He painstakingly matcbed bis fingers to keys, for, as be said, 
"My mother told me to look at my fingers and press tbe keys witb tbe 
same colors." Edward did not explore the keyboard. Instead, be searcbed 
out tbe upper-case alpbabet, avoiding all punctuation marks and num-
bers. After a wbile be was going through tbe upper-case letters in 
alpbabetic order. After ten minutes of this, he asked for the pictures. He 
said, "At home my books bave colored pictures," and before the booth 
assistant could say anytbing, be added, "I bate tbis stupid tbing-I want 
to go." Tbe assistant immediately turned off tbe equipment and lifted 
Edward from tbe elevated cbair. He said, "I want to do it some more." 
When be was told that be could come back tbe next day, be cried, "I 
want to do it now!" Edward left tbe Labaratory complaining bitterly, but 
he greeted bis mother witb tbe statement, "Their typewriter is better 
CHAPTER 9 
• 
Moore 
201 
than yours." For the next four sessions, Edward confined hirnself to the 
letters with which he was familiar and each day he tried to elicit puni-
tive responses from the booth assistants. 
In his 6th, 7th and 8th sessions, all less than 15 minutes in length, he 
stopped matehing his fingers to keys and tried to get the booth assistants 
to say how good he was for knowing all the letters. His 9th session 
marked the first major change in Edward's behavior. Instead of sitting 
stifßy, he slumped down and began to pick away at the keyboard, spend-
ing most of his time on characters new to him. He noted that period was 
the same whether "up or down," he liked the end-of-the-line waming 
bell and the carriage retum. For the first time he stayed SO minutes and 
did not insult anyone. Edward's interest grew each day-he repeated 
aloud nearly every character after it was pronounced by the booth 
assistants. 
The supervisor switched him to Phase 2, Search and Match, for his 
15th session. He announced that he was tired of this game during his 
21st session-he could match quickly and accurately. 
Edward liked WC-R immediately. In free story telling for WC-W he 
told long complex stories about how he was going to be his father's 
partner in doubles tennis. He told about not having a ball of his own and 
that he was spanked for touching his father's tennis racquet ... but the 
balls and racquets were gone now. Edward would not Iisten to his own 
voice in dictation. He wanted the little girl's voice ( the guide's); he very 
happily typed her dictated word lists. For the next SO sessions, Edward 
stayed in Phase 3. All of his typing was clone with one finger of each hand 
and he became very pleasant to have in the Laboratory. 
In Edward's 10th week, his mother asked for a conference about his 
behavior. She said that at home he had become very "sloppy," for ex-
ample, he would not put his toys away. More importantly, he had become 
rude and disrespectful to her. He would not play with the typewriter at 
home, and, as far as she could see, he had learned nothing. He would 
not look at his books; he had told her that the "Lab" did not have pic-
tures and that pictures were stupid. His allergies were worse, if anything, 
but he was sleeping a little better. She said she wanted to withdraw him 
from the program but that he looked forward to the trip every day. What 
she said she wished to discuss "at a theoretical Ievel" was whether the 
program tended to make children self-centered. 
She was told that it was her privilege to withdraw Edward, but that 
it would be advisable for her to take him to the referral clinic for a 
re-evaluation. She accepted this advice. The clinic reported to Edward's 
mother that he enjoyed his laboratory experience ( a representative of the 
clinic came to the Labaratory to watch Edward for four sessions) and 
that it was unlikely his sessions were disturbing to him. On the contrary, 
202 
PART IV 
he seemed to be a little less tense and apprehensive. The question as to 
whether Edward was learning to read or not was irrelevant from the 
clinic's standpoint, so long as he found pleasure in this activity. The clinic 
advised her to put the typewriter at home away until he asked for it. 
Also, the clinic reiterated the advice it gave when he was three and a half 
years old, namely, "Find some children of his own age for Edward to play 
with." The Labaratory staff re-examined Edward from the standpoint of 
assessing his emotional stability. The examiner did not find, or expect 
to find, any marked change, though Edward was friendlier. Edward's 
mother decided to keep him in the program and she also enrolled him 
in a nursery school for the mornings. 
Edward liked the nursery school from the first day on. The experienced 
teacher slowly and skillfully got him to join in group activities. She also 
succeeded in getting Edward to play with the group's mascot, a puppy. 
In Edward's 53rd session, he was shifted to Phase 4, Reading and 
Writing. He worked his way rapidly into Alice's Adventures in Wonder-
land. His mother bought the book and record set. He would Iisten to the 
records at home, though he would not touch the book. 
Edward stayed in Phase 4, without regressing, from then on. At the 
end of his laboratory experience ( 93rd session), he passed a standardized 
reading test at the second grade leveJ.l6 His printing was poor, though 
Iegihle ( he never did get along with assistants in the handwriting booth). 
His typing was rapid but with two fingers only. He came to accept his 
own voice in dictation. His I.Q. had jumped to 152, his speech continued 
to be excellent. There were no detectable changes in his personality 
structure although he had learned more satisfactory ways of dealing with 
others. His food allergies continued-his mother reported that he was 
sleeping restfully almost every night. His mother stated that he now 
liked to go to the library with her to check out books and that he was 
looking forward to seeing his father. 
The referral clinic made a similar assessment of Edward. The clinic's 
final report stated, in part, "The Iabaratory and the nursery were positive 
for Edward. His ability to cope with the demands of his mother is much 
improved. Edward needs the campanionship of his father if he is to keep 
the gains that he has made." 
Although Edward's mother had not planned to Ieave the area during 
the school year, she abruptly changed her mind in mid-February. She 
informed the clinic, the laboratory and the nursery of her decision only 
one week prior to their departure. 
16 It should be noted that passing standardized reading tests call for formal aca-
demic skills in addition to the ability to read meaningfully. Edward could read and 
answer questions about, for example, Alice's adventures, yet he passed the test only 
at the second· grade Ievel 
C HA PT E R 9 
• 
Moore 
203 
Betty and ]ane 
Betty and Jane are physically sturdy, normal-appearing, identical 
Negro twins. They entered an integrated public school kindergarten at 
five, and after a month they were referred by their teacher and principal 
to the school psychologist for examination. During this month they had 
not spoken to anyone or actively participated in kindergarten activities. 
For the most part, they sat quietly, smiling irrelevantly from time to time. 
Children who knew them said that they did not talk but just made noises. 
When the children in kindergarten stood, Betty and J ane had to be 
taken by their hands and helped to their feet; when it was time to sit, the 
twins continued to stand until again they were taken by their hands and 
shown to their chairs. They constantly sucked their fingers or stuffed 
their whole hands into their mouths, with saliva flowing freely down their 
arms and over the fronts of their dresses. 
They went willingly with the examiner to take intelligence tests. She 
reported, "They cannot understand or follow any directions, even when 
blocks were placed in their hands, they could not put them in tower 
formation. Their chronological age is 5 years 2 months, but they were 
unable to pass any test at the 2-year level or beyond." On the basis of the 
psychological tests and their behavior in kindergarten, it was decided 
that they were too limited in mental development to profit by kinder-
garten attendance. They were excluded immediately from school for one 
year and re-admittance was to be dependent upon the outcome of tests 
to be given the following year. 
The question of re-admittance to public school did not arise the next 
fall because a social worker, who assisted the family, was able to get the 
twins into a state agency's dass for retarded children. The twins started 
coming to the Labaratory in Iate spring after they had attended this 
special dass for eight months. At the time they came to the Laboratory, 
according to the psychological examiner for the special dass, Betty's 
I.Q. was 55 and Jane's was 56 as measured by the Stanford-Binet in-
telligence test. The children still drooled, and toilet training had not been 
completed. 
The twins with their family live in a small, three-room apartment in a 
double-entrance, tumble-down, brownstone complex. The back yard and 
front sidewalk are littered with scraps, glass and discarded beer cans. 
The apartment is cramped and dingy though not filthy. The furniture is 
in a terrible state of disrepair, plaster hangs from the walls and in places 
is simply missing. The door to the kitchen balances precariously on one 
hinge. 
The family consists of two younger children, the twins, the mother, 
and a matemal grandmother. The grandmother seems tobe the one who 
204 
PART IV 
takes the initiative in holding the family together and she is doing her 
best to raise the children. The twins' mother, who may be thought of as 
a loving older sister, frequently plays with them on the fl.oor in a child-
like unrestrained manner. The grandmother exercises firm, though gentle, 
control over the twins by confining them, most of the time, to the apart-
ment or to the back yard. It is her opinion that the twins cannot defend 
themselves in the streets where the neighborhood children play. The 
twins thus have had very limited experience with other children or adults. 
Also, city life is new to the family; only three years before they had 
moved from the South where they had lived in an isolated area. Since 
coming north the family has been totally on welfare; there is no bread-
winner. 
The eight months the twins had spent in the special dass before com-
ing to the Labaratory served to widen their horizons. According to the 
teacher the children were extremely shy at first and did not speak to 
anyone. At the end of several months they began to whisper to each 
other and to the teacher. Within eight months they were able to "shout, 
scream and talk to the teacher, children, and any other person who enters 
the dassroom." Their teacher reported that in strange situations they were 
still very shy. The twins enjoyed the dass and feit comfortable with the 
teacher, assistants and other children. In social interaction Jane was the 
more dominant one, Betty seemed to be stronger in "intellectual" pur-
suits. However, the twins are so similar in appearance and behavior that 
even those who know them reasonably weil frequently mistake one for 
the other. At six the twins had not yet learned to exploit, as most 
identical twins do, the social possibilities inherent in their identity. 
The Laboratory's evaluation of the twin..; concurred with that of the 
psychologist for the special dass with respect to their intellectual abili-
ties. They were definitely in the category educable retardate. There was 
nothing wrong with their general health and eyes. It was not feasible to 
do initial speech and hearing analyses because of the difficulty of elicit-
ing an adequate number of utterances. The twins were uniformly pleas-
ant but nonresponsive. It was also difficult to determine much about the 
structure of their personalities. The finger-thumb-hand sucking, the inane 
smiling, the extreme shyness and so forth, all would have to be taken 
into account, of course, in any adequate analysis of their development. 
The Labaratory had agreed in advance with the state officials that it 
would accept a small number of retarded children, free of charge, if the 
children were "certified" as retarded by the state's experts. When the 
twins were sent to the Laboratory, there was no way to have one be a 
control subject without violating the agreement to accept whatever chil-
dren were assigned to the Laboratory. It would have been desirable for 
some scientific purposes to have worked with only one of the twins. Yet, 
C HA PT E R 9 
• 
Moore 
205 
if the laboratory experience proved to be a valuable one, this would have 
been unfair to the neglected twin and might have had untoward con-
sequences for them in their close relationship to each other. Under these 
circumstances, I decided to think about the twins from the standpoint of 
assessing their identicalness. Just how identical are identical twins when 
each is faced with a new environment? 
Betty and Jane were introduced to the Laboratory together for fear 
that they might be frightened alone. They accepted their guide passively, 
they asked no questions-in fact, they did not say anything-they drooled 
and sucked their fingers. Nevertheless, they did not seem to be espe-
cially fearful. Their guide was very gracious; she omitted spontaneously 
the discussion of the Laboratory rules and, instead, assured them over 
and over that they would like the "Lab." It was decided to have them 
go separately into nonautomated booths after one introductory visit 
because they might be passive for weeks. 
Betty permitted herself to be seated in the elevated chair without com-
ment. She sat up straight and appeared to be interested in the keyboard. 
After about one minute she began to rapidly press keys with an odd sort 
of Iooping movement of her right hand using her middle finger. She con-
tinued to do this for the full period at a nearly constant rate. Her stroke 
count for the period was 2204. She struck 27 of the 52 keys. However, 
she concentrated heavily on three keys, the slant, the comma and the 
period ( these keys are located next to each other on the right side of 
the bottom row). Forty-nine percent of the keys she struck were these 
three keys, and of these, the slant was most frequently struck-she pro-
duced 815 slants. At the end of her session she was led out of the booth 
and did not say anything. 
J ane permitted herself to be seated and appeared to be interested in 
the keyboard. After about one minute she began to rapidly press keys 
with an odd sort of Iooping movement of her right hand using her middle 
finger. She continued to do this for the full period at a nearly constant 
rate. Her stroke count for the period was 3189. She struck 35 of the 52 
keys. However, she concentrat-ed heavily on three keys, the slant, the 
comma and the period. Forty-three percent of all the keys she struck 
were these three keys, and of these, the slant was most frequently struck 
-she produced 807 slants. At the end of her session she was led out of 
the bÖoth and did not say anything. 
In their 2nd through 5th sessions the twins continued to be very similar 
in their approach, but they never again were as identical as they were 
during their first booth session. At the end of five days, Betty's stroke 
countwas 8511 and Jane's was 8724-a difference of 153 strokes. During 
the 2nd week they began to diverge; Jane became noticeably more active 
in the booths. Their graphs for stroke counts crossed after three weeks 
206 
PART IV 
at 14,377 strokes for Betty and 14,202 for J ane. From then on Betty re-
mained slightly more active than her sister. At the completion of 150 
sessions, Betty had typed 10,109 more characters than had Jane. On a 
day-to-day basis, this means behaviorally that Betty did about a line and 
one half more typing-a very small difference but an observable one. The 
girls were more closely matched in booth time than in stroke count. Each 
almost always stayed the full period. ( Their similarity in time is, in part, 
an artifact of the methods used in handling them. The girls would stay 
almost anywhere you put them until told to leave.) 
The twins stayed in Phase 1 for 19 sessions. It was decided to shift 
them to Phase 2 in their 20th session because their stroke count was 
beginning to fall off rapidly. 
They had no difficulty in adjusting to Phase 2, though they were slow 
in working out a systematic search pattern for finding the correct keys. 
Neither Betty nor Jane used the color-coding scheme. By their 70th 
session each was quick to find the appropriate keys. Betty was slightly 
more accurate. 
They were shifted to Phase 3 in their 7lst session. They would accept 
word lists in WC-R; but for five weeks they would not talk in WC-W; 
also, they would not respond to other children's dictation. Finally, Jane 
began to make a few disjointed comments during her 97th session in 
WC-W, Betty during her 100th session. 
Leaving aside the WC-W recording sessions, the girls began to talk 
above a whisper during their 5th week at the Laboratory. They both 
have deep rich voices. lt was hard to guess when they would speak up. 
Occasionally, they would make rather surprising remarks. For example, 
the first time Jane encountered the cursive typewriter she shouted, "Dig 
this crazy typewriter!" 
Once the twins were speaking with some regularity in WC-W, it was 
feasible to do a speech analysis ( recall that there were no speech and 
hearing evaluations because of the difficulty in eliciting utterances). 
Both were rated as having intelligible speech; Jane's speech was marked 
by a w /r substitution, Betty made the same w /r substitution and in addi-
tion had consonant blend substitutions. Their hearing was checked at 
this time and it turned out to be normal. 
In Betty' s 115th session and J ane' s 120th, they were shifted to Phase 4. 
They clearly liked stories, although it was very difficult to teil how much 
they understood of the stories they typed. lt was useless to quiz them 
about what they had typed because this tended to make them withdraw. 
Once in a while they would make a fairly incisive comment which indi-
cated some understanding of the material. 
The twins completed 150 session ( see footnote 15). By this time they 
could print all upper- and lower-case letters as weil as the punctuation 
CHAPTER 9 
• 
Moore 
207 
marks and other symbols on the typewriter. On automated equipment 
they could type four words a minnte. There was strong indirect evidence 
to indicate that they could handle first-grade stories if they would only 
speak freely. Drooling had almost ceased and they no Ionger wet their 
pants in the Laboratory. 
With respect to their I.Q., Betty scored 64 on the Stanford-Binet and 
Jane scored 60. Both were weakest in the verbal langnage tasks. Betty 
successfully passed one item at the 6-year-old Ievel; J ane passed none at 
this Ievel. 
Even though the twins had to be dropped from the Iabaratory pro-
gram, as was mentioned before, a follow-up investigation was made one 
year later. The twins had been re-admitted to public school and assigned 
to a special class. Their teacher had visited the Labaratory the year before 
and had seen them at "work." She was favorably disposed toward the 
girls. She emphasized in her report that they were very different from 
the rest of the class. In her opinion it was their Iack of social experience 
rather than low I.Q. which was holding them back. Their individual 
performances in class Huctuated so much that she felt that there was not 
a sufficient basis for determining which twin performed better. The 
teacher began to have them read books at the beginning of the spring 
term ( until that time she felt that they were not ready for work at this 
Ievel). She was uncertain about how much they had retained from their 
experience at the Laboratory, but she said that at the beginning of school 
the girls remernbered letters and numbers though they apparently had 
forgotten sounds. 
A Labaratory observer, who sat in on the class during a reading session 
in the second term, reported that the twins read aloud from the Ginn 
first pre-primer. Each read her own selection both accurately and quickly; 
the selection was unfamiliar though simple. The twins did not have 
reading every day. As the Labaratory observer arose from the reading 
session, Betty, half hiding behind her teacher's skirt, screeched, "Lab, 
Lab! I wanna go Lab!" The observer's report reads as follows: "I then com-
pleted my discussion with the teacher and went to speak to the girls. I had 
hoped that I would be able to talk to each one individually, but I found 
that impossible because Betty kept hovering over the table mooning at 
us. Rather than risk Jane 'tuming off,' I let them talk with me together. 
They both recalled many details about the Lab; red building, white 
chalk, yellow station wagon and colors on their fingers. Jane kept bab-
bling about the yellow station wagon. They both remernbered typing, 
reading books, writing on the table and colaring their nails. Jane recalled 
they 'played games,' Betty remernbered the talking typewriter for 'the 
story about the golden chicken.' (In alllikelihood this is the Aesop Fable 
'The Goose that Laid the Golden Egg.') They both agreed they had had 
208 
PART IV 
fun playing at the Lab, and they obviously wanted to come back again. 
Initially, I was leery about their enthusiasm because the teacher had 
alerted me to the fact that their grandmother had a record of prompting 
the girls. Nevertheless, Betty and Jane did recall a lot about the Program 
that she ( the grandmother) could not have known about, and I didn't 
feel that they were sophisticated enough to show a sustained and artificial 
enthusiasm, even prompted." 
Sandra 
It is the general policy of the Labaratory to obtain children by work-
ing with schools, clinics, government agencies, and so forth. In this way 
the Labaratory gains the benefit of whatever information the relevant 
organization has about the children in question, and the Laboratory's 
findings can be integrated with those of other organizations which serve 
children. This policy also obviates the necessity of dealing on an ad hoc 
basis with numerous families. Nevertheless, parents call the Laboratory; 
most calls are about handicapped children and we suggest that they see 
their pediatrician or other appropriate specialist 
There is one kind of telephone call which the Labaratory follows up, 
in an informal way, whenever possible. For instance, a mother may call 
and say that she has a three-year old who can do extraordinary things-
that he is a mathematical prodigy or that he reads like a whiz. Time 
permitting, an interviewer goes out to see the child in his home, explain-
ing that our concern is to better understand exceptional children. 
One of the things that has impressed us about these visits is the lack 
of information parents have about the achievements of children. Parents 
are in the unfortunate position of having to judge the possibly mmsual 
achievements ( i.e., accomplishments as opposed to the ability to achieve 
as estimated by some standardized test) of their own child by the 
standards derived from reading and personal experience. They may con-
clude that they have a wunderkind. 
There is also great vagueness about what constitutes reading. Wehave 
been in some homes where a child is said to be reading brilliantly when 
he can only identify a few words. Parents say, almost uniformly, that 
whatever the child does, he learned all by himself. Yet even casual 
inspection of the living room reveals Hash cards, slates, or educational 
toys directly related to the child's accomplishments. Questioning the 
parents closely is generally sufficient to reveal the method of instruction 
which the mother, father, grandmother, older sister, or neighbor used. 
In a few cases, when parents stoutly maintained that the child has had 
no instruction whatsoever in reading or numbers, we have said to them 
that if their child, unaided, can discover so much, then perhaps he could 
CHAPTER 9 
• 
Moore 
209 
help at the University to decipher some heretofore untranslated hiero-
glyphics that had even the specialists wondering whether to start from 
the right, left, top or bottom. At this point parents quickly volunteer 
that, of course, they answered all the child's questions. 
I do not wish to impugn the ability of these children to learn, or to 
minimize their accomplishments in any way, or to make light of the pride 
their parents take in them, or to discourage such parents. The plain fact 
is that parents Iack comparative information about children's accom-
plishments, and even if they were to search the relevant scientific litera-
ture, generally they would not receive very much helpP Behavioral 
scientists, including myself, are pretty much in the dark about extra-
ordinary accomplishments. It is for this very reason that we are apprecia-
tive of the opportunity to observe children who strike their parents as 
prodigious. 
Sandra's mother called to ask questions about enrolling her four-year-
old daughter in a Labaratory program. She said that Sandra, an only 
child, was beginning to learn to read by herself and that she did many 
precocious things. A visit to the home was arranged. 
Sandra lived with her parents in a rambling winterized beach house 
which they had rented four years before when they moved to this area. 
Sandra's father is an engineer and her mother is a painter who occasion-
ally accepts commercial assignments. The house was filled with the 
accouterments of their work. One room was set aside for the father's 
extensive files. Sandra was probably the only person who knew where 
everything was. 
Her parents were swimming when the Labaratory interviewer arrived 
and Sandra introduced herself ( she was waiting) and asked if he wanted 
to see her photographic equipment. Her father had set up a miniature 
studio for her with a dark room three months before. She explained in 
great detail the complete process of taking pictures and developing them. 
She also showed some of her work with a running commentary on the 
quality of each picture. She explained that the current project was to 
use mirrors in taking pictures. She distinguished clearly between those 
things which she did by herself and those things which her mother or 
father helped her with. Also, anything that might be dangeraus she would 
do only when a parent was present. There was no doubt in the inter-
viewer's mind that basically the studiowas hers even though she received 
a great deal of technical assistance. 
In about half an hour her parents came in, wearing their beach rohes, 
and sent Sandra out to play. They reminded her to stay out of the water 
17 Terman's monumental study (1925, 1959) is a gold mine of factual information 
for those who are interested in gifted children. 
210 
PART IV 
and to stay within view-the interview took place on the porch where 
Sandra could be watched. She took a pail, a shovel, a few toys and a 
camera with her. Her mother apologized for not being there when the 
interviewer arrived but said that she wanted him to visit with Sandra 
first. 
Sandra' s father was 40 and her mother S5. The father received bis 
degree in engineering, the mother went to art school. They wanted to 
learn'. about the Labaratory program and also wanted to know whether 
the interviewer agreed with them that Sandra was some kind of prodigy. 
Their attitude seemed to be one of concern about what would be best 
for Sandra. They said she got along reasonably weil with the neighbor-
hood children; nevertheless, most of the time she preferred to pursue 
her own projects. She would have liked to have played more with some 
of the older children in the neighborhood, but she could not get them to 
stay in her studio long enough-besides, they messed things up. The 
parents bad not intended for her to get so wrapped up in photography, 
but once started she bad kept after them to teil her more and more about 
it. She bad other hobbies: coilecting sheils, painting ( trying to copy 
things) and currently she was tying her various hobbies together 
through photography. She bad learned the alphabet while getting things 
for her father from bis files and now she wanted to learn to read so that 
she could help her parents better and read instructions for herself, espe-
ciaily those related to photography. 
Her parents, who were quite relaxed, were somewhat appailed by the 
thorough, relentless way in which she pursued her interests. They thought 
that though she was friendly and helpful, even affectionate, she was 
rapidly becoming more and more exclusive. The only way to get close 
to her was to become a part of her projects. The parents bad great 
sympathy for the idea of a child pursuing interests independently, but 
they did not think it was healthy for her to become so absorbed in her 
own affairs. 
The interviewer suggested that Sandra be sent to a clinic for a thorough 
examination and to see if the clinic feit that it was advisable that the 
Labaratory accept her. It was pointed out that the clinic probably would 
recommend that she go to nursery school in conjunction with the Iabara-
tory sessions. This recommendation would have to be followed. The 
parents agreed. 
All during this conversation ( approximately 45 minutes) Sandra 
played. When the interviewer was leaving they walked up to see what 
she was doing. She bad made an elaborate sand castle decked out with 
toys which she was in the process of photographing. 
Sandra came to the Labaratory in September and also started nursery 
school. She was an attractive child, big for her age, in good health, and 
C HA PT E R 9 
• 
Moore 
211 
had normal vision and hearing. Her speech was excellent and her I.Q. 
tested 160. Her general personality development was sound; she was 
without marked tensions or anxieties. The examiner commented that she 
seemed to be somewhat wanting in spontaneity and humor and thought 
that she needed the campanionship of other superior children. The over-
all assessment was that she was a gifted child in good psychological 
health. There was no evidence of coaching for the tests or academic 
pressure at home. She liked the examination and said she wanted to do 
it again sometime. 
Sandra was intrigued by the Labaratory in her introductory visit. She 
noted the photographic equipment, she said she thought she would like 
the typing "studio," she got along beautifully with her guide and her 
main disappointment was that she had to wait till the next day to play 
with the equipment. The supervisor scheduled her for a nonautomated 
booth session the next day. When her fingers were painted she wanted to 
know why; she was told that she would find out. The moment she sat in 
the elevated chair and looked at the keyboard carefully she remarked 
that now she knew-from the first she matched fingers to keys. Sandra's 
search pattern, even in free exploration was deliberate; she tried every 
key row by row. When she encountered the lower-case key she started 
over again, trying each key both ways. She told the booth assistant that 
it was not necessary to say the letters that she already knew, that she 
would say them. Sandra stayed 30 minutes and was quite annoyed about 
having to leave though she controlled her temper. Her stroke count was 
410. Her 2nd and 3rd sessions were spent in the same way. At the end 
of the 3rd session she said that she would like to do something eise. 
The supervisor switched her to Phase 2, Search and Match, for her 
4th session even though she did not know the names of all of the keys. 
Her first reaction to the new game was to say that she understood it. She 
went quickly through the increasingly difficult forms of the game. At the 
end of her 13th session she knew the keyboard cold and continued to use 
correct fingering. She asked when she could have a "really" new game. 
The supervisor gave her one the next day. 
Sandra spent 18 weeks in Phase 3, W ord Construction, R and W. In 
WC-W she talked freely and happily about her projects. She brought 
material from her studio to copy as weil. 
In her 103rd session she was shifted to Phase 4 because her stroke 
count and eager interest were falling off. With her ability to retain what-
ever she was exposed to, she immediately began reading pre-primers, 
and two weeks later she was reading first-grade books. Occasionally she 
asked to go back and do some special word lists. At the end of spring 
term ( 170 sessions) the reading test showed she was at the second grade 
eighth-month Ievel. She could type eight words a minute on nonauto-
212 
PART IV 
mated equipment. She printed all typewriter characters with precision. 
Sandra' s experience in nursery school was not altogether satisfactory 
to her. She liked her teacher and a few of the children but she com-
plained, in a lady-like way, that it was all too babyish. She attempted to 
mother the other children and some of the boys said that she was too 
"bossy." Unfortunately, at the time she came to the Labaratory there was 
no newspaper project to challenge her, nor was there any other common 
activity for laboratory children. As things stood, she was a leader sans 
followers. 
Arecheck of her I.Q. showed it tobe 169. At home she added reading 
and writing to her other projects. She did very little in the way of creat-
ing original stories. Her favorite book, which she bad just started to 
read, was Tal. 
The personality assessment showed no basic change. However her 
parents feit that she bad changed significantly. She wanted to discuss the 
stories that she read and it was their opinion that this greater common 
area of interest was drawing her closer to them again. She continued to 
pursue her projects independently, but as her father put it, "She is run-
ning into ideas that cannot be captured in a photograph." 
The family moved to a !arge city in another state when school was out. 
Sandra was enrolled in a special class for gifted children. Her parents 
write occasionally to keep the Labaratory posted. At present, she is in a 
class with an ungraded program. Thus far, this class has provided a 
challenge which she enjoys. 
CONCLUDING COMMENTS 
At the beginning of this chapter it was pointed out that slow learners 
are likely to be out of phase with the age-graded societal demands im-
posed upon them and that they are apt to be problems to themselves and 
to their friends. The three slow learners that we have considered, Billy, 
Betty and Jane, are certainly cases in point. As soon as they appeared in 
school the duly constituted authorities decided that they were not 
"ready." In all likelihood, the authorities were correct-these children 
were not "ready" to be taught by conventional methods. Nevertheless, 
they could be reached and the procedures through which they leamed 
did not depend upon a rescue by one of those rare marvelous teachers 
who, through empathy, insight and intelligence, can reach the nearly 
unreachable. 
It also was stated that ultrarapid leamers, too, may create problems 
for themselves and others. Edward and Sandra, in very different ways, 
made people uncomfortable. Neither Edward nor Sandra bad bad the 
opportunity to take part in the full Labaratory program where they could 
CHAPTER 9 
• 
Moore 
213 
have used their intellectual skills within the context of a meaningful 
group that was heterogeneaus in ability. 
The vignettes of the background and Iabaratory behavior of the :five 
children just considered perhaps have served to clarify both the opera-
tion of the Labaratory and some of its effects upon exceptional children. 
It might have been more revealing to have presented some of the chil-
dren who started coming to the Labaratory at two and three years of age 
and who are still in the program on a daily basis. Cases of this kind 
demand a more lengthy and systematic treatment. Also, in my opinion, 
very early exposure to a responsive environment produces deep person-
ality changes, and it would be inappropriate to analyze children thus 
exposed outside the context of a theoretical interpretation of personality 
development. Hence, I have focused attention here on children who 
began their experience at the Labaratory at four, :five or six years of age 
and who remained in the program for only one academic year ( or less). 
These children gained useful skills and attitudes which, with the help 
of clinicians, nursery school teachers and others, enabled them to deal 
somewhat more effectively with pressing individual and social demands. 
Another reason for selecting these children was that they make mani-
fest some of the subtleties and complexities of the psychodynamics and 
sociodynamics of learning. This may serve as an antidote to the dangeraus 
notion that a responsive environments Iabaratory grinds out results in a 
purely mechanical way. The role of the supervisor was highlighted 
throughout in order to emphasize that a responsive environments labora-
tory, though phases of it are automated, does not run by itself. It would 
be equally foolish to assume that well-designed instruments do not have 
an important part to play in the daily operation of a laboratory. 
It was the purpose of this chapter to describe an autotelic responsive 
environment which facilitates the learning of complex symbolic skills. It 
was suggested initially that no one aspect of the environment should be 
thought of as constituting its essence. In part it is a mechanical system, 
in part it is a social system, and in part it is a cultural system. All of 
these parts are constituents of the total system-all of them must be taken 
into account if the Labaratory is to be understood. The task of designing 
optimal environments for learning is in its infancy, and the theoretical 
problems of understanding what is going on in the Labaratory are 
staggering. One would have to be very insensitive to its research possi-
bilities not to imagine quickly a hundred and one experiments that could 
be carried out within it which might increase our understanding of 
human beings. For example, the startling similarities between Betty's 
and Jane's :first sessions practically demand further studies of identical 
twins. The behavior of Billy and Edward may be of special interest to 
psychoanalytically oriented researchers. 
214 
PART IV 
For the present and for an additional year or so I intend to continue 
to operate my laboratories as a demonstration project rather than as a 
controlled experiment. I may be mistaken in this policy, but there are 
hazards connected with focusing sharply on one or another aspect of 
human behavior before one gets a full sense of its variety in longitudinal 
perspective. This easily can Iead to lop-sided theorizing and debilitating 
polemics. The Responsive Environments Project is endeavoring to remain 
open and responsive to whatever changes the continuing observations of 
children's behavior seem to call for, although it is easy to deceive one-
self about such matters. 
This chapter, in abridged form, was presented at the Second National North-
western Summer Conference, "The Special Child in Century 21," held in Seattle, 
Washington, August 1962. 
I am indebted to Alan Ross Anderson and Edith S. Lisansky (also see below) 
for helpful criticisms of earlier drafts of this chapter. 
The work reported here has received the generous support of the following organ-
izations: The Carnegie Corporation of New York; The Cooperative Research Pro-
gram of the Office of Education; The McGraw Foundation; The Murray Foundation; 
The Office of Naval Research, Group Psychology Branch, Contract No. SAR/Nonr-
609( 16); The Responsive Environments Foundation; The Riggins Fund of Yale 
University. 
The Thomas A. Edison Research Laboratory of West Orange, New Jersey, a 
division of the McGraw-Edison Company, bore the entire cost of developing the 
equipment described here. I wish to thank particularly Richard Kobler, an electronic 
engineer at the Edison Laboratory, for his valuable contributions. 
Special thanks are due to Dr. Burton Blatt, Head, Department of Special Educa-
tion, Boston University; Dr. John Martin, Superintendent of Schools, Freeport, Long 
Island; and Edward I. McDowell, Jr., Headmaster, Harnden Hall Country Day 
School, for their initiative and administrative skill in establishing responsive environ-
ments laboratories. 
Recognition should be given to the many essential contributions of the Project's 
supervisory staff at the various laboratories: Caroline Colby, Mary Coogan, Ann 
Ferguson, Dorothy Johnson, Ruth Moore and Ruth Wong. Also to Blanche Pierpont 
Blanchard, supervisor of the laboratory-connected classrooms at Harnden Hall Coun-
try Day School. 
Last, but just as important, I wish to thank the following persons for their pro-
fessional services: Dr. Edith S. Lisansky, who is in charge of the Project's work in 
clinical psychology; Dr. Robert F. Newton, for general physical examinations; Dr. 
Robert F. Nagel, Clinical Instructor of Otolaryngology, Yale University, for speech 
and hearing evaluations; Dr. Meyer Samson for eye examinations. 
CHAPTER 9 
• 
Moore 
215 
HEFERENCES 
Anderson, A. & Moore, 0. K. Autotelic folk-models. Technical Report No. 8, Office 
of Naval Research, Group Psychology Branch, Contract SAR/Nonr. 609( 16), 
New Haven, 1959. Reprinted in Sociological Quarterly, 1:204-216. 
Anderson, A. R. & Moore, 0. K. The formal analysis of normative concepts. Amer. 
Soc. Rev., 1957, 22, 9-17. 
Mead, G. H. Mind, Self and Society. Chicago: Univer. of Chicago Press, 1934. 
Moore, 0. K. Dictation. (Motion picture). Will be available through the Responsive 
Environments Foundation, Inc., 20 Augur Street, Hamden, Connecticut. 
Moore, 0. K. Problem solving and the perception of persons. In R. Tagiuri & L. 
Petrullo ( eds.), Person Perception and Interpersonal Behavior. Palo Alto: Stan-
ford Univer. Press, 1958, pp. 131-150. 
Moore, 0. K. Orthographie symbols and the preschool child-a new approach. 
Proceedings of the third Minnesota conference on gifted children, Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1960, pp. 91-101. 
Moore, 0. K. Automated Responsive Environments: Part 1. (Motion picture). The 
Responsive Environments Foundation, Inc., Hamden, Connecticut. 
Moore, 0. K. Automated Responsive Environments: Part 2. (Motion picture). The 
Responsive Environments Foundation, Inc., Hamden, Connecticut. 
Moore, 0. K. & Anderson, A. R. Early Reading and Writing, Part 1: Skills. (Motion 
picture). Basic Education, Inc., Hamden, Connecticut. 
Moore, 0. K. & Anderson, A. R. Early Reading and Writing, Part 2: Teaching 
Methods. (Motion picture). Basic Education, Inc., Hamden, Connecticut. 
Moore, 0. K. & Anderson, A. R. Early Reading and Writing, Part 3: Development. 
(Motion picture). Basic Education, Inc., Hamden, Connecticut. 
Moore, 0. K. & Anderson, A. R. Some puzzling aspects of social interaction. In 
J. H. Criswell, H. Solomon & P. Suppes ( eds.), Mathematical Methods in Small 
Group Processes. Stanford Univer. Press, 1962, pp. 232-249. Also, Rev. of 
Metaphys., 1962, 15, 409-433. 
Moore, 0. K. & Anderson, A. R. The structure of personality. Read at the ONR 
symposium on the "Social Self," University of Colorado, October 7-9, 1961. Also, 
Rev. of Metaphys., 16, 212-236. Also, 0. J. Harvey (ed.), Cognitive Determi-
nants of Motivation and Social Interaction. University of Colorado: Ronald 
Press, 1963. 
Moore, 0. K. & Lewis, D. J. Learning theory and culture. Psych. Rev., 59, 1962, 
380-388. Also, E. P. Hollauder & R. G. Hunt ( eds.), Current Perspectives in 
Social Psychology. New York: Oxford University Press, 1963. 
Pierce, J. R. Symbols, Signals and Noise: The Nature and Process of Communication. 
New York: Rarper & Brothers, 1961. 
Terman, L. M. Genetic Studies of Genius, Vols. 1-5. Palo Alto: Stanford University 
Press, 1925-1959. 
216 
PART IV 
