Doreen Nelson
City BuildingEducation
,4Warm Learn
:37gm!oft/w most importantandmost neglectedsubjects of real
7;:ldumlion is that of children regardingthe city environment in which
ﬂux/indthemselves living. Can they as children haveany eﬁ‘ect on
0ﬂmlution of the massivephysicalitemssurrounding them? Yes,
Fan. Fora numberofyears it has been demonstrated that this
ﬂ!
[act is intensely interestingto both the children and the teens.
, 5:Shines in cityplanningare enormouslystimulatedbyactual
damningfabricating, andoperatingvarious buildingstructures and,
.u[haveall, by buildingclassroom size scale models of the cities the
' ”talentsplan.
, M‘mnmendthat CityBuildingEducationbeincludedin all
Eﬂlmmhnyandhighschoolcurricula.
‘: -
‘
‐Buckminster Fuller
May 8, 1985
Nclnon is |"nu||(l(*l'
and Hircclm' ol' lhc ( I c n l c l ' l'm‘
(lily lluiltling Educational
Programs in lins \ngclcs. Shc
has taught kindcrgartcn
through university lmels since
1959 including a visiting
lcciurcship in thc School of
Architccturc and Urban
Planning at tho University of
California at [ i n s Augclcs. Shc
worked as a consultant for thc
National Endowment for the
Arts and as Artistic Dircclor 0f
the Childrcn’s M u s c u n l in llos
Angclcs. l l c r w u r k in thc l'icld
n l ' i - ( l u c a l i u u has hccu
publishctl “ n i l - [ y
City BuildingEducation
/[ Way t0 Learn
Wrillcu with Kirslcu ( i i ' i m s l a d
Dorm-u Nelson
,
.
_
.
W
.
_
m
_ -
w
v _ . ‘
5 '
, ,
'
3
4
" ,
V a r - M ,
arm‐n,
‐_-
» - _
,
ENVIRON.
DESIGN
4980‐1441
Roc’d uca ENVI
APR 24 1985
Photographic Editor and
Production Director
Bobbi Mapstone
Designed by:
I
SheilaLevrant de Bretteville
Photography by:
|
Charles Eames
Ollice of B a y a n d
I
Charles Eames
Grant Taylor,
B o b b i Mapstone
Library of Congress Catalog
( l a r d NuInbcr 82-74508
Printed in lhc lJ.S.A.
Copyright © l982 Dorccn Nelson
All rights l'i‘M‘l'i‘t'll,
including the right of
rcprmlm-lluu in whole or in
mlrl. c v a l by explicit
wriIIi-u permission.
i’ubllsllcii by the ( Z c u l c r i‘or
(Iiiy Building i‘lilucuiionai
Programs, 2 2 “ ) Wiishirc
Blvd., #505, Santa Monica,
‘
CA 90405
This publication was made
possible by grants fromihe
I
National Endowment for the
Arts, the California Commu‑
nity Foundation, the Cali‑
fornia Arts Council, Heller
Charitable, and the Ralph M.
Parsons Foundation.
. :k is dedicatedto my mother, whoreturnedto
I (0g r ! herdiploma whileI was stillin high
andthen went on with me to college. Through
7'fm lie. I learnedone of lyre’s cruciallessons,
,' ﬁnishingthe things you begin.
(my BiilldlngEducatlon
What I Believe
ity Building is a revisioning of basic educatio
It is dedicated to restoringthe vital connection
between the realms of thinking and doing'in the
learningprocess. By emphasizing this neglected
_
link, the City Buildingapproach nurtures and deV .3;
ops students’ latent powers of originality, imagina‑
tion, andinvention.I regardthis asthe main task if
education.
The concept grew o u t of my experience asateach-l"‘
in the Los Angeles schools‐ a career I began in 195
and my desire to uncover the essential meaning0 ‘
education. Since the launching of the initial pilot
study in 1969,the system has been in use in school
throughout the country and has m e t with enough 5
response and success that the time has come to m . )
the details of its vision available to awider audien
ol'vdu mom. I would like to emphasize at the outs ,
that (1in Building is n o t an alternative form of edu
union. Nor is it another enrichment program or ' ‘
slrulogum for popularizing subject matter. Rather »
is aphilosophy of education based on explicit
'
assumptions and beliefs about the learning proces
and the role of education, particularly in o u r w o r l
of today. These beliefs, articulated below, inform
substance and shape the contours of the City
Buildingsystem.
All creative w o r k
requires an
ability lo
transform t h a t
which is given
a n d f a m i l i a r i n t o
s o m e t h i n g n e w
a n d original.
TeachingInventive Thought
I believe that the capacity for originality and i n v e
tion ‐often regarded asthe special province of a I
inventors, and great thinkers - i s inherent in the
mind of each individual. All creative work, whet 1
it is a stunning technological invention, abrillian
theoretical breakthrough, or animproved way of ‘
organizing desks in a classroom requires an abili .
transform that which is given and familiar into
something n e w and original. City Buildingwas
founded on the beliefthat this ability can be t a u g
Developingindividual creativity and encouragin
students to use this skill in shaping their lives an
the world‐these are the t w o foremost items on t
City Buildingagenda.
.
A
Teaching the TransformationProcess
.
Traditional teaching shares the aim of stimulatin‘
inventive thought, aspursued in the following m_
ner. The,student begins by acquiring informatio
ﬁrst one layer, then the next. Then, it is hoped, a
some point usually well advanced down the line,‘
critical mass forms which mysteriously triggers,a
ability to synthesize the accumulated store of infu'
mation into original ideas.This is the traditional3‘
hierarchy of learning, leadingfrom basic knowle‘
to the realm of pure invention. The ﬂaw in this
design is that only the very gifted students ever r3
their apogee. The rest are left ploddingmethodi.1‘
through lesson after lesson, often developing a -i
dislike toward learningin the process.
=’
The City Buildingapproach reverses the traditio‘
hierarchy by training students ﬁrst in the skill‘of‘
inventive thought from which the basics are derii
In its basic features, this learninginvolves prac‑
tice andfamiliarity with the steps in the process ’
transformation which lies atthe heart of the cre.
process. This is the essential original contributi!
City Buildingoffers to education. It teaches stud
to take any given “thing,” whetherthat beanob'
an organization, or an idea, and transform it i n t
(l
(Iii) llullqllnu l‘ltlurnlion
’I‘he miniaturized
1'in gives the
students p o w e r
o v e r t h e u s u a l l y
unseen whole.
something n e w by altering its size, scale, role, fu
.
tion., direction, its dimension in space or over t i m
These changes, either singly or in combination, 0?
prise what is called an intuitive leap. City Buildin'
takes the mystery o u t of the intuitive leap and pr‑
sents its components to the students systematical
The course of study begins with simple transfor
tion of objects to transformation of organizations
social relationships, ultimately synthesizing both 3
these in the transformation of the community ano'
environment.
Through this process, students are guided to “dis
cover” for themselves the information and basic _
knowledge required for the execution of their ide‘
In other words, the City Buildingsystem provide
a relevant context in which basic learningtakes
place. By focusing on inventive thought, students
automatically receive their basic education aswel
The reverse is n o t t r u e . A focus on basic skills do 5
n o t necessarily leadto invention.
‘
The CityasaContextforLearning
,
The vehicle through which this learning occurs is
scale model of the students’ o w n city or commun'
projected into the future and constructed in the
classroom asthe central learning activity. We def’
a city asany group of people organized to live
‘
together, using outside goods and services. The s
model community can be urban, suburban, or ru
We use the city, in the larger meaning of the worn
because it serves asa teeming microcosm of civil'_
tion. The miniaturized city gives the students po "
over the usually unseen whole, which, in turn, p
vides a dynamic context within which countless '
topics of learning can be studied in their intercon
nection and relationship to that whole. For exam 5'.
amodel city that is (hypothetically) located on an
earthquake zone m u s t have buildings constructeo‘
withstand the stress of t r e m o r s . Otherwise peopl
get hurt and die. The city planners (namely, the ‘
8
( l i l ) llulltlinu I'Illucnlhm
T h e m o d e l 0in
stands as a
tangible a n d
constant r e m i n d e r
of t h e vital
b o n d between
classroom l i f e a n d
c o m m u n i t y l i f e .
students) are responsible for protecting the city’s
inhabitants1ncase of such disasters. Therefore,
earthquake-proof construction techniques m u s t b
utilized. Professional architects are calledin to
‘
advise the planners on proper methods. Building
codes m u s t be established and enforced In this
example, geology, municipalplanning, architectu
and construction are suddenly experiencedin t h ‑
profound relevance to one another Just asin co
munity life outside the classroom, the model c0
munity vibrates with causally connectedi s s u e s a
events occurring simultaneously. With the sparki
of such interconnections, knowledge springs to li}
The city asamicrocosm of society transcends all 3‘
grade levels. It can be used over and over again a
year, changing asthe classroom needs change, fo
ing n o w on industriali s s u e s , next timeon marin-_-‘
biology,thenagain onhealth care oragriculture..
food distribution, government, law, transportatio
adinﬁnitum.
The model city stands asatangible and constant ‘
reminder of the vital bond between classroom l i f‘
and community life. Without this connection, I
believe that learningbecomes vapid and meaning
less More than eighty years ago, John Dewey
'
stressed the signiﬁcance of this link for the learni
process. In his treatise “My Pedagogic Creed,” h:f
stated:
I Inlu'm' that education is a process oﬂiving a n d»
(1preparationforﬁiture living
I believe that the school must representpresent If
1]}:asrealand vital to the child asthat which he a
ries on in the home, in the neighborhood, or on
playground.
;
I believe that much of present educationfails becai
it neglects thisfundamentalprincipleof the schoo‘
aform ofcommunityIfe It conceives the school I f
place where certain informationistobegiven, wh
certain lessons are to belearned, or where certain ,
habits are tobeformed. The value of these is con‑
City B u i l d i n g Htlucalion
Subject m a t t e r
comes 011‘t h e
page a n d i n t o
t h e classroom
where students
work w i t h it
in three-
dimensional
f o r m .
ceivedaslyinglargelyin the remoteﬁxture,- the
must do these thingsfor the sake of something
is to do; they are merepreparation..Asa result
(10 n o t become apart of the lifeexperience of the
andso are n o t truly educative.
Dewey’s criticism holds t r u e today ‐perhaps no
m o r e than ever ‐with the sad result that studen
get ﬁfty percent of what they have learned wi
one year and eighty percent in just t w o years. Ci
Buildingaddresses the ephemeral nature of t r a
tional learning.Through the microcosmic comm
ity created in the classroom, complete with gove
ment, postal system, property ownership, 20 '
regulations, stock exchange, monetary system,
so on, learning acquires a certain Vividness, whi
in t u r n , has beenfound to leave a lastingimp
on the mind of the learner. Furthermore, proj
the mini-city into the future requires the studen
create something new, n o t merely replicate wha
already exists. This aspect‐designing for the fu
‐constitutes an essential departure from Dewey.
Three-DimensionalLearning
The vividness of the learningexperience is rein‑
forced bywhat wecall the three-dimensional na
of the classroom work. Traditional learningis
exclusively two-dimensional; students read boo
hear teachers speak, sometimes see movies abo
aspects of life that take place outside of the class
room. The learningprocess is therefore almost
entirely abstract and intellectual. The material,
physical, and concrete dimension of learningis1
o u t of the process.
In a City Building classroom, concrete experien
itselfthe vehicle for learningreading, mathema
history, geography, and soon. Subject m a t t e r
off the page and into the classroom where stud
work with it in three‐dimensional form, givingi
visual, spatial reality. This extra dimension is
on many counts. First, it helps develop the
abilities of those students who are predominan
I2
1 ( i t \ BuildingMlmalion
T h e spatial
dimension
forces t h e
subjects of
learning to be
understood in
context, in their
relationship to
o t h e r issues.
verbal while, at the same time, validating the abil
ties of visually‐oriented students who are often a
handicapIn traditional classrooms. Second, the
three-dimensional m o d e l18both aproduct of de
and atool for designing. Students can try o u t a n .
reﬁne their ideas bymanipulatingthings ont h e*
model In this way, the model gives concrete f o r
to the thought process itself.
Third, the spatial dimension forces the subjects .1
learningto beunderstood1ncontext in their r e l
tionship to otheri s s u e s . Designing and impleme
ingatransportation system, for example, involv‑
questions of housing patterns, commercial zonin
noise and air pollution, trafﬁc safety, trafﬁc ﬂow,
on and on. Unresolved conﬂicts acquire atangibl
presence in the model city‐the freeway turns ou
bet o o close to the park, pollutingthe picknicker
and endangering the safety of toddlers This em:,
sis on context distinguishes the City Building
'
approach from atraditional approach that may ai
for an occasional day of hands-o n learning.
The beneﬁts of three‐dimensional learning are v l
With the rapid advance of o u r technological, me
dominated civilization, a certain dimension of l i f
experience has eroded. In the old days, particula
before urbanization and the advent of the mass
"
media, the two‐dimensional nature of school lea.
ing was richly supplemented by life experience 0
side of school. Students would go to school to le ‘
reading, writing, and arithmetic while outside 0 3'
school they would experience the cycles of life b “
watching calves and lambs being born. Or they ‘
would ﬁnd o u t about the relationship between
climate and agriculture by participating in the fa
harvest.
4
Students today ﬁll much of their after‐school ti
with TV, movies, video games, and other t w o ‑
dimensional activities. This resultsin aﬂattenin
l4
(Zil_\ Building l-Zdueulion
o u t of knowledge. Life is n o t experienced directl'
but only seen in representation I believe that it i ‘
essential to reinstate the material w o r l d1nthe p
ess oﬂearning and that it is up to the schools to
the initiative.
’
This type of involvement in the subjects of learni'
produces afar deeper understanding of basic su.
m a t t e r than abstract learning can achieve. Beyon
that, it also equips students with essential tools f
living, particularly the ability to work with other
order to resolve conﬂicts make decisions organ
resources, advocate ideas, assume and share res .
sibility, and create their o w n culture.
GivingShape to the Future in the Present
City Buildingalso includes the dimension of t i m a;
the learningprocess by projectingthe model city
into the future. Of course, there is no textbook f 0"l
the future, no authoritative work or person who a
say, “ t h i s18right,” or “ t h a t1swrong.’Pedagogic
this fact shifts the emphasis from the product to _
process of learning The central issue becomes “ ‘
doI get the informationI needto c a r r youtI n y _
plan,” n o t “do I know the correct answer.’7The
.
effectis to encourage self-reliance and discourag:
dependency on authority ﬁgures Ultimately, s t u i
dents learn to go to the teacher and other autho "
for information but n o t for approval. They develo‘
what Jerome Bruner calls courage of taste, that 1*
eonlidence in one’s o w n intuitions about what is:
good, what is beautiful, what is moving, and wh
tawdry. It is this inner conﬁdence that guides s t u
dents n o t only in planning their community of th
future but also in deciding what career path to f0
low, what to do with their time, and how to live ,
their lives.
'
The model city also stands astangible evidence t
the future coexists with the present to the extent
that o u r action or inaction today inﬂuences the s
o f t o m o r r o w. Students ﬁnd o u t that b y applying
I“
17H) lluildlnu I'de'nllun
ability to transform and invent to their model c0 .
munity, they can determine the course of their CD
munity’s future. Whatever needs they perceive i
their present.environment ‐ e.g., clean air ‐ provi
grist for the mill of the imagination asthey devis
n e w and original approaches to chronic social co
cerns. Through their participation, the model cit
ultimately represents their ideal Vision.
'
In this way, City Buildingfulﬁlls my vision of ed \
tion associal reform. The experience of conceivi
and realizing asocial vision fosters the spirit of
community participationin the learner. I believe
that students trained in their creative powers are’
likely asadults to become helpless victims of i n t ‘
able circumstance. Instead,they acquire the abili
take charge of their lives, their communities, t h e
environment and become active creators of their:
world.
,
l8
(Til) lhlildinu Education
Background
The City Buildingmethod has n o w been in 11
public schools for well over a decade. Like most;
social innovations, its vision emerged at the inte
tion of educational theory‐particularly the i d e a
John Dewey, Hilda Taba, Benjamin Bloom, Joh
Guilford, and Jerome Bruner‐and personal exp‘
ence, namely my previous fourteen years of teac
both children and other teachers in the Los Ang
schools.
Dreams andFrustrations
In many ways, my dreams and frustrations asa
teacher parallel those of my colleagues. Simply
stated, m o s t of us go into the ﬁeld of education '
of adeep‐seated desire to beneﬁt o u r pupils’ liv:"
equipping them with the tools of knowledge the
need in order to getby in the world and live
satisfying lives.
It is by n o w atediously familiar complaint that t
traditional classroom does n o t nurture these ide
istic intentions. Instead of equipping pupils to d
with life, I found myselfteaching them to be i m i
tors and replicators of knowledge conveyed in a
manner. I was n o t challenging their minds to w - '
imaginatively with the products of learning. I w:v
n o t challenging myself to “truly educate” my pu‘
in Dewey’s sense; I was too busy trying to get to
chapter six on schedule and make sure I had “co
ered” all the malt‘rial, all the while struggling to
involve the parents, cope with administrative
20
till} Hulltllnu I'Ztluentlun
Artists,
designers, a n d
inventors t a k e
something
known and
familiar a n d
t u r n i t into
something
original.
demands, and soon and soforth. In a nutshell, I
overburdened, isolated with my problems, and .
erless to solve them. My students yawned. I ya
Together it seemed that we were trapped in an ’
ing program that consistently fed the mind with
without stimulating its ability to transform factu
knowledge in everyday experience. The awaren‘
of this growing malaise produced a search for n
techniques -law‐related education this year, ne
math the n e x t ‐ n o n e of which addressed the
underlyingproblems.
My frustration with learning echoed my feelings
about larger social concerns, speciﬁcally, the abs
of human values in social planning. Like many .2,
contemporaries, I felt angered by the lack of a ra
transit system in Los Angeles and the dependen
on polluting, congestion‐creating automobiles. I.
hated the hideous conformity of tract houses an.‘
fact that low-income housingwas destroyed to
way for a baseball stadium. I wanted to know vv
there were no parks, bicycle paths, provisions f0
child care for working parents. Instead we have
smog alerts, toxic waste pollution, and the lethal
presence of nuclear reactors (located on earthqu‘
faults) and missiles. I felt helpless and victimize ,
social circumstances that seemed beyond my in
‘
ence or control. Why didn’t They do something»
Upon reﬂection, it dawned on me that the vague:
omnipotent They, on whom I heaped blame for
social malaise, were n o n e other than myselfand,
every other citizen who passively accept the dete
oration of o u r world. The sense of powerlessnes
felt asan educator and asacitizen effectively ma‘
the actual powerI had/have to shape both my We‘
and my world.
.
ThinkingLike an Arlisl
My admiration for artists sparked this realizatio ‘
Artists, designers, inventors all work in the area ‘
transformation
taking something known and fa
iar and turning it into something original, accord
22
( i l l ) llulldlnu l-Ztlm'ullon
T h e spark that
produces g r e a t
a r t a n d t h o u g h t
is a state of m i n d
that is available
to a l l people.
r
L
to their vision. Often the medium is a materials .
asr a w stone shaped into sculpture. In fact, anyt
c a n serve as a medium for the creative process.
Tschaikowsky, for example, expressed aworld e
‐ the War of 1812‐ i n a musical overture. At the 0?
stitutional Convention in 1787, the founding fath:
of o u r country produced the Constitution of the .
United States and the Bill of Rights, the creative
product of their combined social-political visionu
In countless less‐dramatic ways, the creative pro
, ,
that produced the 1812 Overture and the United ,
' '
.
.~
'
States Constitution is at work in the daily lives 0"
' ’
'
all people‐athletes, gardeners, journalists,
cooks, ofﬁce managers, therapists, mothers, m a .
zine editors, restaurant owners, educators, and s
on. The point I ammakingis that the spark that '
duces great art and thought is a state of mind that
available to all people. And it is this same state 02"
mind,that can empower individuals to affect thei
lives and their culture just asartists and invento
transform materials.
With these thoughts in mind, the task of educati
suddenly seemed clear: to teach students to thin ,
like artists.
In exploring how to go about this challenge, I
‘
remembered the work of educator Jerome Brun‑
Bruner talked of the intuitive leap aslying at the '
heart of the creative process. Bruner regarded th
intuitive leap asa mysterious, uncharted activity 5
the mind. Though I disagreed with Bruner’s und
standing of the creative process, his language tip .
me off. The challenge was to uncover the myste ‘
what happens during an intuitive leap. I found
‘
myselfdelving into this uncharted territory, see l
to demystify it.
'
Through my acquaintance with artists, designers ;
composers, and architects I began to uncover the .
logic behind the intuitive leap that Bruner found
mysterious. I found that each a c t of creation is as
24
( I i l ) B u i l d i n g [ C ( l n c n l i n n
Each a c t of
creation is
associated w i t h
c e r t a i n changes ‑
changes in size,
scale, function,
role, direction in
t i m e or in space.
ciated with certain changes-changes in size, sca
function, role, direction in time or in space. At a
simple level, glasses ﬁlled with w a t e r become a ,
musical instrument, t w o orange juice cans c o n n
by a string become aprimitive telephone. The
V
complex invention or work of a r t is ultimately 0 j
reﬁnement of this basic process. Practice in the .2
of making such changes became the focal activit
City Building.
’
Before ﬁlling in the details of how City Building‑
works in the classroom, I would like to emphasi
that since the initial pilot study in 1969,the mod
has been continually reevaluated and reﬁned. In
central to the principles of City Buildingis the n
that feedback produces change, and the system i
is no exception to this rule. The original model 7
ﬁrst developed through a series of workshops at
Smithsonian Institution in 1971and 1972. The te
“City Building” was ﬁrst coined thereto refer n‘
only to the physical aspects of urban living, but .
to the invisible fabric of social, political, and eco
nomic relationships aswell. In 1974, the Center
City BuildingEducational Programs was founde'
The Center continues to lead intensive worksho
which primary and secondary teachers (and som
college-level instructors) learn the philosophy a .
practice of City Building. With the active partici‑
lion of teachers, administrators, university depa:
m c n l s of education, City Building has become a
dynamic context for research into'the n a t u r e of
learning.
26
City Buildinglidiiﬁilhin
H o w It Works
he focus of the classroom work lies in const ‘
ing, evaluating, and reﬁningthe mini-city of the
future. Beforeactually identifying community bo
daries, parceling o u t land, and erecting the build
the students are guided through a series of overl
ping activities which enable them to see themsel
and their environment asmutable entities. The
charted path leads through four phases, from an '
introductory phase designed to reveal what info
tion students are bringingto their work through
three phases of transformation activities. Followi‘»
the introduction, Phase Oneexplores the individn
relationship to objects, with anemphasis on t r a n
forming their size, scale, and function. Phase Tw
explores the individual’s relationship to organiza‘.
tions, stressing the transformation of function an
role. Phase Three integrates the t w o former phas~
in the transformation of the community and
environment.
l
Although these phases of activity a r e of necessity I
presented sequentially, it is important to realize t
in the classroom activities the different phases ca
and do occur simultaneously. Exercises in object 1.
transformation can take place at the same time as
mini‐city is being designed. At the same time, the
phases are additive, moving from simple to comp
levels of understanding.
‘
28
(lit) Building Education
E
I ’ d like to emphasize that throughout this proces
basic skills are acquired1na traditional m a n n e r ‑
presented drilled and tested for recall accordin
standard teaching methodology. The difference 1
that in the City Building system, learningﬂows
organically from the need to know to the applica
of the knowledge, n o t mechanically accordingto
what’s next on the lesson plan or which chapter 3‘
lows. As part of the discussion and evaluation of
City Building activities, the teacher guides the st
dents in identifyingwhat they need to know in o
to proceed with their designs. Then the students
research the requiredinformation and study the,
skills they need. At that point, they apply their 11
skills and knowledge to the design of the model...
needto lay o u t a street plan, for example, requir
an ability to recognize and work with parallel l i n
(and perpendicular ones, for that matter). After t
concept has been learned, the students use this c
cept in laying o u t the streets on the model. In thi
way, the meaning of parallel l i n e s13extended fro
abstract understandingto concrete experience.
Speciﬁc City Buildingtools facilitate this transiti
from the abstract to the concrete. These include
drawing asa form of communication, setting crit
at the outset of each activity sothat the ﬁnished
product has a reference point for evaluation, w r i
llSLS‘ and organizing ideas and information accord
to importance, producingﬂow charts, categorizi
and displaying information on drawings, charts, .
endars,graphs, diagrams, maps, matrices,ﬂoorp
protytypes, anddisplay boards.The composite is
technique used for inventingmany forms by com
ing ideas, materials, and styles from disparate
realms, e.g., aJapanese‐style house that has amu;
sard roof, Victorian windows, and aRussian-Sty]:1
doorway. The history wall records the events and
activities of the class, providing a sort of three‑
dimensional cultural history period. Experience
reports describe students’ feelings about events ae
50
(Illy llulldlnu l'lduonllnu
T h e three‑
dimensional
m o d c l shows n o t
only h o w things
d o l o o k , b u t also
h o w they m i g h t
l o o k .
objects they are transforming. Town meetings occ
regularly asa way for students to express their fe
ings orally, develop group consensus on decision
make and follow agendas, and resolve conﬂicts. *
three‐dimensional models Show n o t only how thi i
do look, but also how they might look.
‘
IntroductoryPhase
The introductory phase begins with the students
respondingto the question, “Who Am I,” to begi
establish the sense of personal identity students V
bringto their o w n and collaborative class work. ’
Then, to expose what they know of their environ
ment, students draw maps of the major features‑
their community‐landmarks, streets, signiﬁcant
buildings, vegetation, etc. The individual maps a
then combined into a larger community map thaw
reﬂects each student’s community concerns. The
community map indicates the location of each st
dent’sjhome asaway of furthering a sense of pe
sonal identiﬁcation and of graphically illustratin;.
where each student lives with respect to the othe,
Another activity builds upon this incipient c o m ‑
munity knowledge to explore the notion of value
Students draw or photograph what they consider
be the “good” and “bad” aspects of their environ
m e n t and list the reasons for their judgments. T
exercise provides a basis for talking about the r e l
tivity of values. One student who lives in an outly
neighborhood regards the freeway as“good”
because it enables her and her family to get wher
they w a n t to go quickly. To the boy whose house
right n e x t to the freeway, the freeway is “bad”
.
because the noise, pollution, and danger of speed
ing cars dominate his experience. This activity he
students to appreciate each other’spoint of View.
Ultimately,1nbuilding their mini-city, students
V
have to negotiate and resolve these differing valu
Early on students get to try o u t their knowledge i '
what is called instant city building. This activity is
52
(III) Mulltllnu I'Itlm'nllun
designed to help identify students’ preconceived p
notions and to ﬁnd o u t what information gaps e i n
Instant city buildingprovides the teacher with ad
bank of what to teach. The activity is based on the_
following imaginary situation. In a place of great
natural beauty, an e w material has been discovere
which miraculously makes all wastes biodegradab
Miningoperations have begun, and the students .
have the task of planning and buildingacommuni
to support the mining operation. They are respon
ble for providing all the facilities required by apo.
ulation that doubles each year. Of course, such
growth threatens the area’s natural beauty, which
the students are also responsible for preserving.
instant city gives students anopportunity right fro
the outset to experience issues and subjects in con
text, while putting them in a position where they 1
have to resolve the conﬂicts that necessarily arise .
from the context, conﬂicts such aspopulation gro
versuspreservation of the natural environment.
Students begin by constructing a scale model ofa ‘
simpliﬁed natural landscape on aStyrofoam base, ‘
includingmountains, valleys, forests, lakes, and
open land. (With a little imagination, green sawdu
can look remarkably like grass; bits of green spong ,
impaled on toothpicks resemble little trees.) By
actually creating anatural landscape students lear >
how the different aspects of nature interrelate‐ riv
ers ﬂow down from mountains, emptying into the ]
lakes below, creating a fertile valley for crop cultiv
tion. But if the mountains are too high, they cut
down onavailable sunlight, thereby diminishingt ,
growing season.
The instant city site model provides the basis for
other City Buildingactivities. Each time the site
model gets transformed accordingto need, ulti‑
mately becomingthe site of the mini-city of the
future. In the course of these many transformation
of the original site model, students get a lot of prac
tice in designing and buildingcities and generally
‘54
(Elly lluildinu I‘de'ullun
developing their facility with these skills. By the
time they begin working on the mini-city of the
future, they have already become “experts,” soto
speak.
When the model is ready to go, the students devel
a chart of what they need and what they don’t wa
in their city. This serves as a guide in making deci‑
sions and later on in evaluating to what extent the .
have m e t their o w n standards. Not surprisingly, p
lution, crime, poverty seem to have a regular plac
on the “don’t want” list.
The site is divided into council districts. The stu‑
dents group into districts, elect representatives to '
the city council, and elect amayor who then appoi
commissioners for housing, transportation, health
etc. Huddlingbrieﬂy with othermembers of their
council district, students plan their district ﬁrst on,
paper with the mayor and commissioners coordin
ingthe planningphase. Then comes implementa‑
tion. Of course, asin real life, there are certain pre
sures, namely time. Students have to devise housi ._j
transportation, and other services and facilities to k
keep up with the rapidly growing population (with
o u t destroying too many trees or pollutingthe rive
Getting students to respondto pressure is a centra
message of the activity because pressure is what
causes things to change.
The activity ends with an evaluation session. Are
there sufﬁcient facilities for the population? How f
does waste disposal occur? Has the natural enviro -.
m e n t been preserved? The students join in adiscu
sion of the extent to which their model city embod‘
ies the ideals listed in their “needs/don’t want”
chart. The evaluation is n o t a measure of success 0,
failure in the sense of a grade (A, B, C, etc.) but
rather produces essential feedback that enhances
subsequent activities. All mistakes and “failures”
are valuable in that they are instructive asthey are
the “real” world. Ultimately,there are no “wrong”
answers, only those that don’t work.
'
36
(Elly llulltllnu lCdm-nllon
Cities a r e m e r e l y
spaces ﬁl l e d w i t h
objects w h i c h
have g r o w n either
vertically, l i k e a
skyscraper, or
horizontally, l i k e
a tract home
development.
Object 'I)‘(1r1.§/ornz(1ti()rl: Phase I
In the ﬁrst teaching sequence, students begin to
explore their relationship to the world of objects.
Each student selects and builds a model of his or h,
chosen object (atoothpaste tube, aﬁlm reel) at act
scale, at decreased scale, at increased scale, and
ﬁnally at the scale of the student’s o w n body.
Through this activity, students become familiar wi
the concepts of structure, scale, ratio and proporti
and geometry. In effecting these transformations, ,
students begin to see objects assystems of interde -‘
pendent parts. They discover for themselves the
laws relatedto physical objects. They also feel
.
empowered in the process. They see that making ‘
change is simple. By observing objects in space,
.
buildingthem, taking them apartand changingth
functions, something n e w is created. Students
become inventors. They reestablish their relation‑
ship with the three‐dimensional world: objects in .
space become accessible, touchable, concrete. The
also beginto see that buildings and cities are mere
spaces ﬁlled with objects which have grown either
vertically, like askyscraper, or horizontally, like a
tract home development.
Transformation of Organizations:PhaseII
The second sequence of activities applies the
concepts of community, structure, and transforma‑
tion introduced in the previous activitiesto questi‑
of organization. Here organization is understood 1.
its largest sense asany systematic arrangement of
parts into a whole. Seen in this way, nature, time,
the home are organizations just asare the city cou
cil and the postal service. This series of activities is
designed to develop the student’s ability to recogn'
and deﬁne needs and to organize available resourc
in order to provide for those needs efﬁciently.
The form of organization closest at hand is the clas’
r o o m which serves asboth aphysical and social
38
(Ill) llulltllng l".(|m'nllon
organization. Thus, the ﬁrst need the students fac
that of reorganizing their classroom to facilitate w-r
study, and storage. The purpose is three-fold. Firs
the students are introduced to an organization at 31
scale that is familiar and comprehensible. In this
case, the physical classroom provides aperceivabl
structure oﬁnterrelated parts. Second, they learn >
about the group process of organizing the existing
classroom social and physical structure into a m o r
efﬁcient entity. Through group participation, stu‐ ‘
dents imagine and invent responses to what each ‘
class identiﬁes asneeds. Third, students become ‘
aware of the need to anticipate future needs in the
present, and this requires the involvement of thei ‘
imaginations.
Usingthe skills learned in object transformation,
students construct a scale model of their classroo
interior which serves asthe basis for discussing w
works and what doesn’t work in the existing class‑
r o o m organization. The scale model is an empowe
m e n t tool. It provides an opportunity to experime
and play around with change before making an
actual commitment. In this way it also functions as
decision-making tool. Students can test and evalua.
reorganization proposals by rearrangingthe furniv
ture and ﬁxtures in the model and discussing the
effects of the changes. Constructing the model‐an
thereby adding the third dimension‐contributes
information that would n o t beapparentin a ﬂoor
plan. Viewed two‐dimensionally from above, table
and desks seem to take up quite a bit of room. But
the three-dimensional model you can see that they
in fact have r o o m underneath which can be used f.‑
storage or other purposes.
‘
Working in groups, students discuss such question
as: What is a classroom for? How is it used? What _
are the good and bad aspects of the current class‑
r o o m organization? What can be changed, moved,
installed, removed? How are changes limited byf1'
and safety regulations? Who owns the furniture?
4 "  9 1 9 ; ! ! s t 3 ‘ 1 0 t h t h
T h e teacher is
n o t t h e absolute
authority;
decision‐m a k i n g
is shared.
Who owns the classroom? Who is the Board of Ed
cation? Each student or group develops aplan for
reorganizingthe classroom along with a rationale
for the plan. Next, each group selects the plan tha
seems to work best from among those devised by
its members. The class then listens to each group
present the arguments in favor of 1ts plan. Discus
sion and evaluation are followed by the selection "
a ﬁnal plan and then the actual reorganization of
classroom. This process encourages students to
advocate their ideas while giving them the oppor‑
tunity to experience the tangible results of success
fully advocating their vision In this activity, the
social organization is ﬁrst transformed; then the
social organization itself acts to transform the phy
cal organization, taking the level of change to t h e
n e x t degree.
At this point, it seems appropriate to c o m m e n t on:
the fact that a City Buildingclassroom does n o t 10
like atraditional classroom. Neatand orderly r o w
of desks give way to a s o r t of creative disorder wi
the focus of attention on the model, which itself *
points the way to another level of order. There ar
in fact many ways to arrange aclassroom, depend
ing on the immediate needs of the classroom c o m
munity. Asneeds change, classroom reorganizati
can be repeated over and over, each time respond"
to the changing function of the classroom.
Likewise, the role of a City Buildingteacher diffe
from that of a traditional teacher. While the teach
serves asthe designer of the activities and a guide
along the path, he or she is n o t theabsolute autho
ity asin a traditional classroom. Instead, decision:
makingis shared aspart of the learningprocess.
Students ﬁnd that they have to depend on each otv
and on outside consultants for ideas and feedback
Whereas traditional teaching tends to rely on the
input of academicians, City Buildingconsciously
cultivates the participation of practicingprofessio
als from the community‐designers, architects, cit
42
(Elly Building I'de'nllnn
council members, urban planners, environmental
ecologists, bankers, lawyers, shopkeepers, and so '
on. The teacher becomes a resource person a m o n
others the students can call upon for help in addr'
ing needs they themselves have identiﬁed. This
decentralization is crucial to the City Building con'
cept. It encourages self‐reliance in the students w
freeing the teacher to participate asa resource/m
ager in the learningprocess, unconstrained by th
burdens of the authoritarian role.
As part of their increasingresponsibility for plann
classroom activities, students learn how to use a H
chart. The planning and organizing of classroom
activities is done by groups of students who share '
c o m m o n need or problem. A large class ﬂowchart
constructed which serves asa visual planning and'
organizing aid for the entire year. Proposed activi
that have been evaluated and approved by the clas
get placed on the ﬂowchart in writing or using
'
symbols.
The unfolding of classroom events and activities 1
documented on the classroom walls which becom*1
a “history wall,” recording and visually displaying
the cultural progress of the particular class. While
the ﬂowchart helps students to decide where they'
are going, the history wall shows them where the .
have been, giving the past avisual reality in the
present. The items on the history wall help stude
to assess their past and use it to shape their futur
Both the ﬂowchart and the history wall function a
communication tools.
Another activity in this phase simulates the experi
ence of surviving in primitive surroundings. The
activity begins with the adaptation of the original »
modelto form another natural landscape featurin
mountains, valleys, lakes, canyons, meadows, r i v
etc. The activity takes place according to the follo .
ing scenario. The students belongto a primitive
nomadic tribe that lives during a time before tools
44
(myinulldlrtq Eduvatlon
w e r e invented. It is n o w fall, and they have come
the place of their site model to spend the winter .
spring. They m u s t set about the task of makingw
ever arrangements are necessary for their surviv
After all, the seasons are uncontrollable and mak
allowances for mistakes. Individuals will have to .
work fast and develop skills and tools in order to
survive. They will also discover and use forms of ‑
social organization such asdivision of labor, selec
ofa leader and primitive forms of government, an.
the development of communication and trade
between groups. The purpose of this activity is f0:
students to experience the effects of the passage .
time. The seasons represent a preordained time
clock to which they m u s t respond in order to su
They ﬁnd o u t that they can transform the effects 4
natural time through their inventions and discov~
Each individual is represented by apin on the mo
Applying skills in structure, spatial organization, .
scale transformation, students build shelters to
stand the forces of nature. The location of the set
m e n t is inﬂuencedby proximity to food sources,
climate, buildingmaterials, etc.
Now the forces of nature begin their course with ‘
wind storms (produced by a hair dryer), rain and
s n o w storms (produced by aw a t e r spray gun).
and snow storms become increasingly violent ast
season passes from fall to winter. All of the n a t u r
forces that contribute to the situation are researc ‘
and produced by the students themselves. In ase
the students “invent” the seasons and other natut
occurring conditions so asto approximate what h,
pens in real life. Then, asthe forces of nature are‘
experienced, the logic and construction of their 3
ters become critical. Cave and mountain dwellers
can get snowed in and cut off from food suppliesf
Riverside dwellings can get ﬂooded asrains caus :
rivers to overﬂow their banks.
46
(Elly llnlIdlnu l'ltlllt‘llllﬂll
T h e m i n i - c i t y
provides practice
in crealing
fantasy a n d real‑
l i f e solutions to
l a r g e r issues.
In the end, some survive, others perish. As one
teacher observed, the ones who perish certainly
don’t forget the experience. Others survive by dis 1
covering ﬁre for warmth or inventingweapons wi_
which to kill animals for their m e a t and hides or b
learning to communicate by smoke signals. Thro i
this exercise, students learn ways to adapt and us
nature; they also discover the need to invent tools
and develop agriculture and other natural r e s o u r
to help ensure their survival. Once they identify t '
needs, thorough study and researchgo into
discovering the means to provide for the need.
The Individualin Relationship to the Community ‘
andEnvironment:PhaseI I I
The third and m o s t complex phase of the City Bu'
ing system concerns the design and construction .
a model of the students’ o w n community projecte
into the future. Duringthis phase past learning‑
concepts and skills developed in previous phases ,
placed in a context that challenges the students
to apply that learningto n e w and m o r e complicat‘
problems. This phase experiments with the trans
formation of the community and environment by '
changing size, scale, role, function, and direction '
over time and in space. Through the construction.
the mini‐city, students become experienced in the
techniques required for addressing the issues and
needs of typical real‐life situations they may face i’
later years. It also provides practice in creating
fantasy and real-life solutions to these issues. And
by learningto cooperate and collaborate with one
another, the students ﬁnd o u t how their various
individual solutions ﬁt together in the larger whol
The work gets underway with the adaptation of th
original site model to the contours and dimension
of the local community. By using the local commu ;
nity asa site, students get to perceive the transfo
tion of something real. The work has arelevance;
what they are doing matters. Using a grid, the s t u ‑
dents then develop land parcels, two-dimensional
48
(Ii!) Building lildm'nlinu
at ﬁrst, then transferring them to the site model.
Now comes the distribution of the parcels to the
students. Which method shall they use? Lottery?
Land grab? Auction or sale? Teacher assignment?
Each method is researched and investigated. Using
role playing, the class can try o u t each method and,
choose whichever one works best and m o s t equita‑
bly. Deeds are then drawn up and issued. Each
‘
student is n o w the owner of a piece of property on
the site, which, in turn, involves the student direct
L.cw ,
and emotionally in the problems and decision‐
;.~ "3,15,:
.
.
.
‘
~ 5 0 é
i ﬂu ﬂ' ,
makingprocesses of the model c1ty.
,
,
- , .1a" a
f w d / ( M a w !
»
rumMrﬂr’wrxn
. 50¢th ”Qt/“1.15.19”
.L
m
‐
wm a .
Havana {rm/44"
‘lﬂﬁtgyw
g u m may,
V29110'” W
,y ,
26ml”:
Students research and develop a survey of the sec ,
of the region and community they’ve chosen to
design. The survey will serve asthe basis for proje
ingtheir goals for the city. They prepare charts,
maps, and graphs depicting the basic forces acting
their community, includingpopulation patterns,
transportation network, communication network, ‘
energy resources and distribution, sewage and wa
disposal procedures and systems, natural environ‑
m e n t features, economic and commercial organiza
tion. The “citizens” have to take all of these forces '
into account in determining the rate and direction ~
development of their city. The regional research
clearly reveals that the community is in constant
ﬂux. In recognizingthe forces which control Chang“
in the city, students learn that they can inﬂuence
those changes. In addition, the regional research .
ensures that the model city is grounded in reality
and that the lessons learned are real, n o t just play.
Regional research is followed by asurvey of the
community. A group of students designs a survey
aimed atﬁnding o u t who lives and works in the
community, what typesof buildings and other
objects occur there, what the inhabitants like or dis
like about their community, and what changes they
suggest. Usingthe survey, students then interview :
members of the community, compile the results,
and present the data to the class using pie charts,
50
(lit) Building I‘lducullon
percentages, line graphs, or bar graphs to visually
express the statistical results.
‘
Professional consultants and other community
resource people such aslibrarians, city planners,
city council members, etc. also add their input to
the growing body of information about the c o m ‑
munity, from which students develop a comprehe
sive list of goals for their city.
’
As in previous phases, beginning with the instant
city activity, students ﬁnd that implementingtheia
goals requires an effective decision-making or go j
erning body. As this need arises throughout the
'
year, students get practice in developing their ow:
forms of government. This time the process begi
with research. Groups of students study particula
forms of government such astribe, anarchy, m o n ‑
archy, totalitarian state, authoritarian state,consti
tutional democracy. As each group presents its ﬁn
ings to the class, the different forms are comparev“
by tracing the course of an imaginary law through
legislation and execution. To get the full impact 0
the meaning of government, each form is tried ou
in class for a day or m o r e . In this way, students ge
to explore the transformation of government role ,
and function. Ultimately, they design aform of
government tailored to their particular needs.
Research into actual local (city or county) forms 0
government also takes place asstudents study the“
various political ofﬁces such ascounty supervisor,
mayor, county clerk, planning commissioner. The
research leads to anunderstandingof the ﬂow of ,
responsibility from one ofﬁce to another which st
dents portray in the form of a chart of the local go
ernment. This chart serves as a model for the
students’ o w n decision makingprocedure.
After researchingtheories of land division, a grou
of students divides the site model into council or
52
(Elly lhllldllm I‘lduvnllnn
supervisorial districts. Members oi'cach district el
a council representative. And, ﬁnally, a mayor or
county supervisor is elected or appointed, dependi
on the form of government chosen by the class F0
lowingstandard municipal procedure the newly
elected council members nominate students for th
be
A
E
various appointed ofﬁces. As the work proceeds, t
""1 Cars
.
ac eS
_
m
governing body can bereﬁnedbydeleting, adding‘
ma:3 ‘I"r‘aﬂ5f’°'+°h°n
new:
i'
.
__
or inventing n e w functions when necessary. This
Immen‘l"
" ' 0 “ ! v a
3-
0
organization assumes increasingresponsibility f o r
luau:{'13
bridgea
f,
the progress of the class asawhole, strengthening
Is
bank:
I
the values of group self‐reliance and mutual coope
o 2/66.»!
Salem Pawer
j - J
ation that have been instilled from the outset.
.
' (““565
{my ball
W1th1n thls system the teacher’s role becomes one
”I park:
la‘érairieg
of coordlnator rather than director.
I'e5h W a n1":
At the same time that the governing structure is
defense 5,75%”,
evolving, the planning, design, and construction 0
,
.
3 I , “
the city begins totake place. Duringthe planning
, " ' 0 " 33d"!
Compvfer:
‘
phase, each student works onanindividual design
,‘
help?“ d”?:
Taci' Transformni‘hn
.1
for his or her land parcel, deﬁning spaces on apie.
of paper through aerial drawings. Students may
create whatever they w a n t asimaginatively asthey
. ”Mk“:
want, but they m u s t also take the community need
" ” 3
and the goal list into consideration.
‘
i
'
‘.
;
The planning commission has by n o w usually
‘
. 3
O
n
+
W
spawned land‐use and transportation subcommit- .
‘ , ‘ ._
mg
tees to help coordinate individual designs and to
develop an overall plan for the city. The city counc
enacts laws to enforce the proposals of the plannin
commission.
0 ‘ }
lufon of al/ 4‘
I n0 . 2 : :
luilolmcjs
( m l 43 l‘l’ IS
aifon
lf'ni
’ p a m r
( " ' 1 ‘ 5
Of course, the class has to evaluate critically the
individual designs with respectto the Whole c o m ‑
munity. This can be done byﬁttingall of the indi‑
vidual pieces together like ajigsaw puzzle and put‑
ting them up on the wall. Are there enough houses
multi‐family dwellings, stores, factories? Are there
t o o many? Is there enough open space? Does the
transportation system take the effects of noise and -.
safety considerations into account? The teacher
3
.b
c
1 M 1 maﬁa/s
l
.
I" . 4 he q
r’mw . .
54
(III) Ilulldlnu I‘Itlm'ullun
'l‘hc ( ‘ i n is never
ﬁnished, neither
is City Building
Education.
plays a signiﬁcant role in challenging the students ‘
to justify their designs, to help them evaluate and
perfect their inventions.
Inevitably,the individual designs fail to m e e t the
criteria that have been set up. The students are
forced to goback to the drawing boards, this time i
with the understandingthat only through group
cooperation can individual needs and community .
needs be successfully integrated. Students have to,
identify and resolve basic value conﬂicts between ‘
individual and the community. If the community
needs afreeway system or some other newly inve
transportation network, how will that affect indivi‘
ual students’ plans for their land parcels? In this
way, issuessuch asthe relative merits of private
property versus communal ownership become pa ,
of the experience of learning, vividly reinforcing
what the mind absorbs abstractly.
The city council ultimately adopts rules, regulatio “
and procedures for approving individual parcel
plans. Students then present their plans to the
appropriate committee which passes judgment on.
the plan’s feasibility. Sometimes students ﬁnd it
necessary to form special interest groups to protes
what they regard asunfair actions by certain com‑
mittees. Once all the plans have been approved, th
class evaluates its work, usingthe input from prac '
ticing professionals in the real worl .
'
And that, in its essential features, is the year’s wor
in City Building. It bears repeating here that just a‘
the city is never ﬁnished, neither is City Building.2
The activities described above can be repeated ove
and over, year after year, in all grade levels, each ‘
time set up to reveal something n e w and different
about o u r world. The possibilities are endless.
,6
(Iil) Building I'ltlm‘ulion
Some Implications
WW MMMWWWW
umummlmmwmmm
m , “
ity Building differs from any other educatio ,
method in that it reinstates the material world‑
with its spatial and temporal dimensions i n t a c t ‐ i
the learningprocess. The presence of both these
dimensions provides aﬁrm context for understanf
ing. In a traditional classroom, it is n o t uncommo
to spend a day makingclay pots or putting on a
Christmas pageant. These activities also have a co
crete spatial reality, and yet they are detached f r o
the larger context. What is the larger context? Du
»
ingthe survival sequence, for example, a member
of the nomadic tribe might invent aclay pot, prov
ingthat clay is a substance occurring naturally at t
site where the tribe has stopped for the winter. If ,
clay is n o t available, they might invent some othe ‘
type of container; they might learn to weave bask
for example. But why do they invent these pots or,
baskets in the ﬁrst place? Probably in order to sto '
the food they’ve gathered, providingaready supp
during the winter months when food sources are ‘
scarce. Later on, they might invent a means of cul
vating food instead of simply gathering it, and tha:
too, gets stored in the containers. In this way, ma a
ing a clay pot becomes m o r e than just a hands‐on
activity. It becomes part of the discovery of the mi 1
gins of civilization.
58
(11V Building|.(lu(.1li1m
’I‘lu- leacher
designs a c o n l e x t
in which subjects
a r e revealed.
TeachingBasic Subjects Through City Building
Ultimately any subject c a n betaught through City
Building. Of course teachers are required to teach
basic subjects, and students are required to pass p
ﬁciency tests. But, in the City Buildingsystem, it is,
up to the teacher to design a context in which the
particular subject will berevealed. The teacher cre
ates aproblem which the students have to address
In so doing, the students learn whatever it is the
teacher has decided they need to learn. Duringth
government simulation, for example, the teacher
leads a discussion of organizational disorder and
inefﬁciency. Students then learn through the expe
ence of addressing the problem how different fo
of government evolved. In the case of one ﬁrst gra
class, at ﬁrst it seemed easiest to simply appoint a .
monarch. But when the monarch began lordinghi
power over others and ruling1nanarbitrary mann
restlessness and insurrection prevailed. This didn’
last long, however, asa n e w group of leaders came‘
along promising to reestablish orderliness. That
seemed ﬁne for a time, except that in its zeal for
orderliness, the n e w ruling group decided to conﬂ
cate pencils and notebooks and limit access to the
library. Restlessness brewed once m o r e . The l e a d
were thrown o u t again, and the students decided
this time to take responsibility for choosing their
leaders and form of government. Thus a democrat‑
was invented.
The crucial lessons in mathematics derive from
exercises in object transformation. A student lear
how to ﬁn d the radius and circumference of a circl
in order to construct his models of a ﬁl m reel. Bull
ingthe scale model city involves everything from
simple arithmetic to complex geometry. And if the
studentmakes anerror, the building may t u r n out
lopsidedor the windows may bet o o close together
The results of both accuracy and error are visibly
and tangibly apparent.
«0
( i l l ) Iiulldlnu I'lllllt‘llllﬂll
Impact on the Student
_
The City Buildingcontext gives rise to aseemingl
endless stream of social, moral, scientiﬁc, aesthe
and political issues interconnected asthey are in ,
As students learn to identify a problem (e.g., the
freeway is too close to the park) and take steps to
solve it (move the freeway; invent an e w system ‑
transportation), they become integrative thinkers;
who ﬁnd and apply information from many s o u r
Our experience shows that they also learn how t‑
think critically for themselves and to ask questio "
to obtain the information they need. They learn
work cooperatively on tasks that cannot be done ;
alone and to organize their efforts for maximum
efﬁciency. Students learn to honor and value eac
other’s point of View, resolve conﬂicts among
;
themselves, make decisions, and take responsibi
Finally,they learn how to take risks and how to
advocate their ideas and beliefs. These skills are -‘
measured on standardized proﬁciency tests. The
are, above all, skills of social survival.
'
Bychallenging students to give visual, materialfr
to their ideas, this form of education fosters the
connection between verbal and visual skills. T h o
students whose strength lies in their visual abilit ‘
are n o t handicapped asthey often are in atraditi
classroom. Verbally skilled students are challeng,
to connect thought to action, idea to creation.
The Teacher asa CreativeForce
*'
The City Buildingclassroom changes the ground '
rules for the teacher who is used to simply functi‑
ingasthe vehicle through which curriculum
designed by others is transmitted to the students,
The City Buildingteacher is charged with the
responsibility for designing the curriculum, for or
ating the context in which discovery will take plaa,
This ﬂexibility may seem intimidatingatﬁrst; in '
longrun, we have found that it allows teachers th
“2
( l i l ) Building I'ldm'ullnn
freedom to go in whatever direction they see ﬁt as
well asto bring their o w n particular strengths and
ﬁelds of interest into the classroom. A ﬁfth‐grade .
teacher who has aninterest in philology offered
knowledge to the girl who had been appointed p
lic information ofﬁcer of the class. She was produ
ing a brochure about their class, located in r o o m '
D‐4,for distribution to visitors. Insteadof simply
printing“D‐4” on the cover of the brochure, the ,
teacher helped her visually show the developme
of the letter D and the numeral 4.asa sort of cove
illustration. In this way, the teacher’s entire store
T h e teacher
knowledge and interests become engaged in the ‘
becomes a" ’ 1 "
learningprocess, become a resource available to
m o d e l f o r t h e
creative process.
the SIUdentS.
Our experience shows that the effect on m o s t t e a
ers is invigorating. Forthem, teaching itselfbeco.
aprocess of discovery, calling on their o w n creati
powers, just aslearningcalls on the creative p o w
of the students. In this way, the teacher becomes
role model for the creative process.
City Building ends the teachers’ isolation. Their
work is vitally connected to the life of the commu'
which is manifestedby the participation of com‑
munity consultants, practicingprofessionals from
the ﬁelds of architecture, design, urban planning,
the sciences, aswell as“lay” consultants such as
parents, municipal ofﬁcials, street cleaners, facto
owners, etc.
‑
The participation of community consultants
removes from the teacher the burden of the assu ,
tion that he or she knows (or is supposed to kno
everything. Instead, students learn to goto the
appropriate resource people for information and
help in solving their problems. This clears the wa'“
for the teacher to reclaim a more genuine leaders
role, helping the students identify their problems y
and discover how to solve them for themselves. T
teacher functions asa catalyst for learning.
'
,
94
(Sit) Building l‘ldumliun
For both the students and the teacher, the learning
process comes to life, charged with the excitement, ‘
and also the seriousness, of personal involvement.
What the student learns are the lessons of life in
which heor she is fully involved emotionally aswel
asintellectually. This produces a much more reso‑
n a n t and lastinglearning experience while dramati‑
ally nourishing the students’ desire to learn. That 1,
the essential behavioral effect of the system.
’
Through the act of creating, the students acquire a .
belief in themselves and their abilities that ﬂows
over into other aspects oﬂife, encouraging their fe‑
ings of self‐esteem. In the words of Aaron, age 12,
“I really got to see what acity means, and I sudden
found o u t that uskids have rights too. I m e a n whe
you build a city, you see how important your job is .
and everyone contributes. I guess I realized I ’ m no
just a nothingperson. I ’ m a little important person.
The ideas that ﬁl l
these pages have
taken shape a n d
come to l i f e with
t h e direct h e l p of
m a n y individuals.
First a n d foremost,
my deepest thanks
to those who have
generously aided
me w i t h their
time, energy,
thoughts, a n d
encouragement.
Acknowledgements
Adrienne Albert, Jennifer Albert, Ruth Asawa, Laurin B. Askew, Jr., ,
Theda Askew, Diane Asselin, Judith E Baca, Doris Baizley,
’
Adrianne Bank, Yolanda Baﬁuelos, Doris Baudelot, Nicholas Beck,
Daniel Benjamin, Ed Bereal, August Berger, Debbie Berger,
,
Jeffrey Bernstein, Virginia Bissinger, Jeremy Blahnick, Jon Boorstin,
Ellen Brock, Anne Buerger, Marlyn Burleigh, Bernard Camenson,
I
Kamala Cesar, Judy Chicago, Todd Clark, Anne Cook, Sylvia M. C o o
Noma Copley, Carlos E.Cortes, Marlies Cremer, William Crutchﬁeld
Henry Custis, Melvin Daskal, Sheila Levrant de Bretteville,
‘K‘
Angeline Demartinez, Laddie John Dill, Richard Duke, Charles Ea
BonnieEichorn, Teri Fox, Frank Ford, Helen Fried, Alex Funke,
Diana Gardner, Allan Gatzke, Cynthia Gedgaudas, Berta Gehry,
.
Jaime Gesundheit, Ruth Glatt, Marge Goldwater, Thomas Graham, '
Kirsten Grimstad, Elyse Grinstein, Cheri Guerrero, Kaye Hamilton, '
Nancy Hanks, Roger Hart, Paul Heckman, Jorge Hernandez, David H’
Frances Hine, Marjean Hoesli, Terence Hoke, Fumiko Hosokawa,
Coy Howard, Christina Hunt, Nina Johnson, Doris Jones, Henry Kah'
Raymond Kappe,Shelly Kappe,John H. Kerr, Ralph Knowles, Linda ,
Bill N. Lacy, Joel Lakin, Christine Leon, Linda Hunter Lerner,
D
Leon Lessinger, Alita Letwin, Elsa Leviseur, Mee Lee Ling,
Bruce Loewenthal, Claudia Maholy Nagy, SocorroMaldonado,
John Manavian, Elizabeth Mandel], Esther McCoy, Dennis McFadde
Richard McGinty, Donna McLemore, Daryl Mechur, Ralph Mechur,
Alan Miller, Elery “Rick” Miller, Susanne Miller, Lisa Mora,
Douglas Moreland, Gwynn Murrill, Rolf Nelson, Claes Oldenburg,
Ditta Oliker, David Olney,Watson Omohundro, Eric Orr, Lynda Pale‘
Joseph Pelletier, lrving Petlin, SarahPetlin, Barbara Pinsky,
‘
Judy Preminger, Joe N. Prince, David Rockefeller,Jr., Seymour Rose6
Joyce Rosenfeld, Phyllis Rosser, Richard Rowe, Logan Sallada,
,
David Sanders, Richard Schager, William Schatz, Alan Sieroty, Ben 5
Wallace Smith, Gregory Spicss, Gilbert Stayner, David Stea,
W
Linda Stockton, Morton Subotnick, StevenSubotnick, Tamara Subot .
Radoslav Sutnar, Grant Taylor, Irene Thompson, Ann Thornycrolt,
‘j
David Travers, Frederick Usher, Tom Vinetz, Reverend John Wagner.
Peter Walker, Gerald Weisbach, Audrey Welch, Rachel Williams,
A. CharlesWilson, Amber Wilson, Nancy Wyner, Daniel Zimbaldi,
Bernard Zimmerman,
And to t h e
advisory trustees
‘ a n d members of
the Center f o r
(Iity Building
Education, my
appreciation f o r
providing t h e
essential n e t w o r k
of support t h a t
has brought the
work to where it is
loday.
And I w a n t
to express my
debt to those
whose w o r k a n d
Ideas.have served
as a bedrock of
Inspiration in my
w o r k a n d l i f e .
Finally,
my special
appreciation
g o e s t o t h e
public school
districts ,
and other
Institutions that
have expressed
their belief in
tilty Building
l h r o u g h t h e
) e a r s b y u s i n g
methods n o t o n l y
f o r e d u c a t i n g
sludents b u t also
f o r stat?
development.
Advisory trustees:
Gordon Davidson, Ray Eames, Nicholas England, Frank O. Gehry,
John Goodlad, Lawrence Halprin, Susan Hamilton, Charles W. Rusch,
Jonas Salk, Gloria Steinem, Eugene Tucker, Kenneth Tye,
Sim Van der Ryn, Richard Saul Wurman.
Members:
Frank 0. Gehry, Ruth Hiebert, Emma Hulett, Alan Mandel],
Bobbi Mapstone,Ty Miller, Alexis Smith.
John Altoon, Larry Bell, Benjamin Bloom, Jerome Bruner, John Cage,
Charles Darwin, John Dewey, Marcel Duchamp, Max Ernst, Paolo Ferre,
Sam Francis, Buckminster Fuller, Antonio Gaudi, John Guilford,
Red Grooms, Robert lrwin, Edward Kienholz, Paul MacCready,
Rene Magritte, Marshall McLuhan, Edward Moses, GeorgiaO‘Keeffe,
Claes Oldenburg, Simon Rodia, Edward Ruscha, Lucas Samaras,
Peter Smithson, Hilda Taba, Ludwig van Beethoven, Konrad Wachsmann,
H.C. Westermann, Emmett Williams, William Carlos Williams,
Frank Lloyd Wright.
Alhambra Uniﬁed School District (U.S.D.), Compton U.S.D.,
Long Beach U.S.D., Los Angeles U.S.D., North Monterey County U.S.D.,
Pasadena U.S.D., Santa Maria Joint Union High School District,
Santa Monica U.S.D., Sulphur Springs Union School District,
Norwalk ‐ La Mirada U.S.D., Oakwood School, Baltimore Museum of Art,
California State University at Dominguez Hills,
California State University at Long Beach,
California State University at Los Angeles, Smithsonian institution,
Fort Worth Art Museum, New Jersey Institute of Technology,
Stanford University Migrant Education Project,
U.C.L.A. School of Architecture and Urban Planning. 1wish to single o u t
the ABC Uniﬁed School District in Cerritos, California which has, as of
1982, become a teacher training center for City Building Education,
offering classes at all grade levels and a visitation center coordinated by
a full-time district trainer. My deepest gratitude goes to the district and
all the individuals responsible for giving City Building this recognition.
