. \ 7 
Oxford Univenity P m ,  Waiton s t m ,  Oxford 0 x 2  6DP 
Oxford New York Toronto 
Delhi Bomboy Colculto Moddm Karachi 
Kuoio Lumpur Singopore Hong Kong Tokyo 
Noirobi Dor er Solocm Cope Town 
Melbourne Auckimd 
and errocrored companies in 
Beirut Berlin lbodon Nimio 
Oxford is o !rode mark 4fOxford University Press 
Publbhed in the United Stores 
by Oxford Universify P m ,  New York 
@ Wolfson Coiiege 1986 
Aii rights reserved. No port of this publieorion moy be reproduced, 
stored in o rerrievoisysfem, or tronsmi!ted, in onyform or by any means, 
eieerronic, mechonicol, photocopying, wreding, or otherwise, without 
the prior permision gf Odord Universily P l w  
Britbh Librory Cotoioguing in Pubiication Doto 
The Written word: lireroey in 
transition.-/Wolfson Colie~e 
ieetuk; i985) 
I. Lilerocy--Socioi aspects 
I. Boumonn, Gerd 11. Series 
302.2 LC149 
ISBN 0-19-8750684 
Librory of Congress C(~I(~ioging 
in Publication Dot# 
The Wrilten word. 
IWo(fron Coiiege iectures; 19821 
Includes index. 
I. Writing-Addrerres, map, lectures. 
2. Lilew-Addreyes, 
esay~, lectures. 3. Books 
and moding-Addreuer. essr~ys, leerum 4. Publishen 
ondpublirhing-Addreyes, 
ersoys, Ileerurer. 
I. Bournon", Gerd. 11. Series. 
240. W75 1986 001.54'3 85-28508 
ISBN 0-19-87506841 
Printed in Great Briroin by 
The Aiden Press Lrd. 
Oxford 
WRITING IS A TECHNOLOGY THAT 
RESTRUCTURES THOUGHT 
WALTER 1. ONG, SJ 
1 
1 : 
I 
LITERACY 
is imperious. It tends to arrogate to itself supreme power 
by taking itself as normative for human expression and thought. 
This is particularly true in high-technology cultures, which are built 
on literacy of necessity and which encourage the impression that 
literacy is an always to be expected and even natural state of affairs. 
The term 'illiterate' itself suggests that persons belonging to the 
class it designates are deviants, defined by something they lack, 
namely literacy. Moreover, in high-technology cultures-which, 
more and more, are setting the style for cultures across the world- 
since literacy is regarded as so unquestionably normative and nor- 
mal, the deviancy of illiterates tends to be thought of as lack of a 
simple mechanical skill. Illiterates should learn writing as they 
learned to tie their shoe-laces or to drive a car. Such views of writing 
as simply a mechanical skill obligatory for all human beings distort 
our understanding of what is human if only because they block 
understanding of what natural human mental processes are before 
writing takes possession of consciousness. These views also by the 
same token block understanding of what writing itself really is. For 
without a deep understanding of the normal oral or oral-aural con- 
sciousness and noetic economy of humankind before writing came 
along, it is impossible to grasp what writing accomplished. 
Recent research work, however, in the field and in the library, is 
I 
offering the opportunity to overcome our chirographic (and typo- 
/ 
graphic) bias: This work has deepened our understanding of what 
I have styled primary orality, the orality of cultures with no knowl- 
edge at all of writing, as contrasted with what I have styled second- 
ary orality, the electronic orality of radio and 'television, which 
'Some material in the first part of this article has been adapted from the author's 
'Writing and the Evolution of Consciousness', in: Mosoic (University of Manitoba), 
xviii (1985), 1-10, with the permission of the editor. 
I 
24 
Walter J. Ong, SJ 
grows out of high-literacy cultures, depending for its invention and 
operation on the widespread cultivation of writing and reading. 
Classical scholars, from Milman Parry-the 
prime mover in the 
orality-literacy universe-through 
Albert Lord, Eric Havelock, 
and others, sociologists and linguists such as Jack Goody, Wallace 
Chafe, and Deborah Tannen, cultural anthropologists such as Jeff 
Opland, historians such as M. T. Clanchy, and many others from 
even more diversified fields, including the late Marshall McLuhan, 
the greatest diversifier of all, have opened vistas into primary oral- 
ity which enable us better to understand differences between the 
oral and the literate mind. My own work in opening such vistas, for 
whatever it is worth, began deep in Renaissance and earlier intel- 
lectual history, and has moved into the present, without, I hope, 
losing live contact with the past. We can now view in better per- 
spective the world of writing in which we live, see better what this 
world really is, and what functionally literate human beings really 
are-that 
is, beings whose thought processes do not grow out of 
simply natural powers but out of these powers as structured, directly 
or indirectly, by the technology of writing. Without writing, the 
literate mind would not and could not think as it does, not only 
when engaged in writing but even when it is composing its thoughts 
in oral form. 
Functionally literate persons, those who regularly assimilate dis- 
course such as this, are not simply thinking and speaking human 
beings but chirographically thinking and speaking human beings 
(latterly conditioned also by print and by electronics). The fact that 
we do not commonly feel the influence of writing on our thoughts 
shows that we have interiorized the technology of writing so deeply 
that without tremendous effort we cannot separate it from our- 
selves or even recognize its presence and influence. If functionally 
literate persons are asked to think of the word 'nevertheless', they 
will all have present in imagination the letters of the word-vaguely 
perhaps, but unavoidably-in handwriting or typescript or print. If 
they are asked to think of the word 'nevertheless' for two minutes, 
120 seconds, without ever allowing any letters at all to enter their 
imaginations, they cannot comply. A person from a completely oral 
background of course has no such problem. He or she will think 
only of the real word, a sequence of sounds, 'ne-ver-the-less'. For 
the real word 'nevertheless', the sounded word, cannot ever be 
present all at once, as written words deceptively seem to be. Sound 
Writing Restructures Thought 
25 
exists only whenit is going out of existence. By the time I get tothe 'the- 
less', the 'ne-ver' is gone. To the extent that it makes all of a word 
appear present at once, writing falsifies. Recalling sounded words 
is like recalling a bar of music, a melody, a sequence in time. A , 
word is an event, a happening, not a thing, as letters make it appear 
to he. So is thought: 'This is paper' is an occurrence, an event in 
time. We grasp truth articulately only in events. Articulated truth 
has no permanence. Full truth is deeper than articulation. We find 
it hard to recognize this obvious truth, so deeply has the fixity of 
the written word taken possession of our consciousness. 
The oral world as such distresses literates because sound is evan- 
escent. Typically, literates want words and thoughts pinned down- 
though it is impossible to 'pin down' an event. The mind trained in 
an oral culture does not feel the literate's distress: it can operate 
with exquisite skill in the world of sounds, events, evanescences. 
How does it manage? Basically, in its noetic operations it uses for- 
mulaic structures and procedures that stick in the mind to comple- 
ment and counteract the evanescent: proverbs and other fixed 
sayings, epithets, that is, standard, expected qualifiers (the sturdy 
oak, the brave warrior, wise Nestor, clever Odysseus), numerical 
sets (the three Graces, the seven deadly sins, the five senses, and so 
on), balance, rhythms of all sorts ('Blessed are the poor in spirit, 
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven')-anything 
to make it easy to 
call back what Homer recognized were 'winged words'. Primary 
oral culture also keeps its thinking close to the human life world, 
personalizing things and issues, and storing knowledge in stories. 
Categories are unstable mnemonically. Stories you can remember. 
In its typical mindset, the oral sensibility is out to hold things to- 
gether, to make and retain agglomerates, not to analyse (which 
means to take things apart)-although, 
since all thought is to some 
degree analytic, it does analyse to a degree. Pressed by the need to 
manage an always fugitive noetic universe, the oral world is hasic- 
ally conservative. Exploratory thinking is not unknown, but it is 
relatively rare, a luxury orality can little afford,-for energies must 
be husbanded to keep on constant call the evanescent knowledge 
that the ages have so laboriously accumulated. Everybody, or 
almost everybody, must repeat and repeat and repeat the truths 
that have come down from the ancestors. Otherwise these truths 
will escape, and culture will he hack on square one, where it started 
before the ancestors got the truths from their-ancestors.~ 
26 
Walter J. Ong, SJ 
I have discussed these formulaic and narrative strategies in Oral- 
ity and Literacy (1982). In 1985, John Miles Foley's new Oral- 
Formulaic Theory and Research shows, as nothing has ever done 
before, how universal such strategies are across the globe and 
across the centuries. Foley provides summaries of over 1,800 books 
and articles covering 90 different language areas. 
Our literate world of visually processed sounds has been totally 
unfamiliar to most human beings, who always belonged, and often 
still belong to this oral world. Homo sapiens has been around for 
some 30,000 years, to take a conservative figure. The oldest script, 
Mesopotamian cuneiform, is less than 6,000 years old (the alphabet 
less than 4,000). Of all the tens of thousands of languages spoken in 
the course of human history only a tiny fraction-Edmonson 
(1971: 323) calculates about 106-have 
ever been committed to 
writing t o  a degree sufficient to have produced a literature, and 
most have neverbeen written at all. Of the 4,000 or so languages 
spoken today, only around 78 have a literature (Edmonson 1971: 
332). For some of the others linguists have devised more or less 
adequate ways of writing them, with results that appear in linguistics 
publications and convention papers that have no noteworthy effect 
at all on the actual users of the language. Dr C. Andrew Hofling 
has recently completed a linguistic study of discourse in the Itza 
Mayan language which transcribes the language in the Roman 
alphabet. This transcription is essential for linguistic studies, but it 
is useless, inconseguential, for the Itza Maya themselves. With only 
some 500 speakers, the language has no effective way of developing 
a literate culture. Most languages in the world today exist in com- 
parable conditions. Those who think of the text as the paradigm of 
all discourse need to face the fact that only the tiniest fraction of 
languages have ever been written or ever will be. Most have dis- 
appeared or are fast disappearing, untouched by textuality. Hard- 
core textualism is snobbery, often hardly disguised. 
Only in recent centuries have human beings generally had the 
idea that a language could be written, and even today many peoples 
do not believe their language can be written. In Dayton, Ohio, on 
25 February 1983, I saw a videotape of a Methodist missionary and 
linguist who had worked out an alphabetization of a previously 
unwritten language in the South Pacific and witnessed her dif- 
ficulty in convincing the speakers of the language that she could 
write down their utterances. They believed that only the languages 
Writing Restructures Thought 
27 
they knew as written, such as English or French, could be 
written. 
All this is not to deny that spoken languages are all amenable to 
conversion into writing (always with only partial success or accu- 
racy) or that, given the human condition and the advantages con- 
ferred by writing, the invention of writing, and even of alphabetic 
writing, was sure to occur somewhere in the evolution of culture 
and consciousness: But to say that language is writing is, at best, 
uninformed. It provides egregious evidence of the unreflective 
chirographic and/or typographic squint that haunts us all. 
I1 
Writing was an inttusion, though an invaluable intrusion, into the 
early human lifeworld, much as computers are today. It has lately 
become fashionable in some linguistic circles to refer to Plato's 
condemnation of writing in the Phaedrus and the Seventh Letter. 
What is seldom if ever noticed, however, is that Plato's ohjections 
against writing are essentially the very same ohjections commonly 
urged today against computers by those who object to them (Ong 
1982: 79-81). Writing, Plato has Socrates say in the Phaedrus, is 
inhuman, pretending to establish outside the mind what in reality 
can only be in the mind. Writing is simply a thing, something to be 
manipulated, something inhuman, artificial, a manufactured prod- 
uct. We recognize here the same complaint that is made against 
computers: they are artificial contrivances, foreign to human life. 
Secondly, Plato's Socrates complains, a written text is basically 
unresponsive. If you ask a person to explain his or her statement, 
you can get at least an attempt at explanation: if you ask a text, you 
get nothing except the same, often stupid words which called for 
your question in the first place. In the modern critique of the com- 
puter, the same objection is put, 'Garbage in, garbage out'. So 
deeply are we into literacy that we fail commonly to recognize that 
this objection applies every hit as much to books as to computers. 
If a book states an untruth, ten thousand printed refutations will 
do nothing to the printed text: the untruth is there for ever. This is 
why books have been burnt. Texts are essentially contumacious. 
Thirdly, Plato's Socrates urges, writing destroys memory. Those 
who use writing will become forgetful, relying on an external source 
for what they lack in internal resources. Writing weakens the mind. 
28 
Walter J. Ong, SJ 
Today, some parents and others fear that pocket calculators pro- 
vide an external resource for what ought to be the internal resource 
of memorized multiplication tables. Presumably, constant repeti- 
tion of multiplication tables might produce more and more Albert 
Einsteins. Calculators weaken the mind, relieve it of the setting-up 
exercises that keep it strong and make it grow. (Significantly, the 
fact that the computer manages multiplication and other compu- 
tation so much more effectively than human beings do, shows how 
little the multiplication tables have to do with real thinking.) 
Fourthly, in keeping with the agonistic mentality of oral cultures, 
their tendency to view everything in terms of interpersonal struggle, 
Plato's Socrates also holds it against writing that the written word 
cannot defend itself as the natural spoken word can: real speech 
and thought always exist essentially in the context of struggle. 
Writing is passive, out of it, in an unreal, unnatural world. So, it 
seems, are computers: if you punch the keys they will not fight back 
on their own, but only in the way they have been programmed to 
do. 
Those who are disturbed about Plato's misgivings about writing 
will be even more disturbed to find that print created similar mis- 
givings when it was first introduced. Hieronimo Squarciafico, who 
in fact promoted the printing of the Latin classics, also argued in 
1477 that already 'abundance of books makes men less studious' 
(Ong 1982: 80). Even more than writing does, print destroys 
memory and enfeebles the mind by relieving it of too much work 
(the pocket calculator complaint once more), downgrading the wise 
man and wise woman in favour of the pocket compendium. 
One weakness in Plato's position is that he put these misgivings 
about writing into writing, just as one weakness in antiprint posi- 
tions is that their proponents put their objections into print, and 
one weakness in anti-computer positions is that they are articulated 
in articles or books printed from tapes composed on computer 
terminals. The law at work here is: once the word is techno- 
logized, there is no really effective way to criticize its condition 
without the aid of the technology you are criticizing. The 
complaints about these three inventions are all the same because 
writing and print and the computer are all ways of technologizing 
the word. 
The new technology of writing, it is now clear, was operating in 
Plato's lifeworld in ways far too convoluted for even Plato to 
Writing Restructures Thought - 
29 
understand. The technology of writing was not merely useful to 
Plato for broadcasting his critique of writing, but it also had been 
responsible for bringing the critique into existence. Although there 
was no way for Plato to be explicitly aware of the fact, his philo- 
sophically analytic thought, including his analysis of the effects of 
writing, was possible only because of the effects that writing was 
having on mental processes. We know that totally oral peoples, 
intelligent and wise though they often are, are incapable of the 
protracted, intensive linear analysis that we have from Plato's 
Socrates. Even when he talks, Plato's Socrates is using thought 
forms brought into being by writing. In fact, as Eric Havelock 
has beautifully shown in his Preface to Plato (1963), Plato's 
entire epistemology was unwittingly a programmed rejection of the 
archaic preliterate world of thought and discourse. This world was 
oral, mobile, warm, personally interactive (you needed live people 
to produce spoken words). It was the world represented by the 
poets, whom Plato would not allow in his Republic, because, 
although Plato could not formulate it this way, their thought pro- 
cesses and modes of expression were disruptive of the cool, analytic 
processes generated by writing. 
The Platonic ideas are not oral, not sounded, not mobile, not 
warm, not personally interactive. They are silent, immobile, in 
themselves devoid of all warmth, impersonal and isolated, not part 
of the human lifeworld at all but utterly above and beyond it, para- 
digmatic abstractions. Plato's term idea, form, is in fact visually 
based, coming from the same root as the Latin videre, meaning to 
see, and such English derivatives as vision, visible, or video. In the 
older Greek form, a digamma had preceded the iota: videa or 
widea. Platonic form was form conceived of by analogy precisely 
with visible form. Despite his touting of logos and speech, the 
Platonic ideas in effect modelled intelligence not so much on hear- 
ing as on seeing. The visual model favoured clarity, but also shal- 
lowness. 'I see what you say' lacks the depth of 'I hear what you 
say.' Plato of course was not at all fully aware of the unconscious 
forces at work in his psyche to produce his literate reaction, or 
overreaction, to a lingering, and by his time retardant, orality. But 
he unconsciously adjusted to the threat of shallowness in his 'idea' 
philosophy by giving his thought what is often called a poetic cast 
and by avowing that the depths of truth not only escape writing but 
also even oral articulation. 
' 
30 
Walter J. Ong, SJ 
I11 
In downgrading writing, Plato was thinking of writing as an exter- 
nal, alien technoldgy, as many people today think of the computer. 
Because we have by today so deeply interiorized writing, made it so 
much a part of oursBves, as Plato's age had not yet made it fully a 
part of itself, we find it difficult to consider writing to be a tech- 
nology as we commonly assume printing and the computer to be. 
Yet writing (and especially alphabetic writing) is a technology, call- 
ing for the useof tools and other equipment, styli or brushes or 
pens, carefully prepared surfaces such as paper, animal skins, strips 
of wood, as well as inks or paints, and much more. Writing tech- 
nologies have differed in different parts of the world. In their own 
indigenous technologies of writing, East Asia-China, Korea, and 
Japan-typically used not pens but brushes, not liquid ink in ink- 
horns or inkwells, but ink blocks, on which the wet brush was 
rubbed as in making water-colour paintings, in this sense 'painting' 
rather than 'writing' (etymologically, 'scratching') their texts. 
In From Memory to Written Record: England 1066-1307, M. T. 
Clanchy (1979) has an entire chapter entitled 'The Technology of 
Writing'; He explains how in the West through the Middle Ages and 
earlier almost all those devoted to writing regularly used the services 
of a scribe because the physical labour writing involved-scrap- 
ing and polishing the animal skin or parchment, whitening it with 
chalk, resharpening goose-quill pens with what we still call a pen- 
knife, mixing ink, and all the rest-interfered 
with thought and 
composition. Chaucer's 'Wordes unto Adam, His Owne Scriveyn' 
humorously expressed tlle author's resentment at having to 'rubbe 
and scrape' to correct his scribe Adam's own carelessness in plying 
his craft. Todays ballpoint pens, not to mention our typewriters 
and word processors or the paper we use, are high-technology 
products, but we seldom advert to the fact because the technology 
is concentrated in the factories that produce such things, rather' 
than at the point of production of the text itself, where the tech- 
nology is concentrated in a manuscript culture. 
Although we take writing so much for granted as to forget that it 
is a technology, writing is in a way the most drastic of the three 
technologies of the word:It 
initiated what printing and electronics 
only continued, the physical reduction of dynamic sound to quiesc- 
ent space, the separation of the word from the living present, where 
alone real, spoken words exist. 
Writing ~estructures Thought 
3 1 
IV 
Once reduced to space, words are frozen and in a sense dead. Yet 
there is a paradox in the fact that the deadness of the written or 
printed text, its removal from the living human lifeworld, its rigid 
visual fixity, assures its endurance and its potential for being resur- 
rected into limitless living contexts by a limitless number of living 
readers. The dead, thing-like text has potentials far outdistancing 
those of the simply spoken word. The complementary paradox, 
however, is that the written text, for all its permanence, means 
nothing, is not even a text, except in relationship to the spoken 
word. For a text to be intelligible, to deliver its message, it must be 
reconverted into sound, directly or indirectly, either really in the 
external world or in the auditory imagination. All verbal expres- 
sion, whether put into writing, print, or the computer, is ineluctably 
bound to sound forever. 
Nevertheless, by contrast with natural, oral speech, writing is 
completely artificial. There is no way to write 'naturally'. Oral 
speech is fully natural to human beings in the sense that every 
human being in every culture who is not physiologically or psycho- 
logically impaired learns to talk. Moreover, while talk implements 
conscious life, its use wells up naturally into consciousness out of 
unconscious or subconscious depths, though of course with the 
conscious as well as unconscious co-operation of society. Despite 
the fact that they govern articulation and thought processes them- 
selves, grammar rules or structures normally originate, live, and 
function far below the level at which articulation functions. You 
can know how to use the grammatical rules or structures and even 
how to set up new rules or structures that function clearly and 
effectively without being able to state what they are. Of all the 
hundreds of thousands of grammar rules or structures that have 
been at work in all the tens of thousands of languages and dialects 
of humankind, only the tiniest fraction have ever been articulated 
at all. 
Writing or script differs as such from speech in that it is not 
inevitably learned by all psychologically or physiologically unim- 
paired persons, even those living in highly literate cultures. More- 
over, the use of writing or script does not inevitably well up out of 
the unconscious without the aid of stated rules. The process of put- 
ting spoken language into writing is governed by consciously con- 
trived, articulated procedures: for example, a certain pictogram 
32 
Walter J. Ong, SJ 
will be consciously determined to stand for a celtain specified word 
or concept, or a will be consciously ruled to represent a certain 
phoneme, b another, and so on. (This is not at all to deny that the 
writer-reader situation created by writing is deeply involved with 
unconscious processes which are at work in composing written texts 
once one has learned the explicit, consciously controlled rules for 
transposing sound into a visual code.) 
To say writing is artificial is not to condemn it but to praise it. 
Like other artificial creations and indeed more than any other, 
writing is utterly invaluable and indeed essential for the realization 
of fuller, interior, human potentials. Technologies are not mere 
exterior aids but also interior transformations of consciousness, 
and never more than when they affect the word. Such transform- 
ations of consciousness can be uplifting, at the same time that they 
are in a sense alienating. By distancing thought, alienating it from 
its original habitat in sounded words, writing raises consciousness. 
Alienation from a natural milieu can be good for us and indeed is in 
many ways essential for fuller human life. To live and to understand 
fully, we need not only proximity but also distance. This writing 
provides for, thereby accelerating the evolution of consciousness as 
nothing else before it does. 
Technologies are artificial, but-paradox 
again-artificiality 
is 
natural to human beings. Technology, properly interiorized, does 
not degrade human life but on the contrary enhances it. The mod- 
ern orchestra, for example, is a result of high technology. A clarinet 
is an instrument, which is to say a tool. A piano is an intricate, 
hand-powered machine. An organ is a huge machine, with sources 
of power-pumps, bellows, electric generators, motors-in motion 
before the organ is touched by its operator. Antiquity had no 
orchestras such as ours because it was unable to make any kind of 
instrument, musical or other, with the precision tooling even of a 
clarinet. Its maximum experience of precision was at the level of 
a good pair of scissors. Modern precision tooling has its roots in 
the late Middle Ages and its first major achievement was printing 
from movable alphabetic type. 
A modern orchestra is the product of precision-tooled tech- 
nology. Beethoven's scores consist of almost innumerable, precise 
directions to highly-trained technicians, specifying exactly how 
they are to use their individual tools. Legato: do not take your 
finger off one piano key until you have hit the next. Staccato: hit 
Writing Restructures Thought 
33 
the key and take your finger off immediately. And so on for thou- 
sands of actions which musicians must practise until mechanically 
perfect. To be a first-rate musician, a sine qua non is to be a superb 
technician. There is no substitute for mechanical mastery of the 
tools. 
As musicologists well know, it is pointless to object to electronic 
compositions, as non-musicologists sometimes do, on the grounds 
that the sounds come out of a mechanical contrivance. What do 
you think the sounds of a piano come out of, not to mention an 
organ? Or the sounds of a clarinet or bassoon or even a whistle? 
These things are all mechanical contrivances. The fact is that by 
using the mechanical contrivance a clarinettist or pianist or an 
organist can express something poignantly human that cannot be 
expressed without the mechanical contrivance. To achieve such 
expression effectively, of course, the musician has to have interior- 
ized the technology, made the tool or machine a second nature, a 
psychological part of himself or herself. Art imitates nature. Art 
follows nature, and joins itself to nature. Art is second nature. But 
it is not nature. Natura in Latin, likephysisin Greek, means birth. 
We are not born with art but add it to ourselves. Mastering a musi- 
cal tool, making it one's own, calls for years of mechanical 'prac- 
tice', learning how we can make the tool do mechanically all that it 
can do. Little boys and girls know how boring it can be. Yet such 
shaping of the tool to one's self, learning a technological skill, is 
hardly dehumanizing. The use of a technology can enrich the 
human psyche, enlarge human spirit, set 5 free, intensify its interior 
life. 
I instance the modern orchestra here to make the point that writ- 
ing is an even more deeply interiorized technology than the per- 
formance of instrumental music is. To understand what writing is, 
which means to understand it in relation to its past, to orality, one 
must honestly face the fact that it is a technology. 
Writing, in the strict sense of the word, as has already been seen, 
was a very late development in human history. The first script, or 
true writing, that we know was developed among the Sumerians in 
Mesopotamia only around the year 3500 BC, less than 6,000 years 
ago. The alphabet, which was invented only once, so that every 
34 
Walter J. Ong, SJ 
alphabet in the world derives directly or indirectly from the original 
Semitic alphabet, came into existence only around 1500 BC. 
Speech is ancient, archaic. Writing is brand-new. Can one make 
out a case for some sort of archaic writing earlier than 6,000 years 
ago? It is of course possible to count as 'writing' any semiotic 
mark, that is, any visible or sensible mark which an individual 
makes and assigns a meaning to-a 
simple scratch on a rock or a 
notch on a stick, for example. If this is what is meant by writing, 
the antiquity of writing is perhaps comparable to the antiquity of 
speech. However, investigations of writing which take 'writing' to 
mean any visible or sensible mark with an assigned meaning merge 
writing with purely biological behaviour. When does a footprint or 
a deposit of faeces or urine (used by many species of animals for 
communication) become 'writing'? Using the term 'writing' in this 
extended sense to include any semiotic marking trivializes its mean- 
ing. The critical and unique breakthrough into new kinds of noetic 
operations and new worlds of knowledge was achieved within 
human consciousness not when simple semiotic marking was de- 
vised but when what we ordinarily mean by writing was developed, 
that is, when a coded system of visible marks was invented whereby 
a writer could determine, in effect without limit, the exact words 
and sequence of words that a reader would generate from a given 
text. This is what we regularly mean today by writing or script. We 
have to say 'in effect. . . the exact words' because no form, even of 
the alphabet, will always eliminate all ambiguities. The notation 
'read' on a document may be the imperative (rhyming with 'bead') 
and mean 'read this' or it may be the past participle (rhyming with 
'head') and mean 'this has been read'. But a true writing system 
will reduce ambiguities to a negligible minimum and make those 
that occur readily clarifiable. 
Of course, writing is not suddenly 'invented' but grows out of 
orality by stages. Hence it cannot be understood in depth without 
circumstantial familiarity with the primary orality which is its seed- 
bed. Discussions of writing which ignore its roots in orality and 
restrict themselves to alphabetic printed texts from the age of 
Romanticism on can produce effects which are interesting often 
because they are unavoidably distorted. 
AU writing systems do not have the same psychic or even neuro- 
physiological structures or effects. Most studies investigating 
psychic, intellectual, and cultural contrasts between oral and 
Writing ~estructures Thought 
35 
writing cultures have looked only to contrasts between orality and 
alphabetic writing. The effects of other writing systems have just 
begun to be explored. For example, recent research (Tzeng and 
Wang 1983) has shown.that readers of Chinese script use the right 
cerebral hemisphere significantly more than do readers of alpha- 
betic script, which is geared more to the analytic left hemisphere. 
Such studies need to be developed still more. 
Writing, in the ordinary sense of a coded system of visible marks 
enabling a writer to determine, in effect without limit, the exact 
words and sequence of words that a reader will generate from a 
given text, is the most momentous of all human technological in- 
ventions. It is not a mere appendage or accessory to oral speech. 
Because it moves speech drastically from the oral-aural or voice- 
and-ear world to a new sensory world, that of vision, writing trans- 
forms speech and thought as well. Notches on sticks and other 
aides-mimoire can lead up to writing, but they do not restructure 
the human lifeworld as true writing does. And no other writing 
system restructures the human lifeworld so drastically as alphabetic 
writing. Or so democratically, for the alphabet is relatively easy to 
learn. By contrast, Chinese character writing, though more aesthet- 
ically and semantically rich than alphabetic writing can ever hope 
to be, is klitist, despite heroic efforts to democratize its use. Its total 
mastery demands more time than most people can afford. As is 
well known, the People's Republic of China is undertaking to teach 
all its populace Mandarin, the largest of themany Chineselanguages 
(referred to as 'dialects' customarily but misleadingly, for they are 
mutually incomprehensible when spoken). If and when everyone 
can speak Mandarin, it is quite certain, tomy mind, that the alpha- 
bet will be introduced-with 
incalculable losses to literature but 
massive operational gains elsewhere. 
In treating of the effects of writing one has to guard against reduc- 
tionism. All changes in social and noetic structures that can be 
identified after writing is introduced are not due simply to writing. 
Writing itself has social causes. It grows, for example, first in urban 
environments for use in recording ownership and related uses. 
Throughout its history, writing interacts massively with all sorts 
of social structures and practices, so that it by no means follows 
36 
Walter J. Ong, SJ 
exactly the same development in all cultures (see Graff 1981). 
Although certain general cross-cultural patterns are identifiable, in 
various transitional cultures there are various kinds of interfaces 
between literacy and orality and various kinds and amounts of oral 
residue (Goody and Watt 1968, Ong 1982, and the many references 
there). 
But if there is no warrant for reductionism, there is more than 
ample warrant for relationism. Once writing is introduced into a 
culture and grows to more than marginal status, it interacts with 
noetic and social structures and practices often in a bewildering 
variety of ways, as, for example, Brian Stock has shown in great 
detail for parts of Western Europe in the eleventh and twelfth cen- 
turies. Sooner or later, and often very quickly, literacy affects mar- 
keting and manufacturing, agriculture and stock-raising and the 
whole of economic life,.political structures and activities, religious 
life and thought, family structures, social mobility, modes of trans- 
portation (a literate communication system laid the straight Roman 
roads and made the ancient Roman Empire, as Innis long ago 
pointed out), and so on ad infiniturn. Even informal person-to- 
person conversations between literates are not structured like those 
among persons in a primary5ral culture. Simple queries for infor- 
mation acquire a new status, for oral cultures typically use words 
less for information and more for operational, interpersonal pur- 
poses than do chirographic and typographic cultures. Writing is 
only one of the various developments making for the transfor- 
mation of consciousness and of society, but once writing takes 
over, it appears to be the most crucial development of all. Almost 
everything in the noetic and social structures of a society where 
writing has been widely interiorized relates in one way or another to 
writing, although just how a particular phenomenon does so has to 
be examined carefully in any given case in any given culture. 
VII 
One of the most generalizable effects of writing is separation. 
Separation is also one of the most telling effects of writing and 
hence can serve here to give some final form to this discussion. 
Writing is diaeretic. It divides and distances, and it divides and 
distances all sorts of things in all sorts of ways. Distancing or 
'distanciation' is one of the effects of writing commonly discussed 
Writing Restructures Thought 
37 
by those coming from the Husserlian and Heideggerian traditions, 
such as Paul Ricoeur (1981), but their discussions are highly special- 
ized and abstractly schematic, paying little if any attention to the 
actual history of writing, its growth out of orality, or to the socio- 
psychological complexities this history presents us with-that 
is, to 
the sort of things earlier detailed here. Their phenomenology is 
fundamentally synchronic, not diachronic. And without a dia- 
chronic phenomenology, our present situation does not show its 
true contours for we do not become aware of how matters stood 
before writing, and to that extent, as earlier stated, are relatively 
unaware of what writing truly is. 
Many of the phenomena here associated with separation or divi- 
sion or distancing could also be discussed under various other 
headings, some of them less abstract headings than separation or 
division, but few other headings would be so handily inclusive. My 
observations here on separation or distancing will be condensed 
and, if only for that reason, should serve, I hope, to open discussion 
and to suggest further study. Here, then, are some of the ways in 
which writing separates or divides. Writing ties together so many 
things in so many interrelations that some of the itemizations here 
inevitably overlap. 
1. Writing separates the known from the knower. It promotes 
'objectivity'. Any writing system does this, but the alphabet does so 
most of all, since it most thoroughly dissolves all sounds into spatial 
equivalents. Havelock (1976) has shown how the ancient Greeks' 
invention of the first fully vocalic alphabet, the most radical of all 
writing systems, gave them their intellectual ascendancy by provid- 
ing access to the thorough intellectual 'objectivity' that led to 
modern science, and modern forms of thought generally, although 
the science of the ancient Greeks remained far more rhetorically 
structured and far more embedded in the human lifeworld than our 
science is today. 
Of course, language in its original oral state already begins the 
separation of known from knower. Simple naming is the most 
archaic and still the basic operation in this separation: when a small 
child looking at a picture-book with mother delightedly calls out 
'Tree!' he or she puts the object 'out there' as different from self 
and mother and from other diversely named objects as well. The 
separated object can be both distanced and shared with mother 
simultaneously. It is great fun. But, involved in the real time of the 
38 
Walter J. Ong, SJ 
interpersonal sound world, oral naming alone cannot achieve the 
distancing brought into being by writing, which is a time-obviating 
and otherwise radically decontextualizing mechanism. 
Enhanced separation of the known from the knower is probably 
the most fundamental value of writing, from its beginnings to the 
present. Between knower and known writing interposes a visible 
and tangible ohject, the text. The objectivity of the text helps im- 
pose objectivity on what the text refers to (see Olson). Eventually 
writing will create a state of mind in which knowledge itself can he 
thought of as an ohject, distinct from the knower. This state of 
mind, however, is most fully realized only when print intensifies the 
object-like character of the text. 
However, whatever its intimate effects on knowledge, the physi- 
cal text is not itself knowledge, for knowledge, verbalized or other, 
can exist only in a knowing subject. In place of knowledge once 
possessed and formulated verbally by a living person, texts suhsti- 
tute coded marks outside any knower which a knowing subject 
possessed of the code can use to generate knowledge in himself or 
herself. Knowledge itself is not object-like: it cannot he transferred 
from one person to another physically even in oral communication, 
face-to-face, or a fortiori in writing. I can only perform actions- 
produce words-which 
enable you to generate the knowledge in 
yourself. The concept of 'medium' or 'media' applied to human 
communication uses an analogy which is useful but nevertheless so 
gross, and so inconspicuously gross, that it regularly falsifies what 
human communication is. I myself try to avoid the term now, 
though I have used it in earlier hooks and articles. 'Medium' applies 
properly to manual or machine transferral of pattern, not to human 
communication. Since knowledge cannot be physically transferred 
verbally from one human person to another hut must always be 
created by the hearer or reader within his or her own consciousness, 
interpretation is always in play when one listens or when one reads. 
2. Whereas oral cultures tend to merge interpretation of data 
with the data themselves, writing separates interpretation from 
data. Asked to repeat exactly what they have just said, persons 
from a primary oral culture will often given an interpretation of 
what they originally said, insisting and clearly believing that the 
interpretation is exactly what they said in the first place (Olson, 
citing Ruth Finnegan). They have difficulty in grasping what liter- 
ates mean by word-for-word repetition. The text provides a new 
Writing ~estrubtures Thought 
39 
scenario. The text is a visual given, a datum, separate from any 
utterer or hearer or reader. What one says (or writes) about the tkxt 
is something else, distinct from the text-object and what it as such. 
represents. This is not to deny that any understanding of a text 
always involves interpretation: for what the object-like text rep- 
. - 
resents is not an object, but words. It is simply to state that the 
status of interpretation becomes different with writing. 
3. Writing distances the word from sound, reducing oral-aural 
evanescence to the seeming quiescence of visual space. But this 
distancing is not total or permanent, for every reading of a text 
consists of restoring it, directly or indirectly, to sound, vocally or in 
the imagination. 
4. Whereas in oral communication the source (speaker) and the 
recipient (hearer) are necessarily present to one another, writing 
distances the source of the communication (the writer) from the 
recipient (the reader), both in time and in space. It is as easy to read 
a book by a person long dead or by a person thousands of miles 
away as it is to read one by a friend sitting at your elbow. Oral com- 
munication provides no comparable condition until the invention 
of sound recordings, which, however, depend on writing for their 
existence and, despite their aura of immediacy, distance speaker 
and hearer even more than writing does, interposing between the 
two mechanisms far more complicated than those of writing and 
print, and abolishing all direct relationship to lived time. 
5. Writing distances the word from the plenum of existence. In 
their original, spoken condition, words are always part of a context 
that is predominantly non-verbal, a modification of a field of per- 
sonal relationships and object-relationships. The immediate context 
of spoken words is never simply other words. The immediate con- 
text of textualized words is simply other words. 
6. By distancing the word from the plenum of existence, from a 
holistic context made up mostly of non-verbal elements, writing 
enforces verbal precision of a sort unavailable in oral cultures. 
Context always controls the meaning of a word. In oral utterance, 
the context always includes much more than words, so that less of 
the total, precise meaning conveyed by words need rest in the words 
themselves. Thus in a primary oral culture, where all verbalization 
is oral, utterances are always given their greater precision by 
nonverbal elements, which form the infrastructure of the oral 
utterance, giving it its fuller, situational meaning. Not so much 
40 
Walter J. Ong, SJ 
depends on the words themselves. In a text, the entire immediate 
context of every word is only other words, and words alone must 
help other words convey whatever meaning is called for. Hence 
texts force words to bear more weight, to develop more and more 
precisely 'defined'-that 
is 'bordered' or contrastive meanings. 
Eventually, words used in texts come to be defined in dictionaries, 
which present the meaning of words in terms of other words. Oral 
cultures present the meaning of words by using them (Goody 1968). 
Oral people are generally altogether uninterested in defining words 
by other words (Ong 1982: 53-4, citing Luria 1976). What the word 
'tree' means is determined by putting the word in non-verbal con- 
text, as in pointing t o  a tree, not by saying in words what 'tree' 
means. 
7. Writing separates past from present. Primary oral cultures 
tend to use the past to explain the present, dropping from memory 
what does not serve this purpose in one way or another, thus homo- 
genizing the past with the present, or approximating past to 
present. To use Jack Goody's term, their relationship with the past 
is homeostatic. By freezing verbalization, writing creates a distanced 
past which is full of puzzles because it can refer to states of affairs 
no longer effectively imaginable or can use words no longer immed- 
iately meaningful to any living persons. 
8. Writing separates 'administration'-civil, 
religious; com- 
mercial, and other-from 
other types of social activities. 'Ad- 
ministration' is unknown in oral cultures, where leaders interact 
non-abstractly with the rest of society in tight-knit, often rhetori- 
cally controlled, configurations. 'Administration' can have two 
senses: (1) a distinct group able to oversee and manage, in a more 
or less abstractly structured fashion, complex social wholes or 
activities or (2) the work such a group actually does. In both senses 
. 
administration comes into being with the development of written 
documentation and scribal expertise. At first, in more marginally 
textualized society, administrators relied on scribes for exploitation 
of the possibilities of textuality but, with wider and deeper textual- 
ization, eventually.found it advantageous to be able to read and 
write themselves (Stock 1983; Cressy, Laqueur, and Stevens in 
Resnick 1983). 
9. Writing makes it possible to separate logic (thought structure 
of discouise) from rhetoric (socially effective discourse). The in- 
vention of logic, it seems, is tied not to any kind of writing system 
Writing Restructures Thought 
41 
but to the completely vocalic phonetic alphabet and the intensive 
analytic activity which such an alphabet demands of its inventors 
and subsequently encourages in all sorts of noetic fields. All formal 
logic in the world, down to that used for computers, stems from the 
ancient Greeks (the later development of some formal logic in 
India, which may have been an independent development, came 
only after Greek logic had effectively taken over and of course after 
India had use of the alphabet). 
10. Writing separates academic learning (mathzsis and mathema) 
from wisdom (sophia), making possible the conveyance of highly 
organized abstract thought structures independently of their actual 
use or of their integration into the human lifeworld. Wisdom 
regards not abstractions but holistic situations and operations in 
the density of the real human lifeworld. Learning by apprentice- 
ship, with which academic learning contrasts, had kept even special- 
ized knowledge integrated into this lifeworld and had helped to 
keep wisdom as the noetic as well as the practical ideal. When 
cultures first assimilate writing, however, they tend to put wise 
sayings into texts. New technologies of the word always reinforce 
earlier conditions of utterances but at the same time transform 
them. But wise sayings in texts are denatured: they do not function 
the way they function in oral cultures. Oral cultures do not recite 
lists of decontextualized wise sayings, such as are found in biblical 
wisdom literature, but, in fact, quite commonly and even typically 
use such sayings separately as parrying devices in real-life agonistic 
oral exchange. Once wise sayings are written down, oral culture is 
weakening, though its demise may take many hundreds of years. 
Today Ibo entrepreneurs in Onitsha in Nigeria are printing and sell- 
ing collections of proverbs to marginally oral people who are un- 
aware of the fuller implications of literacy, much as Erasmus was 
doing for residually oral Europeans almost five hundred years ago. 
11. Writing can divide society by giving rise to a special kind of 
diglossia, splitting verbal communication between a 'high' language 
completely controlled by writing even though also widely spoken 
(Learned Latin in the European Middle Ages) and a 'low' language 
or 'low' languages controlled by speech to the exclusion of writing. 
Besides Learned Latin, the other high languages created and sus- 
tained by writing to produce similar diglossia have been Sanskrit, 
Classical Arabic, Rabbinical Hebrew (all alphabetically written) 
and Classical Chinese (written, but not in the alphabet). In all these 
42 
Walter J. Ong, SJ 
cases the high language has been not only a written language but 
also a sex-linked language, no longer a mother tongue, used only by 
males (with exceptions so few as to he negligible). As social struc- 
tures changed with the advance of technologies and women worked 
their way out of the massive responsibilities of pre-technological 
household management (which often included highly skilled crafts 
and even major manufacturing activities) and into academic edu- 
cation, the diglossia was reduced and gradually eliminated. As 
women entered academia, some did learn the high languages, hut 
only when these were on the wane and no longer used as languages 
of instruction or of normal academic discourse. Of the tens of 
thousands of hooks written in Learned Latin through the eighteenth 
century and beyond, virtually none are by women. Instead, women 
helped put the low, vernacular languages in competition with the 
high language. Eventually one or another dialect of various low 
languages was taken over by writing and replaced the original high 
language. This has happened to all the high languages just men- 
tioned-which 
are in fact the major high languages of the world- 
with the partial exception of Classical Arahicin the still linguistically 
fluid Arabic-speaking world. 
12. Writing differentiates grapholects, those 'low'-language 
dialects which are taken over by writing and erected into national 
languages, from other dialects, making the grapholect a dialect of a 
completely different order of magnitude and effectiveness from the 
dialects that remain oral. The grapholect which we know as stan- 
dard English has an active or recuperable vocabulary of perhaps 
a million and a half words, as compared with the relatively few 
thousand words available in dialects without written resources (see, 
for example, Laughlin 1975 on Tzotzil). For this exponential devel- 
opment, the lexicon of a grapholect requires print as well as writing, 
for dictionaries are print products. (Imagine producing multiple 
copies of Webster's Third International Dictionary or of the Oxford 
English Dictionary by hand.) 
13. Writing divides or distances more evidently and effectively as 
its form becomes more abstract, which is to say more removed 
from the sound world into the space world of sight. 'Abstract' in 
fact means removed, distanced, from abstrahere, to draw out or to 
draw away from. The alphabet in its various forms is the most 
abstract writing form. We have already noted that Tzeng and Wang 
(1983) have reported-though 
more work remains to he done here 
writkg Restructures Thought 
43 
-how 
writing and reading Chinese characters involve the right 
cerebral hemisphere of the brain more than do writing and reading 
the alphabet, which involve the left hemisphere more. The right 
hemisphere normally implements totalizing, intuitive, less abstrac- 
tive or less analytic processes; the left hemisphere is more analytic- 
and more involved in the alphabet. As has been seen, formal logic, 
modern science, and ultimately the computer have their historical 
roots in the fully vocalic alphabet, the most analytic of the writing 
systems, dissolving all sound as such into spatial equivalents, in 
principle, if never completely in fact. (The alphabet, it should be 
recalled, was invented only once: all alphabets in the world-Greek, 
Roman, Glagolitic, Cyrillic, Arabic, Sanskrit, Korean, etc.-derive 
in one way or another, directly or indirectly, from the ancient Sem- 
itic alphabet, which, however, in contrast to Greek, did not and 
still does not have letters for vowels.) 
14. Perhaps the most momentous of all its diaeretic effects in the 
deep history of thought is the effect of writing when it separates 
being from time. This separation has been detailed in a recent major 
monograph by Eric Havelock (1983), 'The Linguistic Task of the 
Presocratics, Part One: Ionian Science in Search of an Abstract 
Vocabulary'. We know that all philosophy depends on writing 
because all elaborate, linear, so-called 'logical' explanation depends 
on writing. Oral persons can be wise, as wise as anyone, and they 
can of course give some explanation for things. But the elaborate, 
intricate, seemingly endless but exact cause-effect sequences re- 
quired by what we call philosophy and by extended scientific think- 
ing are unknown among oral peoples, including the early Greeks 
before their development of the first vocalic alphabet. Havelock's 
newly seminal work, however, goes beyond showing that elaborate 
explanatory thinking depends upon writing and the revisionary, 
back-tracking operations made possible by such a time-obviating 
mechanism. His new monograph shows more precisely that the 
development of the content, the subject-matter of metaphysics 
itself, with its concentration on being as being, depended internally 
upon the elaboration of writing. Havelock's work is based upon 
extraordinarily careful analysis of pre9ocratic texts and upon 
cautious reconstruction of antecedents of the texts. Here I can only 
attempt to suggest in a quite sweeping, but I believe accurate way 
what Havelock's point comes to as related to the line of thought 
I have been pursuing. 
44 
Walter J. Ong, SJ 
Oral speech and thought narrativizes experience and the environ- 
ment, whereas philosophy, which comes into being slowly after 
writing, is radically anti-narrative. Plato did not want story-telling 
poets in his republic. The philosophical enterprise required the 
coinage of a large number of abstract nouns. Havelock (1983: 20) 
cites some which around the end of the fifth century BC had become 
common tender for dealing with the cosmic environment: matter 
(huls), dimension (megethos), space (chdra), body (sdma),- void 
(kenon), motion (kinssis or phora), change (alloidsis, metabolF), 
rest (stasis). Besides such nouns, 'the conceptual task also required 
the elimination of verbs of doing and acting and happening . . . in 
favor of a syntax which states permanent relationships between 
conceptual terms systematically' (p. 14). In this new noetic econ- 
omy, Heraclitus suggests (p. 25) that 'is' (esti) should replace the 
use of all other verbs and even. of the past and future of the verb 
'to be' (einai). Parmenides brings this reorganization of thought to 
completion: the imagistic, narrativistic Homeric references to the 
world are replaced 'by the thought world of conceptual science' 
(pp.28-9). In brief, the Homeric verb kinein, which refers not so 
much to our concept of 'motion' as to the earlier concept of 'com- 
motion' (the disturbance inherent in any kind of real action, not a 
disembodied abstraction such as kinssis), yields to einai, 'to be', 
which is not commotion at all (p. 38). Becoming becomes being. 
The mobile oral world has been supplanted by the quiescent text, 
and Plato's immutable ideas have been provided with their action- 
free, seemingly timeless chirographic launching pad. 
One is struck by similarities between the ancient Greek situation 
reported by Havelock and that which Luria found among illiterates 
as compared to literates among the folk he studied in the south- 
western Soviet Union (reported in Ong 1982: 49-57.). Asked, 'What 
is a tree? Define a tree,' the illiterate peasant replies, 'Why should 
I? Everyone knows what a tree is.' To learn what a thing is one does 
not use definitions. To grasp an object's essence, one does not talk 
about the object, but, as has earlier been noted here, one points to 
the object physically or metaphorically. One deals with existing 
beings as such indexically, not verbally. Words in an oral culture 
are used typically not to set up static definitions but to discourse 
actively on the way a thing acts or behaves or operates in the human 
.lifeworld. Words in oral cultures paradigmatically go with action 
and with things that act. As writing is interiorized, verbalization 
Writing Restructures Thought 
45 
migrates from a predominantly action frame to a predominantly 
'being' frame: the verb to be becomes more urgent than it had ever 
been in an oral culture. The quest is on to find Aristotle's to ti en 
einai, that is, 'what it is to be' or 'what being is'. 
In these perspectives metaphysics is seen to be indebted to writing 
not only for the kinds of protracted analytic explanations with 
which it and all science works, but also for identifying its own 
special quarry, 'being' itself, which it bas always pursued. Writing 
in the sense I have tried to explain here separates being from time 
and a longe sets up Heidegger's project of rejoining the two. But 
Heidegger's Sein und Zeit is written in the alphabet in a far-gone 
print culture, and whether it has fully achieved what it set out to do 
is in the minds of many open to question. 
VIII 
Print and electronics continue with new intensification and radical 
transformations the diaeretic programme initially set in motion 
by writing. They separate knower from known more spectacularly 
than writing does. Between the knower and the known print inter- 
poses elaborate mechanical contrivances and operations of a dif- 
ferent order of complexity than writing. The computer achieves the 
ultimate (thus far) in separation of the knower and the known (the 
subject of discourse): between the two it interposes limitlessly com- 
plex structures of mechanically articulated 'bits' of information, 
each consisting of the ultimate in divisive patterning, the dichotomy 
or binary division, which translates into 'yes-no' or 'is-isn't'. Put- 
ting the simplest statement of, say, a dozen words on to a page in a 
word processor involves operations inside the machine, totally 
remote from the human lifeworld, which are thousands, perhaps 
millions, of times more complex than writing or even letterpress 
printing, though unimaginably less complex than the activities of 
the human cerebrum. 
The computer shows its separative power not merely in distancing 
known from knower more drastically than writing or print. It 
shows its separative drive also within its own history as the digital 
computer today displaces more and more the analogue computer. 
By comparison with the digital computer, the analogue computer is 
holistic (as oral cultures are), whereas the digital computer is essen- 
tially analytic or separative. 
46 
Walter J. Ong, SJ 
An analogue computer measures by providing a model or ana- 
logue for what it is measuring. Thus a thermometer may be con- 
sidered an analogue computer: to measure heat, it takes as an 
analogue for heat the height of mercury in a very slender tube. An 
analogue computer is holistic in the sense that it is unbroken or 
'smooth'. As in the increase of heat there are no sudden jumps, no 
breaks (in rising from 38" centigrade, heat does not suddenly jump 
to 39" and then suddenly to 40" but passes through all the innumer- 
able, because non-disjunct, intermediate stages between 38" and 
40°), so there are no sudden jumps in the rising or falling of mer- 
cury in the tube (it does not rise by jumping abruptly from milli- 
meter to millimeter but passes through all the intermediate stages, 
innumerable because non-disjunct). The scale on the thermometer 
breaks up into discrete parts an action which is not discrete. Ana- 
logue computers give quick results, but the results can be inaccur- 
ate, for such things as variations in transmission of heat through 
the glass of the thermometer tube can produce less than an exact 
match between the movement of the mercury and the temperature. 
Analogue computers are considered accurate if they are within 0.1 
per cent of the correct value (Sanders 1983: log), which is very low 
accuracy compared to digital operations. 
A digital computer, on the other hand, counts in terms of its own 
built-in umts. The abacus is a simple digital computer, counting 
whatever it is being used for in terms of invariable units structured 
into the abacus itself. Corresponding units must be imputed to 
whatever the digital computer is measuring: temperature will be 
considered as jumping, for example, from 40° to 41' centigrade, or 
from 40.0' to 40.5' to 41°, or from 40.0' to 40.0001° to 40.000Z0, 
and so on-but, 
however small the units decided upon, always 
abruptly from one unit to the next. If the units are made small 
enough-say billionths of a degree centigrade-the effect is equiva- 
lently 'smooth' or totalizing, approximating more and more that of 
an analogue computer. The only limit to refinement in a digital 
computer is a matter of how precisely the hardware is designed and 
of how much work the programmer is willing to put in to divide the 
field outside the computer into smaller and smaller units. If this 
work is done assiduously enough, digital computers can be far 
more accurate than analogue computers. But division of the field 
always remains their mode of operation, even though, paradoxi- 
Writing Restructures Thought 
47 
cally, as they divide the field into smaller and smaller units they 
seem to be moving in effect to non-divided field-the bits are too 
small for any one of them to make any effective difference. Never- 
theless, the digital field is never really 'smooth', is always frag- 
mented. 
Today the digital computer has largely replaced the analogue, 
although some analogue computers and mixed-system analogue- 
and-digital computers are still in operation. There will always be 
use for analogue operations, it seems, but purely analogue com- 
puters appear to be on the way out. From friends in computer pro- 
gramming I have recently learned that, so far as they can find, 
simple analogue computers are no longer even being manufactured. 
Division has carried the day, even though it has become so intricate 
that it appears to be approximating non-division. Extremes meet- 
but in this case not quite. Separativeness, inherent in writing and 
print, has been finalized in the computer world. 
In the case of the computer we are clearly dealing with physical 
separation of knower and known. But in the case of writing as well, 
it is the physical separation, the interposition of the text, created by 
a technology, that makes possible the psychological separation 
between the self and the object of its knowledge. Moreover, as is 
evident in computer programming, new tracks for thought are im- 
posed by the new technologies. And the software of the computer 
vigorously interposes even another consciousness or other conscious- 
nesses-the programmer or programmers-between the knower and 
the known. 
As the digital computer can be to a degree, so writing is self-correc- 
tive to a degree. It has in itself the cure for the chirographic squint 
commonly afflicting cultures that have deeply interiorized writing. 
B6ause it so radically separates knower from known, writing can 
distance us from writing itself. Writing has enabled us to identify 
. 
, 
the orality that was antecedent to it and to see how radically it dif- 
fers from that orality. Writing has the power to liberate us more and 
more from the chirographic bias and confusion it creates, though 
complete liberation remains impossible. For all states of the word- 
oral, chirographic, typographic, electronic-impose their own con- 
48 
Walter J. Ong, SJ 
fusions, which cannot be radically eliminated but only controlled 
by reflection. 
In the noetic world, separation ultimately brings reconstituted 
unity. This is true of naming at the oral stage. Calling an object a 
'tree', as has been seen, puts the object 'out there', as different 
from the knower. In place of empathetic identification, the name 
sets up a relatively clear subject-object relationship. But this very 
.relationship makes for a new kind of intimacy. Now, in certain 
ways, the knower can deal with the tree better on its own terms, 
rather than on terms unreflectively imposed by the knower. He or 
she can better appreciate what the tree is on its own as distinct from 
the knower-although 
of course distinctness from the knower is 
never totally realized. With the use of names, the inarticulate iden- 
tification of the infant with the surrounding world is replaced by 
verbally implemented distancing. The new distancing submerges 
the original empathetic identification in a flood of new awarenesses 
but does not entirely do away with it. And indeed, as distancing 
increases beyond those ranges made available by oral naming 
through the vaster distances opened by writing and print-and 
now 
electronics-the 
original empathetic identification becomes more 
and more recuperable at the level of conscious reflectivity. That is 
to say, with writing and its sequels, empathetic identification can be 
attended to as we are attending to it now, and as oral folk could not 
attend to it. Of course, the original innocence of the pristine empa- 
thetic identification can never be repossessed directly. Civilization 
entails such discomforts, for that is what they are. (Freud's title 
should be translated 'Civilization andits Discomforts'(Unbehagen), 
not 'Discontents'.) Human knowledge demands both proximity 
and distance, and these two are related to one another dialectically. 
Proximity perceptions feed distancing analyses, and vice versa, 
creating a more manageable intimacy. 
As a time-obviating, context-free mechanism, writing separates 
the known from the knower more definitely than the original orally 
grounded manceuvre of naming does, but it also unites the knower 
and the known more consciously and more articulately. Writing is a 
consciousness-raising and humanizing technology. So is print, even 
more, and, in its own way, so is the computer. But that is another 
story, which has yet to be told or written or printed or processed in 
the course of this series. 
Writing Restru'ctures Thought 
REFERENCES 
C1anchy;M. T. 1979: From Memory to Written Record: England 1066- 
1307. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. London: Edward' 
Arnold. 
Edmonson, M. S. 1971: Lore: An Introduction to the Science of Folklore 
andLiterature. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston. 
Foley, J. M. 1985: Oral-Formulaic Theory andResearch: An Introduction 
and AnnotatedBibliography. New York and London: Garland Publish- 
ing Co. 
Goody, J. and I. Watt 1968: 'The Consequences of Literacy', in J. Goody 
(ed.), Literacy in Traditional Societies, 27-84. Cambridge: Cambridge. 
University Press. 
Graff, H. J. (ed.) 1981: Literacy and Social Development in the West: 
A Reader, Cambridge Studies in Oral and Literate Culture, 3. Cambridge 
and New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Hauf, J. 1984: 'Communications and Development: Some Strategies for 
Use in Primary Oral Cultures'. Paper delivered at the Tenth Annual 
Third World Conference, Chicago, Ill., 28-31 Mar. Manuscript from 
the author. 
Havelock, E. A. 1963: Preface toPlato. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press 
of Harvard University Press. 
- 
1976: Origins of Western Literacy. Toronto: Ontario Institute for the 
Study of Education. 
- 
1983: 'The Linguistic Task of the Presocratics, Part One: Ionian 
Sciencein Searchof an Abstract Vocabulary', inK. Robb (ed.), Language 
and Tho,ught in Early Greek Philosophy, 7-82. La Salle, Ill.: Hegeler 
Institute, Monist Library of Philosophy. 
Hofling, C. A. 1983: Itza Maya Morphosyntax from a Discourse Perspec- 
tive. Ph.D. Washington University, St Louis, Mo. Ann Arbor: University 
Microfilms International, DA 8310930. 
Hoskin, K. W. (n.d.): 'The History of Education and the History of 
Writing'. Review article, manuscript from the author. 
Innis, H. 1950: Empire and Communications. London: Oxford University 
Press. 
Laughlin, R. W. 1975: The Great Tzotzil Dictionary of Son Lorenzo 
Zinacatan. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press. 
Luria, A. R. 1976: Cognitive Development: Its Cultural and Social Foun- 
dations, trans. M. Lopez-Morillas and L. Solataroff; ed. M. Cole. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Olson, D. R. (n.d.): The World on Paper. Book in preparation, draft- 
manuscript from the author. 
50 
Walter J. Ong, SJ 
Ong, W. J. 1967: The Presence of the Word, New Haven: Yale University 
Press. 
- 
1982: Orality andLiteracy. London: Methuen. 
Resnick, D. (ed.) 1983: Literacy in Historical Perspective. Washington, 
DC: Library of Congress. 
Ricoeur, P. 1981: Hermeneutics and the Human Sciences, trans. and ed. 
J. B. Thompson. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Sanders, D. H. 1983: Computers Today. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Stock. B. 1983: The Implications of Literacy: Written Language and 
Models of Interpretation in the Eleventh and Twelfh Centuries. Prince- 
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Tzeng, 0. J. L. and W. S.-Y. Wang 1983: 'The First Two R's', inAmerican 
Scientkt, 71: 452-6. 
