CURATOR 
A Rationale for a Science Museum 
FRANK OPPENHEIMER 
DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS 
UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO 
There is an increasing need to develop public understanding of science 
and technology. The fruits of science and the products of technology con- 
tinue to shape the nature of our society and to influence events which 
have a world-wide significance. Yet the gulf between the daily lives and 
experience of most people and the complexity of science and technology is 
widening. Remarkably few individuals are familiar with the details of the 
industrial processes involved in their food, their medicine, their enter- 
tainment or their clothing. The phenomena of basic science which have 
become the raw material of invention are not easily accessible by the di- 
rect and unaided observation of nature yet they are natural phenomena 
which have, for one segment of society, become as intriguing and as 
beautiful as a butterfly or a flower. 
There have been many attempts to bridge the gap between the experts 
and the laymen. The attempts have involved books, magazine articles, 
television programs and general science courses in schools. But such at- 
tempts, although valuable, are at a disadvantage because they lack props; 
they require apparatus which people can see and handle and which display 
phenomena which people can turn on and off and vary at will. Explaining 
science and technology without props can resemble an attempt to tell 
what it is like to swim without ever letting a person near the water. For 
many people science is incomprehensible and technology frightening. 
They perceive these as separate worlds that are harsh, fantastic and hos- 
tile to humanity. 
There is thus a growing need for an environment in which people can 
become familiar with the details of science and technology and begin to 
gain some understanding by controlling and watching the behavior of 
laboratory apparatus and machinery; such a place can arouse their latent 
curiosity and can provide at least partial answers. The laboratory atmos- 
206 
phere of such an “explorataium” could then be supplemented with his- 
torical displays showing the development of both science and technology 
and its roots in the past. 
The purpose of a science museum and exploration center would be to 
satisfy this need. It could be valuable and entertaining for the general 
public and would serve as a resource for schools and existing adult educa- 
tion programs. 
The demonstrations and exhibits of the museum should have an aesthe- 
tic appeal as well as pedagogical purpose and they should be designed to 
make things clearer rather than to cultivate obscurantism or science fiction. 
The museum cannot be a mere hodge-podge of exhibits but should be 
conceived with some basic rationale that can provide a flexible frame 
work. 
A POSSIBLE FORM OF ORGAMZATION FOR SUCH A SCIENCE MUSEUM 
A form of organization which could help fulfill the underlying purpose 
of the museum would involve introducing the various areas of science 
and technology with sections dealing with the psychology of perception 
and the artistry associated with the various areas of perception. One might, 
for example, have five main sections based respectively on hearing, on 
vision, on taste and smell, on the tactile sensations (including perception 
of hot and cold) and on proprio-sensitive controls which form the basis 
of balance, locomotion and manipulation. 
The section on hearing might be introduced with a collection of musical 
instruments. The tonal qualities of the instruments could be demonstrated 
or reproduced. There could be a section on various musical scales, fol- 
lowed by a section on everyday sounds and noises which could make 
people aware of the problems of sound recognition and memory. The 
details of auditory perception could then be explored with experiments 
on the frequency and loudness response range and on the determination 
of sound direction, etc. The thread could then divide in two. One part 
would explore the physics of sound, that is the study of vibrations, oscil- 
lations, resonance, interference and reflections. The other part would be 
the physiology and histology of the ear and the associated central nerv- 
ous system. The final section would then elucidate the technology and 
the industrial techniques involved in sound reproduction, ( thus intro- 
ducing electronics) speaker and microphone construction, the acoustics 
of auditoriums and various devices such as hearing aids, telephones, 
radio, sonar, and the like. 
With the sense of vision one might start with painting and introduce 
the ideas of perspective and the effects involved in op-art and moire 
patterns. One would move to experiments in the psychology of visual 
perception and then branch to the physics of light on the one hand and 
207 
CURATOR 
to the biology of the eye on the other. These would each then lead to 
technology. The technology might include pigment manufacture, optical 
instruments, glass manufacture, television and photography, lighting, in- 
frared and ultraviolet devices and lasers. It might even be appropriate to 
demonstrate the use of high energy radiation on biological tissue and 
other aspects of medical technology. 
One would proceed in a similar fashion with taste and smell starting 
with food and perfume, then developing some aspects of chemistry and 
ending with the vast and mysterious technology of the food and cosmetic 
industries. The fourth section would start with clothing and housing, pass 
through a section on perception of hot and cold and roughness, and then 
develop the physics of heat and lead to the section on industrial produc- 
tion of fibers and building materials. 
Finally, the section on control would involve dancing and athletics and 
various skills such as balancing rods on one’s fingers or riding a bicycle. 
It would demonstrate the proprio-sensitive mechanisms of the body and 
would then branch to the mathematics of feedback mechanisms and the 
physiology of muscles and nerves and the semicircular canals, etc. and 
end up with the sophisticated technology of control mechanisms in in- 
dustry and technology. 
This form of organization is but one of many possible plans for a mu- 
seum. I believe it would capture the interest of many people and might 
provide a pattern which museums might wish to follow. However, al- 
though it seems essential that the museum be structured according to 
some underlying plan such as the one suggested above, it is also impor- 
tant that the people who use the museum not be forced to follow some 
preconceived pattern. In the proposed organization some people might 
be interested in following the domain of perception from one area to an- 
other. Some might remain rooted in just one area such as in the physics 
of sound or in food technology, whereas others may want to wander 
around the halls at random. 
IMMEDIATE PROGRAMS 
The design and building of elegant, clear and reasonably public-proof 
experiments and exhibits will proceed slowly. It might easily take many 
years to complete the type of displays for the program outlined above. 
There are, however, some programs which could be initiated within a 
short time and which should be continuing features of the museum. 
These are outlined below. 
1) School science fairs have become established institutions. At pres- 
ent, however, the projects are displayed for only two or three days and are 
then dismantled or returned to some storage place. They could well be 
displayed for much longer periods and the students who have built them 
208 
XI13 i S 6 S  
could occasionally be on hand to explain them to the public. In the future, 
the talent and effort involved in these projects might well be marshalled 
to make more integrated displays for the museum. 
2) The apparatus used in educational television science programs 
could be displayed in the museum after the television program had been 
shown. With competent supervision, this apparatus could be demonstrated 
again, and in at least some cases, the public might be able to work with 
it. In time, a television studio could be incorporated into the museum 
and a symbiotic relation between the museum and educational television 
could be developed. 
3) There is a need for a central location in which to display the labora- 
tory apparatus which has been developed for use in schools and colleges. 
This apparatus could be displayed in such a fashion that teachers and 
their pupils could work with it. Support for this activity might come both 
from the manufacturers of this apparatus and from the National Science 
Foundation which have invested heavily in its development. 
4 )  There are many objects of industry and science which are them- 
selves quite beautiful even when displayed with no pedagogical motive. 
The art department at Stanford University recently put together an ex- 
hibit using instrumentation for the Stanford Linear accelerator. Such 
exhibits would be worth displaying and would fit quite naturally with a 
practice of having displays of sculpture in the gardens and buildings 
which are adjacent to the museum building. 
A museum should not be a substitute for a school or a classroom but it 
should be a place where people come both to teach and to learn. Visitors 
should be able to find it refreshing and stimulating. Above all it should be 
honest and thus convey the understanding that science and technology 
have a role which is deeply rooted in human values and aspirations. 
209 
