Presented
in Monterey, Mexico 1980 .
Meeting of International
Commission
on Science Museums .
EXHIBIT CONCEPTION AND DESIGN
Frank Oppenheimer, Exploratorium
In talking about exhibit design,
I want to avoid a propensity that
frequently plagues discussions about teaching, namely : telling people
how to teach without any reference to what they are teaching .
The way
in which one designs exhibits depends crucially on their broad subject
matter as well as the detailed content of each exhibit .
I will
therefore
stick to some aspects of what we have learned
at the Exploratorium .
There we have exhibits on sensory perception,
light and optics, sound,
resonance and wave motion, electricity, rotation and angular momentum,
exponentials, patterns of motion and rhythm, on the nature of heat and
temperature, the behavior of gasses and liquids, nerve encoding, marine
animal
behavior,
simple engines and a modest collection of miscellany
that exists because it intrigues one or another member of the staff .
This list, and it is not even all
inclusive, must sound pretty diverse,
but
in our minds there is
a thread that connects each topic with our
starting point :
human perception .
The Exploratorium is about nature and
one of the major accomplishments of science has been to demonstrate that
there
is
a unity to the diversity of nature .
There are relatively few
fundamental forces,
stars are suns,
planets and moons fall
like apples,
electricity produces magnetism and magnetism produces electricity and they
both combine to create light .
It
is
hoped that the visitors to the Exploratorium
sense this connectedness .
This objective may,in our case, be helped by the
circumstance that all our exhibits are in one gigantic room .
But even if
the visitors miss or do not formulate this grandiose idea,
it
is vital that
we ourselves keep
it
in our mind .
A museum can resemble a musical
composi-
tion, a symphony
in which even though the listeners may not be aware of the
structure of the piece,
they must sense that it exists because the composer
was disciplined
in his efforts to achieve the coherence of his composition .
Museums, at their best, require their creators to be guided by a similar
kind of discipline .
At the very least one can hope that visitors rarely
say to themselves, or to each
other,"Why in the world do they have that
thing here?"
There are some general
precepts that we adhere to : We endeavor, for
example, to display multiple examples,
in a variety of contexts, of inter-
esting or important phenomena .
We have about 18 different examples of
resonance and standing waves .
There are resonances in air columns,
in
strings and ropes,
in metal
plates and rubber membranes, in rods and springs,
in water and in mechanical wave machines .
We even attempted to illustrate
resonances in solids with
a remarkable jelly-like substance but unfortunately
the only resonant frequencies that would produce an amplitude sufficiently
large to be seen with
a strobe light were too close to human brain rhythms
for prudent display .
Exhibit Conception and Design
page
2
We also have over a dozen exhibit pieces on binocular vision and
size distance judgments, and almost as many on the role of edge effects
and lateral inhibition
in the eye.
We even demonstrate Von Bekesl'smodel
for lateral
inhibition in the ear.
We have eight different exhibits on
gyroscopes and rotary momentum and forces, half a dozen or more pieces
on composition of two perpendicular motions including a pendulum, a
drawing board, oscilloscopes, and color television sets .
We have a
section of 15 exhibits on things which grow or decrease exponentially
or logarithmically .
There are at least two considerations that dictate having such mul-
tiplicities .
Science has not only unearthed many intriguing (and useful)
natural phenomena, it has also provided us with
a conceptual framework for
thinking about them.
Our concept of wave is much more general than any
particular kind of wave .
In fact, it takes some doing to perceive the
common ground among a water wave, a sound wave, a light wave and a wave
of fashion.
- The best way to know more than a textbooky definition of a
wave
is to learn through experiences with and reflections -0h the common-
alities among the various embodiments of a wave .
It would be much the
same with any concept, such as that of a family .
Knowing only one family
member tells nothing .
One needs to know children and uncles and cousins
and brothers and grandfathers and mothers, to understand the concept "family" .
Only then can the concept be extended to include the "family of man" or the
chemical family of halogens .
Natural history museums and anthropology
museums seem to know more about the virtue of multiple examples than do
science centers .
Too often, these centers will show just one example
of refraction, one of reflection, one of interference and one of diffraction
and be satisfied that they have "covered" the behavior of light .
There is an additional
reason for providing a multiplicity of contexts .
Each exhibit on one topic can belong to a different chain of exhibits
on another topic .
For example, some resonance exhibits also fit into the
theme of musical
instrument, some into the exponential
section and some
into the group of those on electrical
inductance and capacity, etc .
We
view a science museum as a collection of props that constitute an inter-
locking web of mini-curricula
that can be used by teachers at all levels,
by the visitors who come hoping to instruct their children, their friends
or their parents or by our own staff when they use the place for learning
or for teaching classes .
We are continually filling in and adding on to
these interlocking curriculitos and hopefully we will be able to do so
for years to come .
As a consequence we never have a formal public opening
of any but traveling exhibit shows .
We,of course, also think of the fxploratorium in other ways than as
a collection of props for teaching mini-curricula .
It is a place for
sightseeing, a woods of natural phenomena through which to wander .
Sight-
seeing is more than pleasurable, it can build the experiences and the intu-
itions on which other opportunities for learning rely; it can arouse curiosity
and, in a broad sense,
it can help people determine where they are going and
Exhibit Conception and Design
page 3
where they will want to make their home .
Many of the scientists who visit
the
Exploratorium have attributed the fact that they are scientists to their
early experiences
in the Museum of Science and Industry
in Chicago .
In addition to providing opportunities for sightseeing and for providing
a library of teaching props,
a museum can, in an overall way, make very deep,
lasting impressions on its visitors .
It can reestablish the visitors'
confi-
dence in their own ability to understand and to learn .
It can give them a
sense of roots in the past,
it can help them realize that human beings and
human acts are a part of nature .
More simply,
it can engender a comfortable
fam.itiarity with aspects of culture that they may have rejected as inaccess-
ible or as undesirable .
It is hard to predict or to assess these general
effects .
One woman told us that after being at the Exploratorium she went
home and, for the first time in her life, put a plug on a lamp cord . Nothing
in the Exploratorium could have instructed her how to do so .
She must have
felt that since she had made sense of some of the difficult ideas in the
museum, she could-make sense of other things
as well .
The Audience
There is one piece of oft-repeated
advice to which we have not paid
the slightest attention .
Over and over again I have been lectured at by
exhibit designers with the statement "You have to decide who your audience
will be" .
We do recognize that it is essential that neither I nor the staff
are bored by our exhibits, that we learn something as we make them and that
we enjoy showing them to people, especially our friends and colleagues, over
and over again .
The best physicists that
I know usually learn something in
the place and are also delighted by some of the things they already know
because the presentation is novel,
illuminating or beautiful .
But as far
as we can determine there is no age limit, no training limit nor any cultural
limit to the range of people who use and enjoy the place .
Preschool groups
and old-folks-home groups come and come back .
Mentally or sensory retarded
groups repeatedly come and special classes for gifted students use the place
as
the basis for a variety of projects .
It
is one of the few formal
insti-
tutions that attracts teenagers .
There are two things misleading about the statement "You have to decide
who your audience is" .
In the first place it
is
possible to make many,
if not most, of the exhibits so that they can each individually
be appreci-
ated and enjoyed on a variety of levels . Secondly, it is ridiculous to think
that every visitor should be able to appreciate or enjoy every exhibit in the
museum .
Most science centers have several hundred exhibit pieces .
We have
over 400, the Franklin Institute has over 600 .
How many of these should one
expect a visitor to become memorably absorbed with in a two or three hour
visit?
How many paintings
in the New York Metropolitan do you specifically
want to go back and see on your next visit -
6? 12? 14? 48?
Exhibit Conception and Design
page 4
We have one exhibit that
I have never seen an unaccompanied person spend
time at .
It is
an exhibit on images of point sources produced by holo-
graphically made zone" plate rings . But the exhibit
is there if anyone
ever asks how a standard holographic image is Produced .We, and the Ex-
plainers,
can take them to this
"unused' exhibit on zone plates, and
occasionally knowledgeable visitors also use it to explain holograms to
their companions .
Not only should one not expect a visitor to become absorbed in very
many exhibits, the atmosphere of the museum must be adjusted in such a
way that people are relaxed about missing or not understanding
something .
I was especially delighted by one example of such relaxedness :
We have
painted over one of the skylights
in the building to keep the optics
section dark .
However, the seagull
feet puncture star-like holes
in the
paint .
On one occasion
I overheard a middle-aged woman saying to her
companion as both looked up at these holes,
"Well,
I suppose that if we
knew more, we would know what the little lights meant" .
They were perfectly
happy as they went on to play with other exhibits .
An important general consideration of the Exploratorium stems from the
central
values we place on art .
Many museums involve artists to help with
the appearance and the graphics of their exhibitry .
We have used artists
in a parallel
capacity
to that of science teachers .
Each contributes
exhibits that deal with roughly the same domains of nature .
We have, for
example, many detailed didactic exhibits on the dispersion of light into
colors but we also have
the magnificent, constantly changing Sun Painting
that was created by an artist using a pallette of pure hues_ that are extracted
from the sunlight by an arrangement of long prisms and narrow mirrors .
We
have holograms purchased from artists displayed along with our didactic
treatment of holograms and diffraction .
Art
is included, not just to make
things pretty, although
it often does
so, but primarily because artists make
different kinds of discoveries about nature than do physicists or biologists .
They also rely on a different basis for decision-making while creating their
exhibits .
But both artists and scientists help us notice and appreciate
things
in nature that we had learned to ignore or had never been taught to
see .
Both art and science are needed to fully understand nature and its
effects on people .
The art in the Exploratorium is therefore blended with
the science as a part of the overall pedagogy . These works, that derive
primarily from aesthetic considerations, undoubtedly also play a crucial
role
in our ability to attract a universal audience .
We need to do more along
these lines, but we are slow in doing so because we only accept those artists
whose interests mesh with the broad thematic content of the museum .
Exhibit Design and Conception
page 5
The Design of Specific Exhibits
The creation of virtually every one of our exhibits has
involved multiple
stages of decision making about how best to demonstrate a particular idea
or phenomena,
about how much variation to provide for the basic variables
and about how much random irrelevent behavior to retain
in the design .
In the Gray Step
exhibit, there
is really only one thing that the visitors
can do .
They can move a rope that covers the boundary between two seemingly
identical white rectangles to one side .
When they do so, one rectangle looks
uniformly dark gray ano the other a uniform white .
The effect is so re-
markable that a visitor will
repeat the procedure over and over again .
In this
case, we do not need to provide any other activity .
Invariably the visitors
will
also read the"What
is Going On" graphics .
(We did, after the exhibit
was on display for several years, add a white card with two widely separated
holes punched
in it .
An-Explainer can now use the card to show that the
identical
uniform-looking rectanqles are not uniform .
Each half changes from
light to slightly darker across the rectangle .
The rope hides the discontin-
uity between them, the step that goes abruptly from dark to light .)
The
exhibit? as it stands
is a good one and does not need anything more .
We do
however have nearby another exhibit, a rotating vertical cylinder with
vertical black and white stripes that illustrates the same effect .
The first
exhibit was copied after one
in Edwin Land's research laboratory and the
second version was suggested by one at the MIT teaching laboratory.
Although the single activity of the Gray Step exhibit is satisfactory,
many of the single activity exhibits in our electricity section are extremely
disappointing . One of these, Motor Effect,
which we really tried to make
effective,was conceived to demonstrate the force that a magnetic field exerts
on a wire carrying a current .
We used an array of radar permanent magnets that
we got from the dismantled
accelerator at Cal . Tech .
They create a magnetic
field of over 2000 gauss within
a gap of 1h" with pole pieces of area 2" by
10" .
A very flexible rubber covered wire about 1" in diameter lies just below
the pole pieces
until
the visitors step on a mat-switch .
Then a current of 200
amperes makes the wire pop up through the field .
If one tries to push it
down, one can feel the magnitude of the force .
The direct current
through
the wire
is not completely smooth so that the wire feels vibrant to a visitor
when he or she touches
it .
When the current flows, the large rectifier lights
up to indicate electricity and the required large transformer is clearly on
view . However, when
I first showed this exhibit to a very knowledgeable
member of our graphics department she said :"The lid of my garbage also pops
up when
I step on a little lever" .
Over and over again
I have watched visitors
step on the mat-switch, feel
the force on the wire,
shrug their shoulders and
move on with an expression of "so what" .
We do not know how to make the exhibit
(and several
other analogous basic electrical exhibits) more captivating,
more beautiful or more instructive .
Exhibit Design and Conception
page 6
The only thing that has occurred to us
is
to use an entirely
different attack .
We have built a vacuum system with a cold cathode
generated electron beam that
is made visible by introducing a small
flow of helium into the vacuum .
The beam is about ;" in diameter and
18" long .One can deflect
it with
a hand-held magnet or steer it with
a joy stick connected
to electrostatic deflectors .
This beam, of
about eight kilovolts, can be directed to turn a radiometer, to impinge
on a thin foil and make
it red hot, to light up a fluorescent screen
or to fall
on a Faraday cup that
is connected to an external milliameter .
We
call
the exhibit "Electric Currents with the Wire Removed" .
We still
have trouble with the stability of the focused beam, but when the beam
behaves
as we intend it to, the visitors are intrigued and captivated,
and we often observe people explaining it to each other .
The glow of
the beam, the elegance of the glassware and of the internal gadgets
render the exhibit really quite handsome .
When
its performance is
debugged, it will make
a very good exhibit .
sometimes we can figure out how to revive or reconstruct a dud
exhibit .
Our exhibit
Convection Currents provides
an example .
The
exhibit was conceived by one of our sta
f members who was developing
an exhibit to demonstrate that the temperature of boiling water and the
steam above it remains constant no matter how fast the water boils .
At one point, while heating the rectangular glass water boiler tank, he
noticed the shadows of the rising hot water that were produced on a wall
by a nearby clear light bulb .
These convection currents shadows were
worthy of a second exhibit so he made another identical
tank, put a clear
light bulb behind it on a long table and a frosted screen in front of
it .
He mounted a small
helical
calrod in the water .
The viewer could
vary the temperature of this heater and watch the convection current
patterns by standing in front of the frosted screen .
The exhibit
worked, but it was extremely unsatisfactory .
The screen was too small
and the water rose further in the tank than could be projected onto the
screen .
The calrod coil was too wide so that the convection shadows
(schlieren) appeared fuzzy and unduly irregular .
The calrod started
to rust so that it was painted with epoxy .
But the epoxy prevented
the water from wetting it properly .
The magnified projected surface
of the calrod looked bumpy and -ugly because of the air .bubbles that
adhered to the epoxy .
We put up with this exhibit for many months and then completely
redesigned it.
We made a much thinner tank and used a one inch long
" diameter horizontal heating element .
We placed a shielded point
source light in front of the tank on a slide so that it could move from
about four to fourteen inches away from the glass wall of the tank .
The shadow image of the convection current stream was projected on a
broad expanse of a wall
a few feet behind the tank .
The rod that
supported the calrod extended a short distance above the top of the tank .
It could be moved,but initially
its motion was frustratingly restricted
because someone was worried that the visitor might knock the heater
Exhibit Design and Conception
page 7
against the wall of the tank and break the glass .
I did not like the
feel
of this restricted motion and wanted to be able to stir the
water with the calrod to see what could happen .
The mounting was
therefore changed so that the calrod could not move sideways and hit
the glass but could have considerable motion parallel
to the glass .
We ran
a string from the protruding calrod support over a pulley to
a ring on the side of the tank .
It was quite pleasant to pull
the string
and stir the water .
The exhibit now has an intriguing operational
aesthetic.
It is both entertaining and instructive to move the light
and observe the change in scale of the shadow on the wall .
When one
first turns the heater on,
a thin warm layer forms around
it that does
not rise,
a kind of "inversion" .
With a little more heat, the warm
water breaks away from the heater, it rises smoothly for a few inches and
then develops two swirls,one each side,rotating in opposite directions .
With full heat, there
is much turbulence and if one pulls the string up
and down one observes threads of warm water that appear throughout the
tank and persist for a surprisingly long time .
It is not as easy to
produce
a uniform mixture by stirring as
I had supposed .
If one waits,
with the heater off, till
the threads have disappeared and then stirs
again,
the threads reappear .
We were puzzled by this reappearance
until
someone pointed out that, after the heater had been on for a while,
there is a gradual temperature increase from the bottom to the top of
the tank that remains static .
It becomes rearranged when one stirs the
quiet tank and the shadows show the resulting inhomogeneities .
The
exhibit now is lovely,
instructive, and as so often happens when one
makes one's own exhibits, full of both aesthetic and phenomonological
surprises
for the exhibit creators .
The exhibit
is so "nice" that,
instead of putting it where it belongs in the section on Heat and
Temperature, we leave it between the main entrance and our office
so
that visitors
can see it when they first come
in and so that we can
readily play with it and show it to friends .
In describing this
exhibit
I have discussed only its operation and have left out an equally
long description of all the little problems and decisions that were
involved in its fabrication .
In many instances removing unpleasant frustrations
in the operation
of an exhibit can be much simpler .
One staff member built a large,
adjustable but very rugged Michelson Interferometer .
One could test
the sensitivity of the instrument by watching the motion of the inter-
ference fringes that resulted from a very light pressure on the steel
plate on which the interferometer mirrors were mounted .
After doing
so,
I wondered how thick the steel
plate was .
I put a finger from
one hand on top of the plate and tried to put a finger from my other
hand underneath
it, thereby using my hand as a crude set of calipers .
But I was frustrated in doing so by a piece of plywood that blocked
my lower hand .
The problem was solved by raising the steel plate above
the box on which it was mounted so that the visitors could see that the
plate was made of V thick steel .
Exhibit Designs and Conception
Page
8
In some ways an exhibit resembles a play or a musical
composition .
A tension is built up by something in the exhibit that
elicits curiosity,
or an interesting task, or a lovely effect, and then the tension
is
resolved as the result of aesthetic or intellectual payoff .
If either
component is missing, either the creation of tension or its relief, the
exhibit
is unsatisfactory .
The creation of tension should not involve
flamboyance or the high signal strength of traditional advertising .
It
should be a quiet affair, for if every exhibit shouts,
"Hey Come and Look
at Me," the museum will become impossibly tiring for the visitors .
Although the two exhibits described above, the Gray St
and the
Motor Effect , can be used in just one way, most of our exhibits can be
used in many ways by the visitors and they are often used in an ingenious
fashion that had not occurred to us when building them .
When visitors
can invent ways to use an exhibit they get a sense of discovery that is
much more satisfactory than if they merely discovered what we thought
they were supposed to discover .
They stay with the exhibit for longer
times and usually, but not always, end up by observing the behavior that
we hoped they would when we conceived the exhibit .
The exhibit Bernoulli
Blower provides
a clear example of such versatility .
A large blower
supports
a ten inch rubber ball on a stream of air .
The Bernoulli
force
is great enough that the visitors can feel the tug when they pull
the
ball out of the air stream .
If they tap the ball
it will
oscillate .
They often attemptto toss the ball
so that it is captured by the stream .
They lift up their sweaters and let the air blow on their stomach .
They
lean over and let the air blow their long hair .
They tear off bits
of paper and watch them in the air stream.
They try suspending other
objects in the stream and sometimes they move off to the side and have a
game of catch .
Our exhibit Critical Angle
is flexible in a different way .
In
many ways the exhibit is completely standard .
It uses a Leybold 8" by
1;1" plastic semi-cylinder and two Leybold light sources . However, one
of the sources has the cylindrical lenses removed in order to produce
a diverging beam which canbe focused by the large semicircular lens .
The broad beam makes a very pretty pattern as the light converges in
a caustic whose curvature is due to the spherical aberration of the wide
lens .
The other light source produces the narrow "ray" of a beam that
it was intended to make .
We have added a short
1" diameter lucite
cylinder tied to a string that the visitor can place in the ray to steer
the light toward any part of the lens .
The visitor can, as is customary,
observe the path of the light on the white formica table top below the
lens, but the ray also impinges on the white rear wall of the exhibit .
One can see the rainbow colors disappear one at a time as each color
reaches the critical angle .
I have seen similar exhibits in other
museums in which the activities allowed the visitors are much more
restricted .
In one display, the semicircular lens was constrained to
rotate only 1800 , presumably to insure that the visitor did not miss the
total
internal
reflection effects .
I found the constraint maddeningly
frustrating .
In fact in general, it is
important to allow the variables in
an exhibit to change enough so that the interesting effects disappear .
One learns
as much or more about an effect by its disappearance as by
its appearance .
Exhibit Design and Conception
page 9
The Ideas for Exhibits
Many, many visitors ask "Where do the ideas for these exhibits
come from?"
Our answer is :
"From many, many different sources" .
A
good number of the exhibits are adaptations of quite standard laboratory
or lecture demonstration equipment .
We learn about them from our own
experiences as instructors or students, from wandering around to other
museums, research labs and universities and from published reports .
Other exhibits originate because, while wandering around town or through
our junk drawers, we encounter some material, a gadget, or a phenomena
that clearly illustrates something we want to show .
The Glass Bead
Rainbows , the Eye Shimmer Poster, the Walking Beats , the H1
the Adjustable Plaything a
- ndthe Shoe Tester are examplesof such
"found" exhibits .
Some exhibits are spin o f results from staff
discoveries as they work on a completely different exhibit .
Such are
the exhibits Mirrorly a Window, the Cheshire Cat or the Brine Shrimp
Ballet .
Sometimes we have to search hard and long and even put the
matter aside for a year or so, before we find a technique for showing
some particular effect . We tried Ouzo and Pernod in water to show the
preferential scattering of blue light by fine particles but the particles
gradually coalesced .
We had to await a staff member's discovery that the
right kind of gelatin would make a good Blue Sky exhibit .
The most interesting developments can result when we ask ourselves
questions such as, "What is the most basic thing we want to show about
nerves?", and then : "How can we best demonstrate that nerves encode
the intensity of their stimulation by increasing the frequency of the
neural pulses they transmit?"
I believe it was Professor Kennedy's
neurophysiology laboratory at Stanford that came up with the idea
of using a Crayfish Tail to show this effect .
When asked "how can
we best show that a large resonant response can arise from repeated,
properly timed tiny pushes or pulls", we invented the giant 400 lb .
Resonant Pendulum exhibit .
When we asked how can we best show that
matter absorbs and re-emits light, we subsequently decided to develop
a group of exhibits on phosphorescence and fluorescence .
A very large
number of our exhibits arise in this way .
We first try to decide what
kind of effects or ideas are fundamental
to an understanding of some
aspect of science or nature .
Then we sort out which effects are easier
to understand if they are demonstrated rather than read about .
Finally,
we grope around for ways to effectively and captivatingly illustrate
such effects .
Outsiders who learn about what we are searching for
will frequently help .
Phil Morrison called from MIT to tell us of
the exponential behavior of a Bouncing Ball, Luis Alvarez sent us
an article on a sequential array o
long focal length lenses . Occa-
sionally a staff member will read about some work in a journal or
newspaper and contact the author .
We gather a group of experts in
linguistics, for example, or in visual perception .
Invariably the
group provides
us with a great raft of ideas to work on .
Since,
as an ongoing process, we are expanding exhibit curricula
and filling gaps in the ones we have, we have been able to afford the
luxury of being responsive (albeit also selective) to the continual
flow of ideas and of actual exhibit pieces that visiting scientists,
teachers and artists bring to us .
Exhibit Design and Conception
page
10
I have used the exhibits
in the Exploratorium as illustrations
because
I know them so well .
But this paper is not about the
Exploratorium .
It is about some of the very many considerations
that govern the way in which exhibits can be conceived and designed
in any science museum .
My discussion has not touched questions of
safety, or maintenance,
of handicapped person accessibility, of
fabrication techniques or of the all-important graphic labeling .
I have restricted the discussion and the examples to some of the basic
considerations of exhibit pedagogy and have primarily stressed the
flexibility, patience and willingness to discard and start over again
that exhibit development requires .
I have used these examples to
suggest the kind of discipline that is required on the part of exhibit
creators if the audience is to be relieved of the constraints on
exploration and behavior that have done such damage to the learning
process
in other contexts .
Invited paper presented to the joint Association of Science-Technology
Center/CIMUSET Conference
in Monterrey, Mexico, October 24-25,
1980
