 
 
 
 
 
Computing in the 
Middle Ages 
A View from the Trenches 
1955 - 1983 
 
 
By 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2002 by Severo M. Ornstein.  All rights reserved. 
 
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without 
written permission from the author. 
 
ISBN: 1-4033-1516-7 (Ebook) 
ISBN: 1-4033-1517-5 (Softcover) 
 
 
This book is printed on acid free paper. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1stBooks - rev. 10/15/02 
 
 
iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For Charlie and Wes 
 
 
iv 
 
 
v 
Table of Contents 
 
 
Preface ........................................................................................xi 
 
Acknowledgments .................................................................xxi 
 
Introduction.......................................................................... xxiii 
 
Chapter 1..................................................................................... 1 
In which I meet some early computers, write my first programs, 
learn a little history, and switch professions 
 
Chapter 2................................................................................... 22 
In which I arrive at Lincoln Lab, am introduced to the wonders 
of air defense, security, and other matters, and worry about my 
children’s future. 
 
Chapter 3................................................................................... 28 
In which I make some comparisons and mark some contrasts 
between “back then” and “now.” 
 
Chapter 4................................................................................... 47 
Enter Sputnik and ARPA, I’m nearly arrested, and a briefcase 
blows away. MITRE arises, I switch jobs again, and encounter 
various missile problems. A computer is murdered 
 
Chapter 5................................................................................... 63 
A piano enters the lab and comes up against TX-2. DEC is 
formed and there is an error on Page 217. Fourier is proven 
sound and we land on an aircraft carrier. 
 
 
 
vi 
 
 
Chapter 6 ...................................................................................74 
A moment of skepticism 
 
Chapter 7 ...................................................................................79 
In which I join the TX-2 group and encounter a different 
culture and some memorable characters. I simulate another 
machine, avoid a fire, and start to dip into hardware 
 
Chapter 8 ...................................................................................92 
The Big Dealers vs. the Little Dealers.  We poise for a leap 
 
Chapter 9 .................................................................................102 
The birth of the LINC. I become a midwife and leave Lincoln 
 
Chapter 10................................................................................116 
We move to Kendall Square where we accomplish the impossible 
 
Chapter 11................................................................................131 
Tragedies overtake us; the prime number drop; we move to St. 
Louis where we design some new building blocks and encounter 
the evil synchronizer bug. I assist in brain surgery 
 
Chapter 12................................................................................146 
Charlie to the rescue; we take a LINC to Chile and climb down 
an elevator shaft. Water juice 
 
Chapter 13................................................................................152 
Macromodules work; St. Louis is hot; we build the Chasm, and 
I depart for Boston 
 
 
 
 
vii 
Chapter 14............................................................................... 156 
I join BBN; some comments on ARPA; Encounters with 
TENEX; some coffee-tables, and a teletype through the wall. 
The ARPANET is born 
 
Chapter 15............................................................................... 188 
The Aloha Network precedes Ethernet; the first microprocessor 
appears; we design a true multiprocessor 
 
Chapter 16............................................................................... 193 
China! 
 
Chapter 17............................................................................... 204 
Pluribus struts its stuff 
 
Chapter 18............................................................................... 210 
Chile revisited; changes at BBN; I head for PARC 
 
Chapter 19............................................................................... 213 
A place of character(s); I love my Alto; the imprint of Engelbart; 
Thacker’s decision; the importance of tools; an unfortunate 
erasure; Bob Taylor—missionary; el Dorado 
 
Chapter 20............................................................................... 231 
Music, music, music; bright students; Mockingbird 
 
Chapter 21............................................................................... 237 
The beginning of the end; CPSR and nuclear wars; clerical 
errors and the end of an era 
 
Chapter 22............................................................................... 244 
A review of the bidding 
 
 
 
viii 
Epilogue...................................................................................250 
 
Appendix I—The Synchronizer Problem..........................256 
 
Appendix II—The Bit-Map Display...................................261 
 
Bibliography...........................................................................265 
 
 
ix 
 
List of Illustrations 
 
 
1. 
The author at the Console of TX-2............................... 84 
 
2. 
The Original LINC Crew............................................. 109 
 
3. 
Wes Clark Demonstrating the LINC......................... 112 
 
4. 
Mary Allen..................................................................... 120 
 
5. 
Mish and Howard......................................................... 121 
 
6. 
Charlie ............................................................................ 123 
 
7. 
A LINC Kit..................................................................... 129 
 
8. 
Frank Heart with an early IMP .................................. 176 
 
9. 
Alex showing the NCC to some Chinese visitors... 180 
 
10. A meeting in China ...................................................... 202 
 
11. The Pluribus Team....................................................... 206 
 
12. Bob Taylor...................................................................... 214 
 
13. John, Severo, and Mockingbird................................. 236 
 
 
 
x 
 
 
xi 
Preface 
 
 
You turn the key—the engine comes to life. You press a 
button—up goes the window. Another and the antenna 
emerges and music washes over you. Still more buttons and 
your seat adjusts itself to you, you are warmed, lights come 
on, the windshield is scrubbed, the garage door gently rises, 
and finally you are on your way. Who could have foreseen 
such a world in the days of hand cranks, dust goggles, and 
isinglass curtains? And yet somehow we got from there to 
here. How did we do it? 
In a similar vein one might ask how, given its 
monstrous, room-filling forbears, computers such as the 
modest one on which I’m presently typing came to be. Surely 
not all at once, not overnight. There was no road map. What 
paths led through the myriad by-ways that brought us to 
this point? 
It’s difficult to believe that over the course of a few 
decades anything like today’s personal computer could have 
evolved from the giant machines1 of the late 1940s and early 
‘50s. Except in Mitchell Waldrop’s excellent book (see 
Bibliography), the story of how this dramatic change came 
about has not been at all well told.  Often one gets the 
impression that the personal computer revolution began in 
the mid 1970s. But that is only when it began to touch the 
consciousness of the general public and to blossom into an 
industry. By then, the image of the personal computer was 
already quite well formed and machines not fundamentally 
                                                 
1 The terms “computer” and “machine” are used interchangeably herein. 
 
 
xii 
different from today’s were already in use in research 
laboratories. The real story began many years earlier with 
the scientists and engineers of a relatively unknown 
laboratory at MIT. They were the originators of much that 
has followed and were to spread productively throughout 
the evolving computer science community over ensuing 
decades. 
Many recent so-called computer histories, catering 
heavily to the public lust for a peep at the rich and famous, 
have explored, ad nauseam, the eccentricities of Bill Gates 
and Steve Jobs and their brethren—to the point that they 
have become almost mythic figures. Their stories and their 
garages have become legendary. But these are Johnny-come-
latelies who have achieved notoriety for the most part not for 
innovative science or even for engineering, but rather thanks 
to their extraordinary ability to exploit ideas pioneered by 
others, to turn them into financial empires. But what about 
the pioneers themselves, the ones who did the scientific and 
engineering groundwork on which these empires have been 
built? Where and who are they? Too often they appear only 
in fading photographs, wearing outmoded suits, usually 
standing in front of giant machinery that bears no apparent 
resemblance to the computers of today. 
A few years ago we tuned in hopefully to a four-hour 
PBS special that claimed to provide some of the history 
behind the computer revolution. But the focus turned out to 
be once again on exploiters rather than explorers, and the 
history I’d known and experienced was largely ignored or 
glossed over. At about the same time, the untimely death of 
a dear friend and former colleague, Charlie Molnar, 
emphasized how few of us remain who are in a position to 
help straighten out the record. Charlie’s death affected me 
deeply and reminded me what extraordinary human beings 
 
 
xiii 
I had been privileged to know and work among. And I 
thought how little recognition is given to such key people, 
thanks to their personal reserve and their preoccupation 
with their work rather than the limelight. 
I initially set out to write this book because other 
histories seemed to ignore or even contradict my thirty-odd 
years of experience in the computer field. Developments that 
I was sure had marked important milestones were given 
short shrift or were overlooked altogether, and forces that 
seemed to me to be crucial in setting directions were 
sometimes not even mentioned. Debates that had once 
almost led to bloodshed, seemed to have been utterly 
forgotten once the passage of time had resolved them or 
rendered them irrelevant. And finally, for many younger 
people, history appeared to have commenced only 
yesterday—whereas I was sure I remembered the day before, 
and the day before that. Indignantly I set out to put the 
record straight. 
Then I remembered the fire-lookout. 
In 1950, one of my college roommates spent the summer 
in a fire-lookout atop a peak in the Cascade range of 
Washington. From the lookout a vast mountainous region of 
the northwestern U.S. spread out before one, and over the 
course of the summer my friend drew a map of what he saw 
from his eyrie. Inspecting his map in the fall, and comparing 
it to official maps of the same area, we were vastly amused 
to discover how distorted his view of matters had been. The 
geography near the lookout was spread out and enlarged, 
whereas the more distant features were all crowded together 
around the fringes of his map. Like the New Yorker 
magazine’s cover burlesquing a Manhattanite’s truncated 
view of the U.S., my friend’s view of the country 
surrounding his lookout was compressed into insignificance. 
 
 
xiv 
Contemplating such myopia, I realized that my version 
of computer history would likely turn out to be just as 
distorted as all the others—just differently so. Moreover, as I 
considered pawing through dusty archives, I began to lose 
heart. It looked like a lot of work. Did I really care that 
much? Meanwhile I’d made a serious mistake. I’d mentioned 
my idea to a number of friends who began egging me on. 
What had I let myself in for? 
The previous year I had been asked by a former 
colleague to give a lecture to his introductory computer 
class. Although his class was becoming increasingly 
computer literate, they had little or no comprehension of 
where the technology they were toying with had come from. 
Feeling that some background would not only be salutary 
but might even interest them, we agreed that I should try to 
summarize my own experiences of thirty years in the field 
and discuss the evolution of computer technology from that 
vantage point. It seemed a decidedly self-centered approach, 
but it had the sizeable advantage that little or no preparation 
was required. In the event, the class showed surprising 
interest in the history, and a number of the students later 
sent messages urging me to write it all down. I was pleased 
that I’d piqued their interest, but writing it down seemed 
absurd. After all, it was just my own narrow, personal view 
of what had happened. 
Nonetheless, the seed had been planted and as time 
passed I began to understand that one of the things that was 
bothering me was the absence of the human theme in the 
history of what might be called the “middle-ages” of 
computer development—the period between the days when 
only a handful of “giant brains” existed and the time when 
computers 
suddenly 
began 
to 
spread 
like 
wildfire 
throughout the society—roughly the early 1950s to the mid 
 
 
xv 
1980s. De-emphasis of the individual is an important 
component of the scientific/technological outlook, and 
indeed objectivity is an essential ingredient of all serious 
science. But history is not the same thing as science. In 
addition to the facts of what happened, there are the often 
colorful human stories of how it all came to pass. Ultimately 
history is a tale of human endeavor, and as such, it inevitably 
captures our interest in ways that purely technical 
descriptions cannot. 
Another thing that bothered me was the absence, in most 
of the histories I’d seen, of a bridge that gave adequate feel 
for how and when so many of the things we now take for 
granted had come about. These things were not specified in a 
book handed down out of the clouds. They arose gradually, 
as people’s understanding grew. As part of the generation 
(now slowly withering) that did much of the work during 
the middle-ages, I decided that perhaps after all I should 
follow the urging of my friend’s students and attempt to 
record matters as I had experienced them. Those years 
formed an important and exciting era in the history of 
computing, and although I myself was never a major figure 
in the field, I had the good fortune to work alongside others 
who were, on a number of projects that have turned out to be 
central to the computer revolution. 
Despite a swarm of hand-waving vision-painters and 
post-hoc vision-claimers, much of the progress that has 
occurred in the computer field has arisen simply from 
people’s curiosity about the next step—the desire to push the 
frontiers—rather than from clear visions of the future. There 
are important exceptions, of course, but they are indeed 
exceptions rather than the rule. Because one thing leads to 
another, evolution and growth have been nearly exponential, 
and this has produced the impression that virtually 
 
 
xvi 
everything happened very recently. But many of the crucial 
steps and decisions that enabled yesterday’s explosion 
actually took place many years earlier. 
Of course, the invention of the transistor at Bell 
Laboratories in the 1940s and the later development of 
integrated circuits were of such profound importance that 
without them, my story and most of the world’s computers 
would simply not exist. These inventions permitted 
computers to become smaller, faster, cheaper, more 
powerful, and more reliable. But arriving at today’s personal 
computer was not only a matter of making things smaller, 
faster, and cheaper. The entire image of computers, what 
they were and what they were good for, needed to be 
transformed. The very name ‘computer’ itself reflects the 
device’s earliest use, and it took many years before the image 
of numerical computation as a primary focus began to fade. 
Many of the developments that took place during the 1960s 
and early ‘70s represented efforts to redefine the way users 
would perceive and interact with computers. In the early 
‘60s I was deep in the trenches, where the battle to define 
and build the earliest personal computer, the LINC, was 
taking place. The course pursued by the team with which I 
was working was far from the mainstream of that period, 
and our trajectory carried us straight through the middle of 
many vigorous controversies. 
________________________ 
 
My life, I regret to report, reveals a stunning lack of 
single-mindedness. During college, dilettantism seemed 
likely to qualify me at best as a ski bum; the notion that I 
might one day have a profession, let alone a career, seemed 
laughable. Nonetheless, despite the odds, life developed into 
a fascinating and rewarding ride. After the lecture to my 
 
 
xvii 
friend’s class, one of his students asked him, “Did that guy 
ever make a bad career move?” Pondering this question has 
left me somehow depressed. “Career moves” are part of the 
paraphernalia of today’s heavily-packaged lifestyle in which 
twenty-year-olds are already preparing for retirement. I 
realized I’d been fortunate to work in an earlier era when 
one could more easily allow the search for interest and/or 
fun to guide one’s choices. My own acquaintance with 
computers 
commenced 
not 
with 
design 
but 
with 
programming, and at the outset I marveled at the ingenuity 
of the machines which must, I felt, have been devised by 
wizards. 
Nonetheless, 
over 
time, 
as 
mystique 
metamorphosed into understanding, I gradually shifted into 
hardware design and in due course not only assisted in the 
birth of a number of different computers, but even taught 
courses in machine design at my old alma mater and 
elsewhere. 
I must have been blessed with a good nose for sensing 
where important work was taking place and finding a way 
to join the team. I never felt that I was a real innovator, 
although it’s not always easy to distinguish major inventions 
from the myriad smaller ones that help make the major ones 
work. In any case, I found that I was able to make 
contributions to these groups as a high-energy enthusiast, 
helping to turn ideas into reality. I was delighted to be able 
to participate and always felt amply rewarded for those 
contributions that I was able to make. 
My professional life was filled with numerous and often 
colorful characters, many of whom appear in the following 
pages. Some of these have been my friends over the better 
part of a lifetime. My goal has been merely to show them as 
they appeared to me, but not to caricature them, and I hope 
 
 
xviii 
that both they, and others who know or knew them, will find 
them honestly, if sometimes bemusedly, portrayed. 
In parallel with my professional life, and sometimes 
deeply entwined with it, runs the narrative of my personal 
life, which naturally affected the course of my career. For the 
most part, however, it is not germane to the tale I wish to 
tell, so except for brief mention in a few places, I have chosen 
to eschew that part of the story. Let me just state briefly that I 
have been married three times and have four children and 
(at the present writing) four grandchildren. My wife, Laura 
Gould, with whom I’ve shared the last twenty-eight years, 
was, like me, a sort of maverick computer scientist and 
teacher. And like me, in the almost twenty years since we 
gave up working in the computer field, she has completely 
changed her spots, becoming a writer immersed in the 
history of science (but not computer science). My own 
interests shifted away from engineering and toward the 
humanities, in particular to music which I had once briefly 
considered as a possible career. 
What is contained herein, then, is a tale laced with 
anecdotes and commentary, half way between a personal 
memoir and a more general history. Rather than attempting 
to give an objective and comprehensive overview—a God’s-
eye view—I have tried instead to describe what it was like to 
be in the belly of the beast, to participate with colleagues in 
the process of exploration, and to give some idea of where 
concepts we now take for granted came from. My own biases 
and opinions are writ large throughout and because my own 
experience failed to touch many of the important branches of 
computer development, they will be found missing here. 
This is thus the antithesis of a comprehensive story. 
Nonetheless, I hope that from this tale will emerge some idea 
of the enormous differences between the computer world of 
 
 
xix 
today and that of the 1950s to the 1980s: and that the reader 
will be able to enjoy, and participate vicariously in, some 
pieces of the journey that connected the two. Because 
computers have so thoroughly invaded the lives of so many 
of us, I have particularly wanted this story to be accessible to 
everyone, not just computer buffs. I have therefore eschewed 
technical descriptions (or committed what some will no 
doubt consider egregious simplifications) and tried to paint 
images that could have been comprehended by anyone who 
might have happened to be at our elbows during that 
remarkably critical epoch of computer evolution. 
 
 
xx 
 
 
xxi 
Acknowledgments 
 
 
Memory is a fragile vessel to hold even the most 
significant events of a lifetime, and in my case considerable 
ullage has occurred. I make no apology for this; it is the 
natural distillation that time imposes. But as a consequence, I 
have found that I needed reconstructive help in places, and 
I’ve not hesitated to seek it among friends and colleagues. 
However, I have used such material only where it has lent 
support to my own sometimes hazy memories, and it is 
therefore I who must take sole responsibility for the facts, the 
semi-facts, the non-facts, and the outright opinions recorded 
here. 
To list the many friends who have contributed 
reminiscences and helped to adjust my memory would not 
only be tedious for me and for you, the reader, but, given the 
narrow and personal perspective of this work, could even 
prove embarrassing to some who will no doubt prefer to 
remain in the shadows. Nonetheless, I feel compelled to 
single out two people, Wes Clark and Les Earnest, who read 
the manuscript and patiently identified my most serious 
misunderstandings and memory lapses. And my wife Laura 
Gould provided her usual thorough editing assistance. To 
the rest I hereby proffer my blanket thanks for your 
encouragement and assistance: without you, my record of 
history would have been far less coherent and, in places, less 
correct. 
 
 
xxii 
 
 
xxiii 
Introduction 
 
 
Life is not an orderly progression, self-contained like a musical 
scale or a quadratic equation. For the autobiographer to force his 
life and his memories of it into a strictly chronological straight line 
is to distort its shape and to fake and falsify his memories. If one is 
to try to record one’s life truthfully, one must aim at getting into 
the record of it something of the disorderly continuity which makes 
it so absurd, unpredictable, bearable. 
 
Leonard Woolf, The Journey Not The Arrival Matters 
 
________________________ 
 
Spread out across the surface of my desk are several 
manuscript versions of the score for a piano quintet that my 
father wrote not long before I was born in 1930. The copies 
differ slightly in a few places, and my task for this coming 
fall is to compare these different versions and, by careful 
selection with the assistance of other musicians, enter into 
my computer, and thence publish via my laser-printer, what 
will no doubt become the Urtext version of this composition. 
I’ve been doing this sort of thing for the past decade, in the 
course of which I’ve transcribed well over two thousand 
pages of my father’s music. In the early part of this century 
he was one of America’s best known pianists and a notorious 
composer of radical music. He has gained another distinction 
in recent years; at the age of 109, he is not only still alive and 
well, but lucid and able to convey fascinating images of life 
in Paris nearly 100 years ago. 
 
 
xxiv 
Every day as I commence to work, staring out at me 
from the surface of my computer’s screen are the side-by-
side figures of me and my oldest chum from college days. 
It’s an image, pieced together with the magic of computer 
graphics, from a couple of individual photos we snapped of 
one another on a recent climbing trip in the Sierra Nevada 
mountains. Søren Kierkegaard, the Danish philosopher, 
wrote a book entitled Purity of Heart is to Will One Thing. I’m 
sure he was right and I wish I possessed purity of heart, but 
alas, it is not the way of most lives, including my own. 
Instead the life that is revealed behind the smiling faces on 
my screen is a messy, steel-wool-like affair, made up of a 
jumble of interlacing threads. There are listings and files for 
the thousands of pages of music scores on which I’ve been 
working; there is the material that comprises what I’m 
writing here; there is information about a series of chamber-
music concerts that we hold in our home each year; there are 
correspondence and email files containing letters and 
messages to and from around the world on a host of 
different subjects; there are files concerning our wills and our 
accounts and those of our elders whose affairs we must now 
handle; there are files that describe and tell how to manage 
our property here in a relatively remote wilderness area; 
there are recipes, address lists, and so many other things that 
it’s quite hopeless even to summarize them. 
In fact, it’s frightening to contemplate how dependent I 
have become on my computer and its link into the network 
that connects me to friends and information around the 
world. In honor of that fear I periodically go through a 
paroxysm, copying everything onto backup disks and toting 
them to the house of a friend that I hope will not be 
damaged by the earthquakes, fires, gremlins, etc. that could 
jeopardize my precious information here at home. 
 
 
xxv 
It may strike the reader as odd that, in listing the kinds 
of material contained in my computer files, there is no 
mention of material from the many years I spent actually 
engaged in the computer profession. There are indeed a 
number of papers in the literature with my name on them, 
but they were published before computers and word 
processing became commonplace. Most were written in the 
old-fashioned way, with pencil and paper, a pink-pearl 
eraser, scissors, staples, scotch tape, and an infinitely patient 
secretary who turned my hieroglyphics into draft after draft 
as the chaos gradually converged toward finished copy. 
Those papers, now yellowing somewhere in the bottom of a 
desk drawer, give evidence that at one time I played a part in 
the evolution of the personal computer, networks, laser 
printers, and the like. At the time, although we hoped and 
believed that the things we were designing and building 
would prove useful, I myself certainly had no idea that I 
would ever make the kind of routine and personal use of 
such facilities that I now enjoy. 
Having lived through these developments, it all seems to 
have happened amazingly quickly—and indeed it has. But 
not quite as quickly as some people seem to think. So let me 
take you back a few dozen years to where, for me, it all 
began. 
 
 
xxvi 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
1 
Chapter 1 
 
 
In which I meet some early computers, 
write my first programs, learn a little history, 
and switch professions. 
 
t was the fall of 1954 and as I strolled across the 
parking lot on my way to work, I noticed a climbing rope in 
the back of a large gray Hudson—the car that looked like an 
upside-down bathtub. I jotted down the license number and 
later that day, having obtained the owner’s name, I went in 
search of him. Like me, Howard Briscoe had been hired as a 
geophysicist to work in the exploration department of Gulf 
Oil’s Research and Development Company in Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania. Three years before I’d graduated from 
Harvard as a geologist and then spent a year in graduate 
school at Berkeley where I’d substituted music for sleep. 
After that I’d gone to work as a geophysical trainee with the 
Gulf Oil company, which meant working with seismic 
surveying crews first in New Mexico and later in 
Oklahoma, looking, of course, for oil. By the time I met 
Howie I was married, had a young daughter, and was 
already bored with the routine work of correlating seismic 
records. I’d decided that it should be possible for some sort 
of automatic machine to do most of what I was supposed to 
be doing and had begun thinking about just what such a 
machine would have to do, when the climbing rope 
appeared. 
Howie was also a geologist by training, but unlike me 
he’d had experience with a computer—MIT’s new 
I
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
2 
Whirlwind2 computer. He’d been a member of the 
Whirlwind programming staff, had written Whirlwind’s 
symbolic assembler, and later became a member of a group 
known as the GAG (Geophysical Analysis Group) in which 
he had written a program to process seismic data. Gulf, as 
one of the sponsors of the project, had hired Howie to help 
them move in similar directions. My thoughts about 
automating our work fit right in and we quickly became 
friends. 
Howie had helped to teach a summer session course 
about Whirlwind at MIT and as he began to describe the 
machine to me I found myself fascinated. My only previous 
brush with a computer had been very indirect, when our 
high-school math teacher described to the class his visit to 
the ENIAC at the Moore School of the University of 
Pennsylvania. He had tried to convey to us the excitement 
he felt watching the flashing lights of the world’s putative 
first electronic computer, but his enthusiasm fell on the 
largely deaf ears of a group of fifteen-year-old boys with 
other things on their minds. But now, stimulated by 
Howie’s enthusiasm and excellent teaching, and with the 
definite purpose of relieving myself and others of tedious, 
routine work, I became a well-motivated student. Our 
regular work didn’t demand anything like our full 
attention, and we spent the rest of the time discussing 
computers. 
I had previously assumed that computers were only for 
the electronically sophisticated, which I certainly was not. 
The idea that one needn’t fully understand its electronics 
                                                 
2 Whirlwind, at MIT's Digital Computer Laboratory, was at that time the 
world's fastest digital computer. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
3 
but could treat a computer in purely logical terms, making 
it do one’s bidding through a complex sequence of 
instructions, was a tremendous and empowering revelation. 
I felt I might be able to deal with that. 
At that time there was serious debate whether the 
future belonged to analog or digital computing. Looking 
back with today’s understanding and with today’s 
technology, it’s hard to believe that anyone could have 
thought that analog computing was a serious contender. 
But back then the emphasis was still on numerical 
computation and the great diversity of tasks for which 
computers would eventually be used could hardly be 
foreseen with the technology of those times. The idea that 
you could make machines that would run so fast that you 
could afford to break computation of continuous functions 
up into jillions of tiny individual steps was by no means 
universally accepted. The speed of operation had an 
enormous impact on the sorts of jobs for which one could 
reasonably consider using a machine, and speeds such as 
we expect today in every home computer were then all but 
inconceivable. 
In due course Howie lent me a book about England’s 
EDSAC computer (an indirect descendant of the ENIAC) 
and I spent some time studying the mysteries of its 
“bootstrap code” —the small initial program that runs 
when you push the Start button and brings into memory 
the much larger program you actually wish to run. The 
bootstrap code needed to be extremely compact: the 
memory that held it was small and prohibitively expensive, 
and it had to be laboriously reloaded, instruction by 
instruction, by hand, every time the machine was restarted. 
Restarting was pretty frequent in those days because the 
electronics were terribly fragile and machines broke down 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
4 
with frustrating regularity. Great ingenuity had therefore 
been expended on constructing a bootstrap program 
consisting of the fewest possible instructions. The initial 
program modified itself as it ran by overlaying some of its 
instructions with others that it brought in. It thus modified 
its own behavior in an extraordinarily clever and confusing 
way—like a serpent devouring its own tail, I thought. I’d 
never encountered anything like this before and was 
genuinely excited. I was also thrilled to find that, with 
considerable effort, I was able to unravel it all. 
I learned later that because computer memory was such 
a scarce and expensive commodity in those days, similar 
effort 
went 
into 
compacting 
almost 
all 
programs. 
Diabolically clever schemes were worked out for reducing 
the size of programs. Devising ways to compact really 
important, frequently-used programs was often a group 
undertaking with details being worked out at a blackboard, 
sometimes over a period of days or weeks. Howie told me 
that on one occasion the latest version of a Whirlwind 
program that had been heavily worked over was left 
overnight on the blackboard. When the programmers 
arrived next morning they were horrified to find that an 
over-zealous janitor had carefully erased it all. (I was later 
to experience a similar catastrophe myself.) 
Such cleverness often meant that early programs were 
difficult for anyone but the author(s) to comprehend3. As 
memory began to be less prohibitively expensive, and as 
                                                 
3 And at the close of the millennium, the entire world trembled in 
anticipation of potential disaster stemming from the trick of saving 
memory-space by ignoring the first two digits of the year in specifying 
dates. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
5 
programming became more widespread and the size of 
programs grew, the need for straightforwardness and 
clarity came to dominate the need for compaction. 
Eventually an entire sub-discipline, software engineering, 
came into being to explore and delineate methods for 
enforcing straightforward organization and for improving 
clarity in today’s enormously complex programs and 
systems. 
After I’d mastered the EDSAC’s bootstrap program, 
Howie lent me a manual describing Whirlwind and how to 
program it. Under his tutelage I worked my way through 
the manual and wrote out the suggested exercises. Of 
course these programs were never going to be executed 
since Whirlwind was hundreds of miles away in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, and remote computing still lay 
far in the future. Besides, Whirlwind had far more 
important things to do. Mine were just paper exercises 
designed to teach one how to write programs. After I 
became somewhat proficient, Howie made the startling 
announcement that most of the instructions I’d been using 
were actually unnecessary and were provided only to save 
memory and make programs run faster. He explained that 
there were, in fact, only a handful of truly basic instructions 
and that all the others could be emulated (i.e., the machine 
could be made to perform precisely the same function) by 
programs made up only of this basic set. I tested the 
validity of this claim by programming one or two of the 
more complicated instructions using the basic set, and once 
again I was stunned: the bloody thing seemed to consist 
almost entirely of sheer ingenuity, balanced atop the merest 
pinpoint of material reality. Where would it end? What did 
it mean? I was now not only fascinated, I was hooked. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
6 
The Gulf research lab had purchased a “small” 
computer (it probably cost upwards of $100,000 which was 
serious money in those days) that had a magnetic drum 
memory. That means just what it says: the main memory of 
the machine consisted of a rapidly rotating drum whose 
surface was coated with magnetic material (think mag. 
tape) on which the information (data, instructions, etc.) 
were written. Thus if you wanted to get at a location that 
had just passed under the read heads, you had to wait for a 
full revolution until it came by again—not exactly random 
access. In order to speed up the running of programs, the 
machine had a complex addressing structure that allowed 
the programmer to specify where the next sequential 
instruction was to be found. I wrote a tiny program or two 
for the machine, but I have to confess that the thing about it 
I remember best was the large, shallow glass-fronted bin 
which held a length of randomly curled up wide magnetic 
tape, used for secondary storage. This bin took the place of 
reels. Because the tape was allowed to fall into it at random 
(but always maintaining its width parallel to the bin’s 
shallow front-to-back dimension), there was little inertia (no 
heavy tape reels) to deal with in quickly accelerating the 
section of tape under the read/write heads. I didn’t 
understand the motivation at the time, but was impressed 
with the beauty of the way the tape curled up in its bin. 
One night Howard and I went to a lecture at the 
University of Pittsburgh. It was given by a couple of people 
from MIT named Belmont Farley and Wesley Clark. The 
topic was the computer simulation of neuronal activity in 
the brain. Here were yet more revelations. The programs I’d 
been writing were the dimmest of student exercises 
consisting of boring things like adding tables of numbers 
together. Now I was to see how the simple capabilities of 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
7 
this incredible machine could be turned to far more 
compelling tasks. I’d always wanted to know more about 
how the brain works and here were people using this lovely 
new instrument to chip away at understanding that very 
thing. 
Their 
talk 
stimulated 
my 
imagination 
and 
I 
immediately began to ponder whether computers could 
really lead to an understanding of how the human brain 
works. Similar fantasies were soon to captivate not only the 
press, but also a sizeable number of members of the 
embryonic field that would subsequently become known as 
computer science,4 leading to outrageous and unfounded 
speculation about what computers were “soon” going to be 
doing for us in all sorts of domains. I’ll have more to say 
about that topic further along. In any case, I think I knew 
from that night onward that one day I wanted to be 
involved in the kind of work that Farley and Clark were 
describing. 
Little did I know what lay in store. 
Howie and I were both avid rock-climbers. That fall 
(1954) saw us clambering over cliffs that we discovered on 
the periphery of Pittsburgh. Soon we bumped into a group 
known as the Pittsburgh Climbers who introduced us to 
climbing areas further afield in West Virginia, as well as to 
local ski areas. When spring skiing season arrived, Howie 
and I arranged a trip to old haunts in New England, and on 
our way through Boston we stopped to visit Whirlwind to 
                                                 
4 Neither the name nor the discipline would make its appearance for 
several years, and when it did, many argued that to call it Science was 
misleading since it was really “only” engineering! 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
8 
let me get a look at the machine for which I’d been writing 
exercise programs. 
It was an impressive and memorable visit. The thing 
didn’t look like a pinpoint after all. In fact it filled several 
floors of the Barta Building at MIT and great bundles of 
intestine-like cables traversed holes in the floors and walls 
between rooms. The main memory (all 4,096 words of it!) 
had originally consisted of 32 registers of switches that had 
to be set by hand. These were then replaced by 256 registers 
of electrostatic storage tubes, on the surface of which bits of 
information were stored as tiny charges. But these about-to-
be-obsolete devices had recently been replaced by an 
experimental magnetic-core memory in which the bits of 
information were stored in planes of tiny magnetic 
doughnuts, polarized this way or that to represent the zeros 
and ones that the machine used to encode instructions and 
data. This core memory (initially 1,024 words) had been 
developed not long before by Jay Forrester, who headed 
Project Whirlwind. (Bill Papian, a graduate student of 
Forrester’s who had done much of the actual work of 
building and testing the prototype core memory, would one 
day become my boss.) A special Memory Test Computer 
(MTC) had been built expressly to try out the new 
memory—which proved so successful that it had promptly 
been moved to Whirlwind where it now resided. A variety 
of less successful devices had been tried in other machines. 
The development of core memory was to spur the growth 
of digital computers by providing the standard main 
memory technology for the next decade and a half. 
The 
machine’s 
main 
registers, 
however, 
were 
constructed from flip-flops which were very fast memory 
devices, much faster than the core memory. These registers, 
consisting of groups of flip-flops, were where the real action 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
9 
took place as the computer charged along executing 
instructions, one after another, from the main (core) 
memory. Each instruction typically involved a series of 
steps that took place within and between the registers, so 
the instruction steps, and hence the registers, needed to 
work significantly faster than the core memory itself. 
Someone unplugged a spare flip-flop from Whirlwind’s 
gigantic racks and handed it to me. It was about eighteen 
inches square as I recall, perhaps four inches thick, bristled 
with vacuum tubes and other inscrutable electronic 
components, and weighed maybe eight or ten pounds. It 
seemed pretty compact and if anyone had suggested then 
that within thirty years you wouldn’t be able to find such a 
thing without a microscope, there would no doubt have 
been great whoops of laughter. 
But all those tubes failed with great regularity, 
producing a healthy paranoia on the part of engineers of the 
time. To cope with reliability problems, a system of 
marginal-checking was devised in which the voltage 
provided by the power supply could be varied on a unit-by-
unit basis in order to reveal incipient failures in elements 
during testing. Marginal elements could then be replaced 
before they failed during actual use and gave wrong 
answers. Engineers who cut their teeth under these 
circumstances were to retain their sensitivity to reliability in 
their later work and the early development of projects such 
as the ARPANET (see Chapter 14), benefited greatly from 
deep concern about reliability issues. 
At the time I wasn’t fully aware of the fortuitous timing 
of my encounter with Howie. I didn’t realize how near the 
headwaters we were, how recent were a number of major 
developments that would propel the forthcoming rapid 
evolution of computers. It was little more than a decade 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
10 
earlier, under the pressure of World War II for more and 
better computation, that the first attempts to build any kind 
of electronic computer had been undertaken. The result was 
ENIAC. 
Earlier 
machines 
had 
used 
relays, 
electromechanical devices, to store information, but their 
mechanical properties had drastically limited their speed 
and reliability. The ENIAC used vacuum tubes and could 
run programs many times faster than any previous 
machine. 
In those days computers were still thought of 
principally as mechanisms for computing functions of 
variables—things like X = a(b2 + c3), and of course far more 
complicated kinds of expressions. For some time there had 
been fixed purpose devices that could perform a very 
limited set of operations, for example, a desk calculator that 
could add, subtract, multiply or divide pairs of numbers. In 
the 19th century, an Englishman named Charles Babbage 
had taken a tremendous intellectual leap by suggesting that 
one should be able to construct a general purpose machine, 
one that could be made to do a wide variety of different 
computations using the same basic machine structure. The 
functions themselves, the rules for what was to be 
computed, seemed to be comparatively fixed and, in 
ENIAC’s day, were thought of as more or less a part of the 
machine’s definition. Of course even though it was 
comparatively stable, it had to be possible to change it for 
different computations, and so in early computers, switches 
and plug-boards, into which a nest of cables could be 
plugged by hand, were used to define the sequence of 
operations that the machine was to follow for a particular 
computation. Setting up or changing programs defined in 
this way was an unbelievably ponderous operation. (My 
wife, whose father, the mathematician D.H. Lehmer, 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
11 
worked on the ENIAC, tells me that as a child she and her 
brother were among the world’s first un-programmers. It was 
their task to remove the wires from plug-boards and sort 
them by length when it was time to reprogram the 
machine.) 
Creating anything as complicated as a computer 
requires a multiplicity of skills. Rarely do all of the 
necessary talents exist in a single individual, and in the 
design of dramatically new and innovative computers it has 
often been the case that a collaboration has arisen between 
individuals who conceive the overall machine and those 
who have the specialized electrical engineering ability and 
imagination to turn that conception into something real that 
works. The rôles are not really separable, of course, and 
each must play in the other’s pond to a large degree. The 
relationship is not unlike that between an architect and a 
building contractor when a structure of dramatically new 
design is to be erected. Each participant, of course, must 
have the capacity to understand the other’s discipline, but 
not necessarily to deploy it with full force and imagination. 
In the case of the ENIAC, John Mauchly was the 
conceptualizer 
and 
J. 
Presper 
Eckert 
was 
the 
engineer/builder. 
This 
is, 
of 
course, 
gross 
oversimplification. Building a new computer invariably 
involves an entire team of specialists as well as numerous 
subcontractors, 
specialized 
parts 
manufacturers, 
and 
fabricators who provide all of the individual pieces. 
In 1944, along came John von Neumann of Princeton’s 
Institute for Advanced Study, who was helping to develop 
the mathematics for the atomic bomb. That work required 
enormous amounts of computation, and although the 
ENIAC wasn’t powerful enough, and reprogramming was 
extremely cumbersome, it nonetheless looked like a 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
12 
promising point of departure. Von Neumann, working 
together with Eckert and Mauchly and other senior 
members of the ENIAC group, had come up with the 
design of a new machine which they called the EDVAC. 
EDVAC incorporated two innovations the importance of 
which would be hard to overstate. 
The first was abandonment of any attempt to force the 
decimal number system into the machine’s innards as had 
been done with ENIAC. Human beings have, by and large, 
settled on the use of decimal numbers so firmly (probably 
because of their ten fingers) that most people are surprised 
to learn that the choice of ten symbols (0 through 9) is, in 
fact, arbitrary and that larger or smaller sets of symbols, 
leading to other numbering systems, are possible and even 
more convenient for certain tasks. In Eniac’s time, 
programmers, being used to decimal numbers, were most 
comfortable defining their instructions for the computer in 
decimal terms. The underlying hardware, however, could 
be made much more reliable if it had to distinguish between 
only two states, which meant that the machine represented 
information internally in binary form where only two 
symbols (zero and one) are used. To resolve this 
discrepancy, ENIAC’s designers had attempted to mask in 
the hardware, the underlying binary nature of the machine in 
order to present the façade of a decimal machine to the 
programmers. Doing the conversion necessary to create the 
façade had vastly complicated ENIAC’s hardware, so the 
decision to push the conversion into the software in 
EDVAC allowed great simplification of its hardware. 
Programmers quickly adjusted to working in binary and as 
the uses of computers have extended far beyond the 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
13 
solution of numerical problems, the early attempts to make 
machines appear decimal now seem ludicrous.5 Of course 
today users (as opposed to programmers) employ decimal 
numbers all over the place and have no need to be aware of, 
or to deal with, the underlying binary machine. 
The second innovation was the decision to store not 
only the data but also the program itself in the memory of 
the machine. Today the usefulness of this seems so 
transparent that we can’t imagine doing it any other way, 
but it was not always so. In thinking up the idea of putting 
the program into the memory as opposed to designating it 
by the temporary setting of switches and wiring of 
plugboards, the EDVAC designers opened the door to a 
flood of possibilities, only some of which they could have 
foreseen at the time. The most obvious benefit was the 
ability to switch programs rapidly, but of course it allowed 
far more flexible programming all around. A running 
program could operate on itself, changing parameters and 
even instructions on the fly. The ability to swap small pieces 
of large programs into and out of the main memory onto 
other, less-expensive media, would lead to virtual memory 
systems, multiprocessing, and a host of other techniques 
that today we take for granted. In a sense, it was the natural 
next step toward greater flexibility, but at the time, given 
the general unreliability of components, it was both a 
powerful insight and an act of considerable bravery. 
In any case, the idea was of such profound significance 
that the stored-program computer, which is what everyone 
has used ever since, is still referred to as a “von Neumann 
machine.” This gives more credit to von Neumann than he 
                                                 
5 Although IBM later built a number of decimal machines. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
14 
deserves. He was the first to publish a description of the 
proposed new EDVAC machine and he signed it as sole 
author, but in fact Eckert had been thinking along these 
lines well before von Neumann showed up on the scene 
and they had worked together on the EDVAC design. Sadly 
scientists and engineers, even the best of them, are not 
immune from the urge to claim more than their share of 
credit. 
Early in 1946, Maurice Wilkes, at the Cambridge 
University computer lab in England, saw a copy of von 
Neumann’s report; a few months later he arrived in the U.S. 
in time for a series of lectures at the Moore School 
describing the machine more fully. Back to England he 
went, busily designing a similar machine of his own en 
route. He dubbed his machine the EDSAC in honor of 
EDVAC which had inspired it, and three years later, in the 
spring of 1949, it began functioning as the first such 
machine the world had ever seen. This was the very EDSAC 
described in the book that Howie had lent me, and that I’d 
been puzzling over just months before our visit to 
Whirlwind. The final piece of the puzzle, that opened the 
door to forthcoming generations of computers, had been the 
development of core memory at MIT. 
In retrospect I find the felicity of my timing 
unbelievably fortuitous. These prior events, which were to 
have such widespread consequences, had all taken place 
within the decade preceding our visit to Whirlwind, some 
only months before. At the time Howie handed me the book 
about EDSAC, I understood that there were only a few such 
machines in the world and that they were all highly 
experimental. I don’t think that I, or anyone else, realized 
the immensity of what was soon to happen and how 
rapidly it would all take place. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
15 
In trying to explain my new profession to my father 
(the word “programming” had not yet entered common 
parlance), I described to him what I knew of this prior 
history. When I mentioned Presper Eckert, to my surprise 
he said that a number of years earlier Eckert had been a 
dinner guest at our home. My family were friends of 
Herbert Welsh, and the Welsh’s son, Frazier, was one of 
Eckert’s closest sidekicks. He brought Eckert to dinner one 
night under the illusion that he and my dad, both geniuses 
in their own fields, might find one another interesting. But 
as Eckert was apparently a prototypical nerd and my father 
is a black hole so far as science and engineering goes, they 
apparently had had little to say to one another. As a 
youngster I had known Frazier during the period when he 
was helping Eckert with the design of the early UNIVAC 
machine, but his life was cut short by the crash of a glider 
he was piloting. 
By the time I came along, the idea that one could use 
computers as something more than mere “computing 
engines” was spreading fast. It was the era in which 
computers were referred to as “Giant Brains” and 
speculation about what they would be able to do ranged 
wildly. Just as nuclear power was at one time envisioned as 
a magic solution to all of the world’s energy problems, so 
computers were thought of as potentially able to solve all of 
our most perplexing intellectual problems. Nor was such 
speculation limited to the media. No one really knew where 
the limits, if any existed, would eventually be encountered, 
and 
even 
some 
experts 
indulged 
in 
over-zealous 
speculation. Such speculation still goes on today of course, 
but, except for a few daring individuals, no longer on the 
scale or with the wide-eyed naiveté of those earlier times. 
Gradually, as the technology began to mature and 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
16 
applications proliferated, more and more people became 
involved and the naiveté diminished. That is not to say that 
we have arrived at the end of the road; far from it. It’s just 
that expectations have become somewhat more realistic and 
computers no longer seem like magic. When gadgets such 
as Palm Pilots, hand-held GPS devices, etc., appear on the 
market, we may be amazed at their cleverness and 
usefulness, but it no longer seems like a miracle. 
Whirlwind was the first machine that was fast enough 
to do interesting things in real time. Most earlier computers 
simply did their processing as rapidly as they could; it was 
hoped that they wouldn’t take unreasonably long, but there 
were no hard deadlines. Real-time computing means that 
something outside the computer imposes fixed, short 
deadlines on the work to be performed. For example, 
suppose a computer is processing data from a device that 
generates the data at fixed intervals. Unless the computer is 
ready to handle the next piece of data when it arrives, the 
data will simply be missed—it will “fall on the floor” (to 
use computer vernacular). It’s the same thing as someone 
working on an assembly line who mustn’t fall behind. In 
some applications, e.g., control of aircraft functions, rates 
are high and failure to keep up can have devastating 
consequences. Careful matching of speed is critical in the 
design of such systems. 
A particularly significant form of real-time computing 
takes place when a human user interacts directly with a 
computer. To be useful, the machine must perform fast 
enough, during the various interactions that occur, so that 
the human is not forced to work at an unreasonably slow 
pace. For example, when a contemporary user moves a 
pointing device such as a mouse, it’s vital that the computer 
be able to keep track of the mouse’s movement and reflect it 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
17 
on the screen by correspondingly moving some visual 
indicator (a cursor). If the computer can’t “keep up,” the 
user’s hand movement is not accurately reflected by 
movement of the cursor on the screen and the entire 
mechanism is ineffectual. Many other elements of 
interactive use demand that the computer respond in a 
timely fashion. Before one could consider using computers 
interactively through a display screen as we do today, they 
needed to become fast enough to cope with such use. 
Whirlwind was the first computer with powerful interactive 
display capabilities, and as such it was the great-
granddaddy of all personal computers. It was in fact 
personal in another sense as well, since it was generally 
used by one individual at a time6  and during that user’s 
time, the machine was completely at his disposal. For many 
later machines, this was felt to be too profligate a way to 
use such expensive equipment, and different ways of 
sharing access would soon be explored. 
During our visit, someone mentioned that MIT had 
recently opened a place called Lincoln Laboratory, in 
suburban Lexington, where qualified staff people were 
being sought to work with computers. Howie and I had 
both become somewhat disenchanted by the conservatism 
of the Gulf Oil company, and not long afterward Howie 
disappeared from Pittsburgh to go to work at Lincoln Lab. 
Before leaving, he suggested that the training he’d given me 
might qualify me for a job there as well. (Programming had 
not yet become a recognized profession and anyone with an 
aptitude for such things was a potential candidate.) A little 
                                                 
6 Although when driving the Cape Cod System (which we'll encounter 
shortly) it was shared by multiple “users.” 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
18 
while 
later 
I 
somewhat 
doubtfully 
submitted 
an 
application, and to my surprise and delight, I was called for 
an interview. 
I remember little of the interview itself except for two 
things. First, in the middle of the interview I was asked 
directly what my main shortcomings were. (I was so 
startled by the candor of this question that I think I was 
quite forthcoming.) Second, I was given a sort of test to take 
home and complete. It contained a number of simple logic 
problems and asked you to discuss some of the issues 
involved in designing an automated traffic light system for 
a city. There were no explicit programming problems, for 
the simple reason that most applicants could not be 
expected to have ever written a program. The test seemed 
not only easy and fun, but was thought-provoking as well. 
The next day a number of people interviewed me in what 
seemed a very offhand manner. Having been stress-tested 
with serious physics questions for employment at Gulf, I 
was perplexed to find myself enjoying the process. Was I 
being interviewed for a serious job? What was going on? 
I learned that Lincoln had been set up to provide MIT 
research services to the Air Force. Foremost among these 
was the design of a modernized air defense system. Our 
uncomfortable alliance with the Soviet Union during World 
War II had been but a brief interlude in the over-arching 
hostilities between the communist Soviet Union and 
capitalist America. By this time that semi-religious war, 
having been dubbed “the cold war,” was in full swing, and 
the consequent military buildup was proceeding apace on 
both sides. The need for an upgraded air defense system 
was a manifest part of the process. 
There had been various studies and proposals for ways 
to upgrade the existing system. MIT had been pursuing a 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
19 
method that would utilize a computer to handle a wide 
variety of relevant tasks—the tracking of aircraft (inter-
continental ballistic missiles had not yet become a 
significant threat), assignment of weapons, control of 
interceptors, etc. A small prototype system that utilized 
Whirlwind, known as the Cape Cod system (some of the 
system’s radars were on Cape Cod, peering out over the 
Atlantic) had been constructed within the Barta building at 
MIT where Whirlwind was housed.7  It was a semi-
automatic system which meant that Air Force personnel, 
wearing telephone headsets and seated in front of large 
consoles with screens and buttons and light-guns (a 
forerunner of today’s mouse), interacted with the computer 
to operate the system. The Air Force had seen the prototype 
system demonstrated and, after the usual hemming and 
hawing, the powers that be had decided to develop a full 
blown version of it—which formed the raison d’être of 
Lincoln Lab. Lincoln was originally organized in 1951, on 
the MIT campus, and moved to Lexington in 1952. 
Numerous stories, some no doubt apocryphal, emerged 
from the Air Force reviews of the Cape Cod system. One 
that 
I 
particularly 
like 
involved 
a 
General 
who, 
understanding little of what he was seeing, nonetheless felt 
compelled to manifest interest. He stepped over to a young 
Air Force operator who happened to be overseeing a radar 
monitor and asked him to explain his job. “Well Sir,” he 
said, “you see that little red light there? You see this button 
                                                 
7 Previous Navy support for Whirlwind had been under threat, and the 
adoption of Whirlwind by the Air Force was quite critical to the continued 
development of Whirlwind, the legacy of core memory, and IBM's 
construction of the follow-on XD-1 (see below), etc. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
20 
here? Whenever that little red light goes on, I push this 
button and the red light goes off.” Radars sometimes pick 
up a lot of irrelevant noise and the red light was a data-
overflow alarm. The button suppressed the alarm. It’s not 
recorded whether or not the General pursued the matter. 
The follow on system to be developed by Lincoln Lab 
was dubbed SAGE, which stood for Semi-Automatic 
Ground Environment. (Acronyms, I was to learn, are the 
life blood of the military.) At the center of the system stood 
a giant new computer, the XD-1, designed cooperatively by 
Lincoln and IBM. By the time I arrived on the scene, the 
basic machine was already in place in a gleaming, 
windowless, super-secret building behind the main lab 
which housed a full-scale prototype Direction Center—
computer, consoles, and all. Alas, no operational program 
inhabited the glistening new core memory and it was in 
order to correct this deficiency that the lab was seeking 
people like Howie and me. 
Despite dire predictions by my disgruntled Gulf 
employers that I was letting myself in for what would soon 
become a sweat-shop operation with hundreds of 
programmers forced to scribble away in giant bull-pens, 
within weeks my family and I were on our way to Boston.8  
After leaving school in Cambridge, I’d been banished by the 
need to earn a living first to the oil fields of New Mexico 
and Oklahoma, and then to the wilds of Pittsburgh. Now, in 
the summer of 1955, we were on our way back to the part of 
                                                 
8 Gulf was so disgruntled, in fact, by the departure of Howard and me and 
a couple of others to MIT, that when a short time later a geologist pal of 
mine came to solicit financial support for MIT, he was none too politely 
shown the door. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
21 
the world I knew and loved, within easy reach of the 
outdoor joys of all New England. I couldn’t believe my 
good fortune. 
And I still had no idea what was in store. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
22 
Chapter 2 
 
 
In which I arrive at Lincoln Lab, am 
introduced to the wonders of air defense, 
security, and other matters, and worry about 
my children’s future. 
 
he SAGE system was the first really large-scale 
programming task undertaken anywhere by a sizeable crew 
of programmers. (Not surprisingly it exposed many of the 
communication problems between programmers that are 
still with us.) Shortly after I arrived at Lincoln, a course was 
given to teach programming to us novices. In those days 
computer people came from all sorts of disciplines. 
Programming as a profession hardly existed; there were 
virtually no experienced people available, nor any 
computer science departments to teach them. So people had 
to be recruited from other walks of life and given on-the-
job-training. As we gathered I had an opportunity to inspect 
my fellow students. We were a motley crew consisting of 
everything 
from 
musicians 
and 
historians, 
through 
chemists and mathematicians, to a handful who had 
actually already written a program or two. I was pleased to 
find myself in the latter category and came gradually to 
recognize that I actually had a gift for this new craft. With 
Howie’s training behind me, and finding considerable 
similarities between Whirlwind and XD-1 (the machine 
with which I was now faced), I breezed along. 
After a week or so, it became apparent to everyone that 
the course was redundant for a few of us; we were culled 
T
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
23 
and given other assignments. It seemed that not only was 
an operational air-defense program lacking, but the overall 
system hadn’t yet been fully designed. The OP SPECS 
(Operational Specifications) which defined the system were 
just being written, and with no more background in air 
defense than a woodchuck, I was unceremoniously handed 
the task of writing the Crosstelling Spec. What in God’s 
name was Crosstelling? The only thing I knew about it was 
that it came late in the schedule, thank heavens, after 
everything else was finished. 
It developed that the country was divided into sectors, 
and that the sectors were in turn divided into sub-sectors 
(which were really the operational units) with a Direction 
Center at the heart of each. Since airplanes, especially those 
that didn’t belong to the Air Force (or even the U.S.), could 
hardly be forbidden from crossing between sub-sectors, 
some coordination was required for handing over the 
tracking of planes, controlling of interceptors, etc., between 
the sub-sectors. This function was called Crosstelling, a 
name inherited from an earlier manual system in which 
human operators followed the tracks of aircraft on radar 
screens and coordinated matters by talking to one another 
on telephones. Now it had somehow fallen to me to define 
how this coordination should be handled by computers, 
and then to write it all down in an official OP SPEC with a 
bright red cover stamped SECRET. 
I was horrified. Not only did I feel incapable of 
handling the task, but what was to become of a country 
whose Crosstelling was to be specified by an ignoramus like 
me? My number two daughter was born at about that time, 
and for the first time I began to fear for my children’s 
future. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
24 
I want to pause here to relate a couple of anecdotes that 
help to explain my later sentiments about security rules. 
While I was getting an introduction to SAGE, my pal Howie 
was writing the manual describing how radar-data input to 
the machine was handled. This was classified information, 
so as Howie produced each page, it was quickly stamped 
SECRET. Unfortunately Howie’s clearance had temporarily 
lapsed, and consequently he was not allowed to proof-read 
the sections he’d just written. 
An even more ironic incident took place the day a 
SECRET stamp arrived on the desk of another member of 
the lab, presumably to cover the possibility that he might 
write down a SECRET thought. Curious about the stamp, he 
tried it out on the blank top sheet of the giant pads that sat 
atop all of our desks (used for doodling and other vital 
government work). That night he was awakened from a 
sound sleep by a telephone call from “Security.” He had left 
a “SECRET document” on his desk, requiring that he get 
out of bed, drive to the lab, and put the document away in 
his securely padlocked file cabinet. 
Despite such ironies, I soon started to get to know my 
confreres. My immediate superior was a wonderfully 
relaxed and friendly Japanese guy, Jiro Ishihara. (Japanese? 
Hadn’t we recently been at war with those guys? What was 
one of them doing defining our new air-defense system?) I 
had a lot to learn, it seemed. And Ish, it turned out, was just 
the one to teach me. He was wonderfully supportive, and 
suitably irreverent. I learned an enormous amount in a 
hurry, much of it by osmosis. One thing I learned was that 
the Direction Centers were to be connected by high-speed 
telephone lines that could transport 1,000 bits of 
information every second—every second, mind you!—and in 
each direction! Why in five minutes, we could ship 300,000 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
25 
bits! I began to relax. With such incredible capacity, we 
could probably do the job. (The tiny modem in my home 
computer today handles 56 times this amount; high-speed 
communication lines, thousands of times.) 
The weeks went by and gradually I learned more. Ish 
lived not far from where we did, in a similar duplex. He 
invited me to join him one afternoon and, as we lay on 
chaises in his sunny back yard discussing work matters, I 
was struck by the difference between this job and the one 
I’d held previously in which work was strictly relegated to 
the office. Here I was coming to learn that the boundaries 
were comfortably permeable—it was assumed that you had 
some genuine interest in your work that persisted even 
beyond the confines of the office and 5 PM. Sometimes we 
would take off in the middle of the day, go somewhere for 
lunch, and then head to the Barta building at MIT where 
some exercise of the Cape Cod system was under way. I 
much preferred this easy interplay of work and living. 
One day there was an open-house demonstration of 
computer facilities at MIT (not, of course, including the 
Cape Cod system, which was classified). A new core 
memory had been installed in MTC, replacing the one that 
had been moved to Whirlwind, and a program had been 
written that enabled it to play music (by carefully switching 
the inputs to an amplifier back and forth at just the right 
frequencies). This was my first encounter with, and must 
have been a very early instance of, the use of a computer to 
play music. Artificial speech would come much later. A 
somewhat grimy but broadly-smiling individual was 
overseeing the demonstration. Although I had no way of 
knowing it then, this fellow was to appear at various times 
throughout my future and, in the process, would become a 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
26 
lifelong friend. His name is Tom Stockebrand and we will 
encounter him again later. 
Eventually 
I 
managed 
to 
write 
a 
respectable 
specification that was duly reviewed by the Air Force 
personnel attached to Lincoln, whose difficult job it was to 
oversee the definition of the system. It was a back-and-forth 
process in which each side educated the other; they 
educated us about air defense and we educated them about 
what a computer could and couldn’t do. Such interactions, 
between computer experts and customers with a problem to 
solve, were to become commonplace in the years ahead, 
and already the occasional arrogance of computer people, 
thinking they understood the customer’s needs better than 
the customer, was beginning to manifest itself. 
Once the specification was completed, it was time to 
write the program. The Systems Development Corporation 
(SDC) had become a partner in the SAGE development 
effort and it was their responsibility to write the actual 
code. So I spent time working with one of their 
programmers, 
conveying 
the 
specifications 
to 
him. 
Thereafter crosstelling gradually drifted away from me as I 
became involved in other matters. I had become interested 
in exploring various ways in which the computer could 
track aircraft in the presence of noisy radar data. (I believe 
SAGE would have failed utterly in the presence of active 
“jamming” by an enemy, but fortunately it was never put to 
the test). I was conducting some experiments on XD-1 when 
someone spilled a cup of coffee down the throat of the card 
reader (the only program entry device). Everything came to 
a halt as the IBM technicians took the reader completely 
apart and cleaned every piece. After two days of this, glass 
partitions and Guards and Rules were put in place. No 
further coffee need apply. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
27 
Emergency main-power-off buttons occupied the ends 
of every one of the numerous long racks of computer 
electronics. One night a janitor, wielding his broom too 
vigorously, accidentally bumped one of them, turning off 
all power to the Direction Center. For days thereafter, 
technicians could be seen going through the machine 
replacing the buttons with recessed versions, thereby 
protecting the nation from errant broom handles. You can 
think of this as an early forerunner of those “Are you sure 
you want to…?” messages that appear on your screen when 
you’re about to take some irreversible action. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
28 
Chapter 3 
 
 
In which I make some comparisons and 
mark some contrasts between “back then” and 
“now.” 
 
n the “middle-ages,” what computer industry existed 
bore little resemblance to that of today. Many of the 
differences have come about as the result of the enormous 
proliferation of machines. This has, of course, been a snow-
balling process: as price comes down, demand and quantity 
increase; as quantity increases, price comes down further, 
etc. Producing things in small quantities doesn’t justify 
specialty shops; it’s only when quantities become large that 
it makes sense. And so the nature of both design and 
production have changed dramatically. In the 1950s there 
were no chip manufacturers because there were no chips. 
Although they bought small electronic components 
(resistors, capacitors, transistors, etc.), the few relatively 
large computer manufacturers tended to make many of the 
parts they needed, such as printed circuit boards, 
themselves. There were no huge overseas manufacturing 
facilities of the sort that exist today. Asia was barely 
emerging into the 20th century having been badly damaged 
as a result of World War II. There were standing jokes about 
the Japanese only being able to copy things, not devise 
them. But these attitudes soon disappeared as Japan rapidly 
rebuilt following the war and, with it’s then relatively cheap 
labor costs, quickly took over the manufacture not only of 
television sets but also of the entire cornucopia of emerging 
I
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
29 
household 
electronic 
gadgetry—not 
to 
mention 
automobiles. 
The rôles of people were very different then as well. 
Start-ups and today’s entrepreneurial fervor all lay ahead. If 
you wanted to work in the investigative part of the 
computer field, exploring new terrain, there were really 
only two choices: you could join one of the large computer 
manufacturing firms (most likely IBM), or you could 
associate yourself with some Institute or University where 
research would be funded with government money of one 
sort or another. While the profit motive certainly underlay 
much of what went on, there was, in my own experience, a 
much larger element of sheer exploratory excitement than 
there is now. People were not working on products—they 
were working in particular areas of computer research, 
testing which ideas were viable and which were not. Many 
ideas that seem laughable in retrospect, had to be tested 
before their flaws became apparent. 
Gradually the wheat was winnowed from the chaff and 
as the design of the basic elements began to settle down, the 
search for ways to exploit them began to intensify. Of 
course people had been considering possible applications 
for computers for a long time, but the mere size of earlier 
machines precluded the exploration of most of the kinds of 
applications that exist today. It was the advent of the 
computer on a chip (or a few chips) in the late 1960s that 
opened up a world of new possibilities, not only for small 
personal computers (and ultimately laptops) but for 
applications in all kinds of devices from automobiles and 
washing machines to a plethora of hand-held devices. 
Given the exponential rate at which the computer enterprise 
has grown, it would be nearly impossible to point to a knee 
in the curve, let alone a beginning. Nonetheless, looking 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
30 
back forty years or so, one can say that at that time, nothing 
comparable to the present industry existed. And as a 
consequence, the rôles that individuals served, their 
ambitions and satisfactions, were all very different from 
those one finds today. 
Over the last few years we’ve watched as a friend and 
neighbor, a young Silicon Valley Turk, set about forming a 
new “startup” in the approved manner. For a time he 
sprouted ideas right and left for a possible new enterprise, 
until one finally grabbed him—the idea of making an 
electronic book, something you could carry around with 
you easily, that would hold a number of books, be more 
readable than your typical laptop, and embody only 
features and capabilities related to reading (as opposed to 
the cornucopia of features in a portable computer.) He then 
pulled together a group of his buddies, rented some office 
space, started refining ideas, building rough prototypes, 
and gathering initial funding. It was today’s classic story. 
Back in “my time” such a person would have been a top-
notch member of some research lab, but today, when so 
much of the terrain has been explored, relatively few such 
labs still exist. Instead the bright people are now utilizing 
their brainpower to create new products (and fortunes) 
from leading-edge technology. In one sense, this is not so 
different from what we did in building new kinds of 
computers using the then-new transistor technology. But 
today, the really new things that are being created are not 
themselves computers, but rather devices and gadgets with 
a microprocessor buried inside. Another major difference is 
that most of our work was either government sponsored 
research or was directed at specific customers with 
particular applications. By contrast, a large fraction of 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
31 
today’s products are aimed directly at the consumer 
market, i.e., the general public. 
Back when I was a kid, we could all identify the makes 
of cars at a glance; you didn’t have to look twice to tell 
whether it was a Ford or a Chevy. Looking at modern 
automobiles, it’s hard to tell one from another. Of course 
there are now all kinds of different models—convertibles, 
sedans, 
vans, 
station 
wagons, 
SUVs—all 
easily 
distinguishable. But within each of these categories variety 
is surprisingly limited compared to earlier times. Why? It’s 
no doubt partly a matter of conservative and highly 
competitive marketing that tends to produce rather uniform 
styling. But style itself has been shaped in no small part by 
engineering considerations that have have come to be 
generally understood and accepted over the course of many 
years of experimentation. Back when the constraints were 
less well understood and therefore less stringent, greater 
experimentation resulted in more diversity. Gradually the 
nooks and crannies of the design space were explored, the 
blind alleys discovered by everyone and foreclosed, and the 
design space thus narrowed. Of course there are still 
distinctions based on cost, but increasingly the features that 
distinguish luxury from economy models are revealed only 
on close inspection and manifested mostly in special 
gadgetry. 
The same sort of convergence has occurred over the 
years with a host of other items from airplanes to toasters as 
the design constraints (including ergonomics) have become 
better and better understood over time. It’s a bit surprising 
that the design of something as complex as a computer has 
settled down so rapidly to a similar kind of superficial 
uniformity. As with cars, there are now a number of 
different 
models—laptops, 
desktops, 
minicomputers, 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
32 
mainframes, supercomputers, etc. But in the smaller 
versions, where most of the proliferation has occurred, you 
have to look carefully at special features, mostly having to 
do with speed and memory capacities, before you can 
distinguish the various hardware offerings from one 
another. Although they are certainly different in their 
software and in their methods of operation (and 
maddeningly incompatible with one another), nonetheless, in 
terms of basic user facilities, they’re all much the same, each 
of them presenting you with a screen, a pointing device, 
and a keyboard, all of which unambiguously suggest highly 
interactive use. 
This was by no means always the case, and part of my 
task is to explain how this style of usage arose from very 
different beginnings. Understanding history is important 
because it makes us less cocksure about the present, let 
alone the future, and helps us to understand that change is 
the only real constant. Despite the uniformity that presently 
exists, and the hype and euphoria surrounding the personal 
computer revolution, it may well be that the explosion in 
numbers today arises less from the perfection of current 
design than from the fact that they’ve become good enough 
to permit them to be produced and utilized in quantity. But 
we 
shouldn’t 
forget 
that 
significant 
changes 
and 
improvements may well lie ahead, and even some designs 
that lie outside our current imagination. 
The computers that existed around the time I arrived at 
Lincoln, in the mid-fifties, bore no resemblance whatsoever 
to the computers most people are familiar with today. 
Many of them cost millions of dollars and filled large 
rooms, and even the “smaller” ones cost many tens of 
thousands of dollars. But there’s more to it than just the size 
and cost and general appearance. Almost everything was 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
33 
unrecognizably different, not just the machines themselves 
but the way they were used, the type of people who used 
them, and what they used them for. 
In the early fifties there were practically no computers 
around to speak of, at least by today’s standards.9  The few 
that existed were all different from one another; programs 
written for one would run only on that machine and no 
other. They also broke down a lot. It was a bit like the early 
automobiles for which the driver needed to be something of 
a mechanic. The people who worked with these early 
machines generally knew them inside out. Gradually there 
came to be a separation between hardware people, who 
specialized in understanding the details of the underlying 
machine, and programmers, who specialized in writing the 
programs that went into the memory and were executed by 
the machine. I certainly encountered many programmers 
who had little or no idea how the machines they were 
programming actually worked—I was in that class myself 
for a number of years—and, perhaps more surprisingly, I 
met a number of hardware designers who never could and 
never did write a sensible program. But for some years 
there was no distinction between a user and a programmer; 
users wrote their own programs to do whatever job they or 
their superiors wanted done. The distinction arose only 
many years later with the proliferation of machines together 
with some understanding of the common tasks for which 
                                                 
9  Since writing this, I have been surprised to learn that a 1957 survey 
indicates that by then there were already roughly 5,000 machines in the 
United States alone including a tiny number of “small” (i.e., on the order of 
$80,000 apiece) computers based on magnetic drum memories. By leaping 
into the field at Lincoln, I came in contact primarily with some of the larger 
machines, which gave me a biased picture of how things stood. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
34 
sizeable numbers of non-computer-savvy people might 
want to use them. 
In the early middle ages, just as there were only a few 
machines, there were very few people who understood and 
dealt with them. They constituted a “brotherhood” of 
cognoscenti. (Indeed not all of the people involved were 
male although most were. Nonetheless, I hope I will be 
forgiven for eschewing the word “personhood.”) As the 
number of experts grew, the average level of scientific 
distinction gradually diminished from the early days of 
such giants as Alan Turing, John von Neumann, Norbert 
Weiner, and Vannevar Bush. In the early-to-middle middle 
ages, there were still few enough knowledgeable people 
within the technical community that many of them tended 
to know one another. Despite strong differences of opinion, 
they were working—in the larger sense—collaboratively, 
toward common goals. Today’s nerds constitute an 
altogether different breed of cat. They are, for the most part, 
working competitively in the marketplace. There are 
infinitely more people involved and, as there can be only a 
limited number of celebrities at any given time, the ones 
who today tend to be widely known are the few who have 
percolated into the economic stratosphere. I don’t mean to 
suggest that there are any fewer extremely bright and 
creative computer people than there used to be—quite the 
reverse. 
In 
their 
millions, 
they 
have 
become 
indistinguishable in the crowd, whereas in the middle ages, 
the few there were often knew one another and stood out 
like sore thumbs . 
The computers that most people today are familiar with 
are the modest-sized, modest-priced personal machines. 
There are, of course, larger, more powerful computers for 
big jobs, but none covers the kinds of acreage that the 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
35 
gargantuan old computers occupied. They filled rooms and 
covered walls that were often plastered with panels 
containing zillions of flashing lights. They were big because 
the pieces from which they were constructed were big. Big 
components meant that cables and connectors were 
required to join the pieces of the machine together, and 
designers quickly learned that, as my later mentor Wes 
Clark put it: “nature abhors a connector.” But aside from 
the unreliability of the cables and connectors that hooked 
the various pieces of the machine together, the individual 
pieces were themselves far less reliable than today’s 
electronic 
components, 
which 
often 
contain 
more 
electronics on a single chip than could then be fitted into a 
large building. Despite the marginal-checking mentioned 
earlier, the mean time between failures of the overall 
machine was sometimes hours or even minutes. The 
flashing lights were there because they provided the only 
visible clue as to what was happening—or, more frequently, 
to what had happened when the machine ground to a halt. 
When 
that 
occurred, 
one 
performed 
what 
was 
appropriately called a postmortem, using the switches and 
buttons to probe around carefully in the remains, trying to 
understand what had gone awry. 
By the time I showed up at Lincoln Lab in 1955, this 
situation was already changing rapidly. Commercial 
computers, still big and expensive but of greater uniformity, 
had begun to appear. Although there were some 
competitors (Remington Rand, General Electric, Control 
Data, etc.), IBM (partly as a result of their involvement in 
SAGE which gave them the jump on memory technology) 
soon came to dominate the field. The situation was often 
referred to as “IBM and the Seven Dwarfs,” the dwarfs 
being the other computer manufacturers. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
36 
For a number of years IBM had been manufacturing 
and selling card-processing equipment that in some very 
general sense could be thought of as “computers.” But other 
than giant IBM, few places (of which thanks to government 
money Lincoln was one) could afford to experiment with 
building machines of their own design. In the case of XD-1, 
the machine was built by IBM, but due to the unusual 
application and its requirements for connecting to large 
numbers of special terminals, radars, etc., many special 
features existed, some of which had been designed, at least 
in part, by Lincoln people. XD-1 was a unique beast, the 
prototype for a later production version of an air-defense 
computer that would become known as the AN/FSQ-7, 
copies of which were eventually installed inside Direction 
Centers around the country. 
The big machines formed a gravitational center for 
groups of programmers who used them. Within a group 
there was a lot of voluntary cooperation and sharing of 
programs. Indeed, organizations tied to particular kinds of 
machines, such as SHARE for IBM and later DECUS for 
DEC 
computers, 
maintained 
libraries 
of 
donated 
subroutines (chunks of program that performed frequently 
needed tasks) that were available to all. 
Because they were few and expensive, access to the 
most powerful of the early computers was hotly contested. 
In fact it is only in relatively recent times that costs have 
come down to the point where contest for access has 
become less of an issue. Most people today think of a 
computer as something you turn on and off as you happen 
to need it, although of course that’s not true of the big 
machines used for functions such as Air Traffic Control and 
by businesses, which typically run continuously in the 
service of large scale operations of one sort or another. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
37 
During much of the period I am describing, many of the 
machines were big and expensive, and methods for 
extending or sharing access were being explored. Debate 
about how this should be accomplished forms a major 
thread of computer history that commences in the mid-
fifties when styles of usage were already beginning to 
diverge. 
The style of use for most of the large, expensive 
machines might best be characterized as “hands-off” 
computing. The user and the computer were deliberately 
insulated from one another, the unstated but underlying 
motivation being to protect the machine from the users and 
to keep the costly beast busy rather than allowing it to sit 
there idling while some programmer mulled over his latest 
program bug. Expert intermediaries (“operators”) handled 
the machine; on a good day a programmer might be 
allowed near the operating console to watch what was 
happening as the program ran, but was not allowed to 
touch the switches. 
Much of the work done on a computer in the early 
middle-ages involved debugging of programs. There were, 
of course, some “production runs” in which programs that 
had been debugged were used to process real live data or 
perform some calculations, but the majority of such runs 
took place in the wee hours when at least some of the 
programmers were asleep. A substantial amount of 
preparatory work took place long before you were ready to 
approach the computer. You wrote programs with pencil 
and paper on giant pads of coding sheets. Sophistication 
had advanced to the point that you no longer had to write 
programs in the ones and zeros that the machine 
understood directly. Instead you spelled out each step in 
something called assembly language. Every program step 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
38 
corresponded to a single machine instruction, but at least 
the names of the instructions and the referenced memory 
locations could be specified mnemonically. These would 
then be translated by the Assembler program into the 
machine’s native binary language. 
Whenever I design anything—from a house to a 
program to a computer—I find that I need to have a picture 
of the whole thing laid out in front of me in order to fit it 
together in my head. (Other people seem to manage seeing 
just one piece at a time.) The programs I was writing were 
tiny by today’s standards, but nonetheless covered many 
sheets of paper and I needed a giant wall upon which to 
paste them up. The walls of my office at Lincoln were 
totally inadequate, but at home I had some sizeable empty 
wall space, so once the general design of the program was 
worked out in major steps, I would often retire to work at 
home as I wrote out the detailed code. The walls of our 
dining room were thus often covered with flow diagrams 
that depicted the broad design, and with coding sheets 
containing the numerous detailed steps. My style was by no 
means unique. 
Once you finished writing the program, the coding 
sheets were handed to someone whose job it was to transfer 
the information onto punched cards or tape.10  Here we 
come to the women’s rôle in earlier computing, for the key-
punchers were often poorly paid women and the work was 
                                                 
10 Whirlwind, like its descendant TX-2, used punched paper tape rather 
than punched cards. The now largely forgotten photoelectric paper tape 
reader sucked paper tape through its jaws at a terrifying rate. In an attempt 
to minimize punching errors, most tapes were punched twice, and the 
duplicates “verified.” Also forgotten now is the battle between the 
rectangular holes of IBM cards and the round ones in Univac's cards. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
39 
painfully tedious. There were, of course, some outstanding 
women programmers, but I recall few male key-punchers. 
Only when you had a deck of cards in hand did you sign up 
for computer time. At this juncture the two styles of use 
diverged and as my first serious encounters with computers 
involved the IBM style of access, I will describe that process 
here and postpone for the moment discussion of the more 
civilized approach. 
When your allotted time arrived, you bore the deck of 
punched cards to wherever the computer was located11. 
There using a console bristling with lights and switches the 
operator ran people’s “jobs” in a sequence called “batch 
processing” mode. In order not to waste a millisecond of 
precious machine time between jobs, your bundle of cards 
was concatenated with those of other hopefuls—separated 
by special “job cards” that indicated to the supervisory 
program just what was to be done to the ensuing group of 
cards—and loaded into a card reader, where either little 
fingers or photocells sensed the holes and fed the 
information on the cards into the computer’s memory. Once 
there, the assembly program translated your symbolic 
instructions into binary instructions which the machine 
could understand, and then punched out a more compact 
deck of cards in binary format. 
At last it was time to try running the program. The 
switches were used to start the program going, at which 
                                                 
11 The holes in cards were, of course, nothing more than just that and could 
be interpreted in any number of ways. Apparently the number theorist 
D.H. Lehmer, was carrying a large deck of program cards, when he 
encountered someone who asked him, “What have you got there?” His 
answer was, “A number.” 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
40 
point the programmer stood back, listened to the rumbling 
of the air-conditioning, nervously chewed his or her 
fingernails, and hoped that something useful would emerge 
from the jackhammer-like line-printer over in the corner. If 
all went well some useful results might appear, but most 
runs ended badly with the program immolating itself in one 
fashion or another. At that point the state of the machine 
was “dumped” to the printer, the programmer’s run was 
finished, and the ensuing hours or days were spent poring 
over inscrutable printout, often in base 8 (octal) numbers, 
trying to decipher what had gone wrong. Once the problem 
was located and corrected, you applied for another “run.” 
This pattern of activity was repeated over and over again, 
often for a period of days or weeks, until finally the 
program had been whipped into shape and began 
functioning satisfactorily. 
A substantial price was paid for this sort of operation. 
Debugging was a slow and painful process that could 
extend over weeks or months, depending on the size and 
complexity of the program. Often programmers would 
realize within minutes what trivial thing they had done 
wrong, but would nonetheless have to wait for hours, or 
more likely until the next day, to try again. The 
consequence was that programs which might have been 
debugged in hours often required many weeks. 
Over time minor improvements were incorporated into 
the procedure, mostly to minimize wasted time between 
jobs. Later systems used spooling programs in which cards 
were converted to tape on a peripheral computer, the tape 
was then put on the big machine where the program was 
assembled and run, and the output went to tape for later 
listing on a line printer. Despite such improvements in 
utilizing the computer efficiently, a lot of one’s life was 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
41 
consumed in trudging around carrying (and occasionally 
dropping!) heavy decks of cards; waiting for one’s turn; 
poring over printout; bantering with the computer 
operators and the people who punched the cards; 
sometimes punching an extra hole or two in a card yourself, 
or even (don’t tell IBM!) gluing a little piece of card material 
back into a hole in a binary card to shortcut reassembly. 
Overall, because the process was so cumbersome and 
involved the programmer with a variety of specialists, there 
was far more social interaction per debugged instruction 
than takes place today. The evolution of the comparatively 
asocial nerd, in isolated partnership with his machine, still 
lay in the future. But the important point is that in that 
world, programmers were the drones; the machine, the 
queen. 
There were a few individuals who disagreed with this 
entire set of attitudes and felt that the price of such 
cumbersome operation was far too high for the supposed 
benefits. These people were convinced that the size and cost 
of computers were bound to fall, making such shoe-horning 
of multiple users unnecessary. And so a very different style 
of usage existed in a few research-oriented settings such as 
Whirlwind’s, where much closer interaction between user 
and machine was the norm. In such settings, the individual 
users spent comparatively long stretches of time with the 
machine, typically operating it themselves, and identifying 
and and correcting program bugs at a high rate so that 
programs converged much more rapidly to correct 
performance. 
The divergence between these two approaches reflected 
a major philosophic schism. Although Whirlwind’s more 
direct, personal style of usage persisted, it remained 
comparatively rare throughout much of the middle ages. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
42 
Eventually, however, it led to the very first personal 
computers. But I’m getting ahead of my story. 
One might ask what has eliminated the need for the 
kind of protective insulation that the more typical style of 
batch-processing usage enforced. The answer lies in a 
number of things. First of all, if you do something that 
causes trouble with your own, truly personal, computer, 
most of the cost will be borne by you, not others. No great 
expense is involved, probably no one else will be hurt. This 
contrasts with the scene in which a large, very expensive 
machine was shared sequentially among many people. If 
something you did caused trouble or even delay, the cost 
could be enormous and hurt many other people. 
When you’re initially writing and testing programs, 
failures of unexpected sorts are virtually certain to occur. 
Today, with so many people using computers for so many 
things, there is no way for all of them to be programmers. 
Instead, most people who use computers aren’t writing and 
debugging programs at all but instead are using application 
programs that provide their only interaction with the 
machine. These programs have (presumably) been carefully 
crafted by programmers to allow the user to perform 
certain kinds of common tasks: email, word-processing, 
spreadsheets, bookkeeping, graphics, network access, and 
the myriad other jobs for which large numbers of people 
today use computers. In using the machine for these 
purposes, you no longer fiddle directly with the innards of 
the machine by pushing buttons and setting switches. 
Rather you manipulate programs indirectly through 
devices (mouse, screen, keyboard) and mediating programs 
that have been carefully crafted to prevent you from 
accessing parts of the hardware or software that could 
cause trouble. Much of the protective insulation that was 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
43 
formerly provided by people and regimented procedures is 
now enforced by the operating system and the application 
programs of the computer itself. In olden times such 
insulating software simply didn’t exist, leaving the machine 
much more vulnerable to user (programmer) errors. 
So, in theory at least, the application programs that 
users interact with have been carefully debugged before 
users get their hands on them. Debugging takes place 
behind the scene, out of sight, in labs dedicated to 
designing and writing the systems and application 
programs that people will later use. Furthermore, today’s 
debuggers utilize programming and debugging tools that 
were undreamed of in the 1950s. These have dramatically 
reduced frustration and shortened the debugging cycle. 
Well then, why aren’t things better today? Why do our 
machines still crash? There are at least three answers. First 
of all, they are better. Todays users, who expect their 
computers to be as reliable as any other piece of consumer 
electronics, can’t possibly imagine how flaky computers 
used to be. Second, Parkinson’s Law: As our abilities 
expand, so do our appetites. And as memory has gotten 
cheaper and more plentiful, our desire to fill it with new, 
larger, “improved” programs has more than kept pace. And 
as the refinements and embroidery increase, they bring 
with them new and more subtle interactions and failure 
modes. And finally, economics. If all programs were tested 
as thoroughly as the space shuttle’s computer programs, we 
would have far fewer failures than we now have. 
Unfortunately such thorough testing is expensive and takes 
time, two things that are intolerable in a fast-moving, highly 
competitive marketplace. Experience indicates that today’s 
debugging is often far from thorough. So of course, crashes 
still happen. Nonetheless, such occurrences are today 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
44 
considered outrageous rather than routine and (one hopes) 
can eventually ruin a company if allowed to get out of 
hand. 
But if computer users in those days were all 
programmers, presumably conversant with the machine, 
why did it need to be protected from them? First of all, by 
the late ‘50s most programmers weren’t any longer so 
knowledgeable about the innards of the machine hardware, 
and, because of the increased contention for access to these 
rare and expensive gadgets, it was vital not to waste a 
precious moment. The IBM regimen meant that all thinking 
was done away from the machine so that it never sat idle 
while programmers scratched their heads puzzling over 
something. More users could thus be accommodated per 
unit time. Beyond that, IBM thinking simply demanded 
regimentation: preserving order; limiting people to their 
allotted time; keeping them from breaking switches, 
spreading grubby fingerprints, spilling coffee; making sure 
they collected suitable postmortem information, etc. This 
was sometimes referred to as “80-column thought,” 
referring to the rigidity of the 80 columns of an IBM card. 
In 1957 IBM introduced an entirely new kind of 
computer 
language 
called 
FORTRAN 
(FORmula 
TRANslation), which broke the one-to-one correspondence 
between the steps that the programmer wrote down and the 
steps that the machine executed.12  A program known as the 
FORTRAN compiler translated programs written in the 
FORTRAN language into steps that could then be executed 
                                                 
12 There were earlier instances of this sort of thing, and of course such 
breakthroughs rarely come all at once, but certainly FORTRAN was the 
one that had the most widespread impact. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
45 
by the machine. This was an early move in the direction of 
allowing programmers to write in a language more attuned 
to the problems they were dealing with and less tied to a 
particular machine’s capabilities. Not only did this make 
writing programs easier and more natural, but because the 
program steps were now independent of the particular 
machine, it held out the promise that a FORTRAN program 
might be translated to work on any of several different 
machines, so long as each new machine had a compatible 
FORTRAN compiler. Thus the notion of machine-
independence was born. Although it was only a first step in 
this direction, it quickly found favor with many 
programmers and some FORTRAN programs are still in 
use today. Debates about “higher-level languages” have 
filled the air in the years since, but today most programs are 
written in languages that run on many different machines. 
Machines and computer languages, of course, actually 
evolved together—like bindweed. Many people today tend 
to think of “the computer” as performing their job, with 
only the vaguest notion of what lies inside. Behind the 
modern screen lie many layers of software, microcode,13 
and hardware, each dependent on all of the underlying 
layers, and the entire mess dependent on the years of work 
and understanding that led to this remarkable pyramid. In 
the early days the pyramid didn’t exist and the 
user/programmer had to deal with the underlying machine 
more directly in its own terms without the helpful buffering 
                                                 
13 Machine architecture has evolved in such a way that the underlying 
hardware performs only some very basic operations. The execution of the 
kind of instructions that used to be built into the hardware, is now 
performed by sequences of these basic “microcode” operations. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
46 
of the many layers that assist present day users and 
programmers.14 These layers arose gradually, starting at the 
very bottom near the hardware, and eventually working 
their way up to the elaborate application programs that 
today’s users have come to rely on. In many ways the 
development of these insulating software layers has been 
even more challenging than the development of new and 
improved hardware. 
                                                 
14 Of course when trouble arises, this multiple layering can be bewildering 
and can (and does) lead to finger pointing. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
47 
Chapter 4 
 
 
Enter Sputnik and ARPA, I’m nearly 
arrested, and a briefcase blows away. MITRE 
arises, I switch jobs again, and encounter 
various missile problems. A computer is 
murdered 
 
n October of 1957, Sputnik rose into the sky and we 
all got up in the early morning to watch it rise—together, as 
it turned out, with our job security. It was no coincidence 
that shortly afterwards an organization within the defense 
department that became known as ARPA (the Advanced 
Research Projects Agency) was born. Within a few years 
ARPA, through its Information Processing Techniques 
Office (IPTO), was to become the dominant governmental 
institution sponsoring computer research around the 
country. I’ll have more to say about ARPA below when I 
and numerous colleagues begin working indirectly under 
ARPA sponsorship. 
Computer people have always tended to work at odd 
hours, often in extended, marathon-like spurts that conform 
poorly to the usual “business day.” This behavior almost 
certainly had its origins in the days when the cost of 
machines led to demand for their full utilization, 24 hours a 
day. It may seem odd that such behavior continues long 
after such requirements have disappeared, but there are 
now other reasons. Part of it has to do with today’s 
enormous competitiveness and the rush to get products to 
market, but I think there may be even more powerful 
I
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
48 
underlying explanations. Computer programmers deal with 
highly complex systems. “Getting your head around” such 
problems often requires near total immersion in order to 
keep track of everything, so programmers and designers 
tend to work in bursts that are tuned to the particular piece 
of work that they are engaged in. When it’s finished, they 
go home and catch up on sleep and the rest of their lives. 
This is behavior that those not so profoundly engaged in a 
complex creative enterprise find hard to understand. 
And so it was in the “early” days. Lincoln Lab was 
situated on Hanscom Air Force Base property, the computer 
was in use 24 hours a day, and I frequently had computer 
time at night. During this period I lived directly across the 
air base from the lab and often bicycled to work. Coming 
home I would take a shortcut that crossed one end of the 
runways. Late one night, as I was preparing to set off 
toward home across the runway, an apparition stepped out 
of the bushes. I noticed out of the corner of my eye that the 
apparition was wearing a uniform and was just a little 
shorter than the cannon that he was holding as, pedaling 
furiously to keep my bike-light alive, I swept past him. A 
second later I heard a rather dubious “Halt?” and suddenly 
a vision of the small figure struggling with the cannon and 
perhaps setting it off in my direction leapt to mind. This 
caused me to apply the brakes, whereupon, of course, my 
light promptly went out and everything went black. Slowly 
I pushed my bike back to where he stood, unsure what to 
do with me now that he had me. He stepped into a small 
booth, grabbed a phone from within, and called for 
reinforcements which arrived amidst sirens and flashing 
lights looking very spiffy in white hats and gloves. I myself 
was in shorts (it was a hot summer night), sported a shaggy 
beard, and appeared quite harmless if perhaps somewhat 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
49 
disreputable. Fortunately I was able to produce my Lincoln 
Laboratory badge which, after carefully matching me to my 
photograph, seemed to satisfy them, although I’m sure they 
had no idea why I might be out bicycling at that time of 
night. Anyway, with an admonition not to get tangled up in 
a drogue chute behind some alighting jet fighter, they were 
off again in a torrent of sirens and flashing lights. I 
continued on my way after assuring the young guard that 
he’d served his country well that night. 
I spoke earlier about the division that had taken place 
by this time between hardware and software specialties. An 
incident that took place at about this time will serve to 
illustrate the depth of the divide. Driving to work one 
morning, I came upon someone I recognized walking along 
Route 128. It was an odd place to be wandering on foot, and 
as he appeared distraught I pulled over and waited while 
he came up to the car. As he stuck his head in the window I 
asked the obvious question—what the devil was he doing 
there? “I lost my bag” was all he could say at first, but then 
gradually the full story emerged. As he had been getting 
into his car that morning to go to work he’d had his 
briefcase in one hand and a laundry bag in the other. He 
put the briefcase on the roof, opened the rear door, tossed in 
the laundry bag, jumped in the front seat and drove away. 
Only much later, as he was turning off of the highway 
toward the lab, did he suddenly remember the briefcase. He 
slammed on the brakes, got out, and stared at the now 
empty roof. When I arrived he was starting to retrace his 
entire route on foot in hopes of finding the missing 
briefcase. 
Weeks before I had encountered him for the first time. 
He was a hardware designer and by that point I had 
become a passably skilled programmer. He wanted to learn 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
50 
to program and I had taken it upon myself to teach him. He 
was an enthusiastic student, always ready to say “I’ve got 
it,” so I gave him a small separable piece of the program I 
was working on to write as an exercise. Periodically he’d 
proudly bring me his work for review and each time I 
would point out what he’d done wrong. “I’ve got it now, 
for sure,” he’d say eagerly each time. But after a month I 
began to realize that programming would never be his 
métier. About a week before I met him on the road, we’d 
had a session in which I’d explained that I really needed to 
get the job done and that if it didn’t work this time, I was 
going to have to finish it myself. After that he’d worked his 
abilities to the bone, and this time, absolutely convinced 
he’d finally got it right, he was on his way to a meeting with 
me—when the briefcase containing the fruits of his labors 
blew away. 
As he explained his misadventure, I felt a surge of 
relief. Although one could hardly fail to feel sympathy for a 
grown man with his head in one’s car window on the verge 
of tears, I nonetheless realized immediately that his 
misadventure had averted the painful session I’d been 
anticipating in which I knew I would have to explain that 
his work needed to be done over. I succeeded in keeping 
these thoughts to myself and after bequeathing what 
sympathy I could, continued on my way to work while he 
set off once again on his futile quest. Later that day he told 
me that he had encountered some youths on the way and 
had hired them to walk the entire route (probably a dozen 
miles) from his home to where he’d stopped, promising a 
reward if they found the briefcase. They never did, and a 
few days later, after we’d worked up the bit of program 
together, he turned to me and announced that it was just as 
well they’d never found it. As I recall, he folded his tent at 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
51 
that point and returned straightaway to the hardware fold, 
never to re-emerge. 
At about that time (in 1957) the rumbles began about 
MITRE. The powers that be at MIT had concluded that 
building air defense and related military systems was likely 
to be an on-going business from which MIT should 
disengage. Besides, there had been growing frustration 
between MIT and the Air Force which had substantially 
different goals. It was therefore decided that Lincoln should 
shed those tasks specifically related to air defense, etc. and 
remain more of a general research institution. The MITRE 
corporation was duly formed, and it was decreed that the 
group in which I’d been working would move en masse to 
the new organization. But I (and one other chap) didn’t 
want to become specialists in designing and building air 
defense systems, which seemed, at that point, to be 
MITRE’s mission. I was interested in more general research, 
and aside from my personal interests, I was beginning to 
have some broader concerns about the rôle of the military in 
society. (These doubts were to sharpen and deepen over the 
course of my career and ultimately to shape the direction of 
my life for several years after I retired.) I remembered how 
the country had felt before World War II and didn’t like the 
way it was beginning to feel now, maintaining a large, on-
going military establishment with steady-state paranoia 
about the Soviets. Clearly MITRE was going to be even 
more directly tied to the military than Lincoln, and I simply 
didn’t want to be a part of that. So I decided to stay within 
the MIT fold. I was importuned by my then boss, Charlie 
Zraket, who was leaving for MITRE and would eventually 
become its president. He was a wonderful person to work 
for and I regretted leaving him, but I resisted all 
blandishments and as my colleagues began to move to their 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
52 
new quarters, I shifted my office and allegiance to another 
group within Lincoln. 
In my early days at the lab I’d been unable to avoid 
noticing a fellow who seemed to have an extraordinary 
vocal range that he employed to great effect in support of 
what many would consider rather decided opinions. Not 
that he was inflexible or unpleasant—just definite. (He’s 
been described as “the only person I knew who spoke in 
italics.”) If a “discussion” arose that included him, people in 
offices for a considerable distance on either side of where 
the discussion was taking place would become aware of his 
views. By the time of the MITRE schism, he was in charge 
of a small group in another division at Lincoln and it was 
for him that I then went to work. His name was Frank 
Heart. 
Frank’s was a small but closely-knit group of about half 
a dozen people. Another member of the group was Will 
Crowther, a rock climber of legendary prowess whom I’d 
already encountered on weekends at the Shawangunk cliffs 
near Poughkeepsie, New York. (William Shockley, inventor 
of the transistor, was another Shawangunk climber and one 
of my favorite climbs was a route involving an overhang 
known as Shockley’s Ceiling.) Will wrote immensely clever 
code, seemingly with both hands, and he taught me to play 
bridge, the de rigueur lunchtime activity in the new group. 
By this time the lab had acquired an honest-to-God 
commercial computer, an IBM 704 with which I was to 
become intimately acquainted over coming months. The 
first days in my new job were spent familiarizing myself 
with the programming manual of this new machine. As I 
warmed up on some minor, now-forgotten projects, I 
noticed that the name Noam Chomsky often appeared on 
reams of paper emerging from the printer. Who the devil 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
53 
was this Chomsky fellow, eating up so much valuable 
computer time? And the chap’s wife was soaking up time 
too. What could possibly be so important, I wondered15. 
Frank’s group worked on a wide variety of projects, 
especially those with a real-time flavor. Lincoln had 
spearheaded such use of computers, but these kinds of 
applications, prevalent today, were relatively new and 
unknown at the time. New uses for computers were being 
investigated, but the expansion into new areas was a slow 
process 
that 
often 
required 
overcoming 
strong 
preconceptions and biases. Many who had problems that 
actually cried out for a computer solution simply weren’t 
aware of the possibilities. People had accepted that 
computers could help with bookkeeping problems, but the 
burden of proof that they might be useful in some new 
arena often lay with the computer people themselves. This 
was Frank’s specialty and over the years he pioneered 
many new applications in addition to the one for which he 
is best known, the ARPANET. Today computers are often 
oversold as the solution to every problem, but with the 
exception of the always-receptive military, at that time they 
were viewed with healthy skepticism by other prospective 
clients. 
The process of exploring new application arenas was 
one that first required familiarizing oneself with some 
existing operation. This could be a delicate proposition 
                                                 
15 Noam Chomsky, I was later to learn, was an MIT professor and one of 
the foremost linguistic theorists of the age. His work, some of it utilizing 
computers, profoundly influenced the field, and in more recent years he 
has achieved further renown as a progressive political and social 
philosopher. He has an international reputation and has published an 
almost uncountable number of books. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
54 
because not far beneath the surface was the implication that 
computer people, fresh off the street so to speak, might be 
able to understand and help solve some problem better than 
those who had been dealing with it for a long time. Under 
such circumstances it was all too easy to offend a potential 
“customer,” especially if one’s approach was at all hasty or 
arrogant. It behooved one to adopt an attitude of some 
humility, because, as often proved to be the case, the 
problem needing solution was usually more complex than it 
first appeared. 
We frequently found ourselves investigating some 
totally unfamiliar branch of science or engineering, 
attempting to understand it well enough to be able to 
decide whether or not there was some piece of an operation 
that could be lubricated by the application of computer 
technology. If approached with some care, we usually 
found that people were enthusiastic about explaining their 
work, delighted that some crazy engineers took interest in 
their often obscure segment of the world. 
Will and I began working together on a project that 
involved a missile-tracking radar. By now ICBMs were 
becoming a potential threat and the question had been 
raised: Would a missile reentering the atmosphere leave a 
wake that could be detected by radar in case the radar 
failed to notice the missile itself (for whatever good that 
might do)? Although I was beginning to have an aversion to 
military work, I knew this was an important question, so I 
put aside my embryonic “anti-war” concerns. 
Not long before, just after dusk on a freezing cold night, 
I’d stood atop a hill outside of Boston where Lincoln’s giant 
Millstone radar tracked missiles and satellites and 
performed numerous scientific experiments. My friend 
Howie Briscoe was, by then, working with the Millstone 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
55 
group and he’d invited me out to see the radar in operation. 
That night it was to track a communications satellite being 
launched into orbit from Wallops Island down in Virginia. 
When the rocket was fired we were able to follow its trace 
on the radar screen, but almost immediately a shout came 
from outdoors and we rushed out into the crystalline night. 
There, some 500 miles away, one could clearly spot the 
rocket as it rose above the earth’s shadow into sunlight, the 
wake from its engines clearly visible spreading out behind 
it in a giant orange plume as it ascended. Of course it was 
an altogether different question whether a ballistic missile, 
whose engines had long ago shut off, would leave a wake 
visible to radar as it rushed silently back into the earth’s 
atmosphere. The project we were about to embark on 
would seek an answer to that question. 
An elaborate experiment was being prepared at 
Wallops Island in Virginia. Multi-stage, solid-fuel rockets 
were to be boosted up above the earth’s atmosphere. There 
the final stage would be turned around and fired back 
down into the atmosphere at high speed, simulating the 
reentry of an incoming missile. The earlier stages were to 
fall into the Atlantic in an area from which (I trust) ships 
were excluded, and we were assured that the final stage 
would completely burn up as it came back down. (Later, as 
we watched a launch, we were to wonder about this. Even 
though the missile went out over the ocean away from us, it 
appeared to be directly overhead and I had the eerie feeling 
that if anything went wrong, it would fall directly back on 
us. It seems that as you look up into the sky, everything 
more than about seventy degrees from the horizontal 
appears to be pretty much directly overhead if you have no 
other point of reference.) 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
56 
A radar was to follow the missile on its upward journey 
and then track the final stage as it was fired back down into 
the atmosphere. A computer and memory were attached to 
the radar in such a way that the path the antenna had taken 
while tracking the missile rise and return would be 
memorized, thus enabling the radar to be repositioned 
along this path to discover if any residual wake could be 
detected. My job was to construct a plot of the trajectory the 
radar followed during the experiment. Wiggles appearing 
in my plots of early tests seemed to suggest a program bug 
of some sort, but closer investigation revealed that the 
antenna actually jigged and jogged as it moved about 
because the servomechanism electronics controlling the 
movement were improperly adjusted. I’d earned my salary 
even before the first shot was fired. 
You need to know about one final refinement. The 
radar was situated on the mainland, several miles inland 
from the island where the missile firings actually took 
place. Thus before the missile took off, the radar was aimed 
horizontally along the earth’s surface. This resulted in a 
great deal of noise (“ground clutter”) in the received signal. 
It was impossible to distinguish the missile within this 
clutter and thus it could not be tracked as it took off. And if 
you couldn’t track it from the outset, how would the radar 
ever locate it as it soared into the sky? A solution to this 
problem had been worked out. A set of movable bicycle 
handlebars (I kid you not) was mounted beside the giant 
radar with a telescope attached to them. The radar antenna 
could be slaved to these handlebars so that whenever they 
were moved, the antenna followed the movement. The idea 
was that an operator would look through the telescope and 
watch the missile taking off. He would then follow it up 
with the telescope by moving the handlebars to keep the 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
57 
missile in view. And of course the radar antenna, slaved to 
the handlebars, would follow along. Shortly the missile 
would rise out of the ground clutter, a radar operator 
would then be able to identify the missile target on the 
radar screen, the radar would be locked onto this target and 
disconnected from the handlebars. Rube Goldberg had 
nothing on the U.S. Air Force. But, on the other hand, what 
could go wrong? 
The launches took place at night, presumably making it 
easier for the fiery missile to be seen through the telescope. 
We had all seen television images of missiles being 
launched from Cape Canaveral (later renamed Cape 
Kennedy) and slowly lumbering into the sky, and somehow 
no one had bothered to explain that those were liquid-fuel 
missiles. By contrast, solid-fuel missiles, such as those to be 
used here, took off lickety-split, like a bullet fired from a 
gun. Thus on the first launch the telescope operator was 
totally unprepared for what happened. As the missile tore 
into the sky his head whipped back to watch it while his 
hands, the handlebars, and the entire guiding apparatus 
never budged. On the second launch the telescope operator 
was better prepared, but one of his colleagues, deciding to 
immortalize the event, snapped a photograph of the 
operator at the handlebars just as the missile took off. The 
camera’s flash utterly blinded him and by the time he’d 
recovered his vision, the missile was somewhere out over 
the Atlantic. 
I believe that the experiment was eventually made to 
work, although I don’t recall whether or not a radar-visible 
wake was ever detected. I’m sure the answer is known to 
the missile-tracking community. Once everything was 
working, however, the programming fun was over, we 
programmers were no longer involved, and the running of 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
58 
the program became just another part of routine activity. I 
have dwelt on this story, not only because the anecdotes 
remain memorable, but also because this project illustrates 
the 
importance 
of 
direct 
interaction 
between 
the 
programmers and the projects for which the programs were 
being written. Such interaction was (and in many cases, still 
is) an essential part of getting the job done properly. Real-
time applications can rarely be circumscribed and fully 
defined in advance. All too often there are side effects and 
constraints that need to be discovered and allowed for, and 
there seems no good alternative to direct experience for 
getting things right. 
Frank, always on the lookout for new applications, 
became interested in bigger rockets—of the Cape Canaveral 
variety. Soon several of us were on our way to Florida 
aboard our first jet airplane, a spanking new Boeing 707. 
Despite some concern about the unfamiliar spoilers on the 
leading edge of the wings before takeoff (“Look at those 
strange things. What do you suppose they are?”  “Can you 
see, is there one on the other wing?”  “I guess they’ll 
remove them before we go.”  “Hey, we’re rolling—could 
they have forgotten?”), miraculously we arrived in Florida 
intact, and the next day we were shown around a launch 
control center. 
Our introduction to the site included viewing films of 
prior missile launches. We saw pictures of gleaming white 
Atlas missiles, sitting on the launch pad shedding ice in the 
approved manner as the engines roared into life. The 
missile would shudder a bit, rise a few feet into the air—
and then suddenly explode in a tremendous ball of flame. 
Moments later, another missile would replace it and the 
same scene would be reenacted. One after another we 
watched our tax dollars going up in a lengthy series of 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
59 
spectacular explosions. I was reminded of the films 
showing the evolution of the airplane through every kind of 
conceivable contraption, most of which met similarly 
disastrous ends. Such things are the price of experimental 
development and illustrate the story I am attempting to tell 
here. Most computer fiascos made somewhat less dramatic 
exits from the stage, but the same story of trial and error 
accompanies most engineering endeavors. 
We were interested in understanding how computers 
were being used in the missile launching business and 
thought that perhaps we would be able to make some 
useful suggestions about functions that could be automated. 
In particular we suspected that a computer might prove 
useful in the long and complex checkout procedures 
leading up to the final countdown and launch. We knew 
that they would be using a computer for the more obvious 
applications, but suspected that they hadn’t thought about 
some of the less apparent possibilities. Remember, this was 
the late 1950s and computers were still a Big Deal then, 
even at Cape Canaveral. There were no computers in 
washing machines or automobiles in those days, only in Big 
Operations. It turned out that there was a single IBM 709 (or 
perhaps it was a 7090) that, as we’d suspected, was 
primarily used when a missile was in the air, to keep track 
of where it was going and what it was doing. It provided 
humans with information, but didn’t do anything much 
beyond that; it wasn’t actually controlling anything, just 
monitoring and reporting. 
We noticed that a large number of television cameras in 
the control center were all aimed directly at the launch pad. 
We asked why there were so many and were told the 
following story. All of the rockets carried explosive destruct 
packages so that in case the rocket went astray, it could be 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
60 
blown up before it got to where it could cause real trouble 
when it came down. The destruct package was in the first 
stage (presumably because by the time the later stages fired 
and might misbehave the thing would be well out over the 
ocean where it could do comparatively little harm). As the 
rocket rose into the air, the computer continuously plotted 
an “intercept” point which was where the rocket would 
land should the engines quit. Drawn across the chart on 
which this intercept point was continuously plotted was a 
heavy black line. The rockets were aimed out over the 
Atlantic, and so the intercept point normally moved 
eastward, away from the coast, away from the heavy line. 
But if the intercept point ever strayed in the wrong 
direction, in particular, if it ever crossed the heavy line, the 
range safety officer was to push the button that exploded 
the destruct package. 
One day things went very wrong indeed, in a way no 
one had anticipated. Those watching outdoors were treated 
to a spectacular show. When the missile was fired, 
somehow the second and third stages of the rocket took off 
together, leaving the first stage sitting simmering on the 
launch pad. Indoors, the computer plotted the intercept 
point of the errant later stages and sure enough, it began to 
move inland as the thing flailed drunkenly about. The 
range safety officer, with his eyes glued to the intercept 
point, saw it cross the forbidden line and so he pushed the 
button igniting the destruct package. Having been stunned 
to see the later stages take off solo, those watching outside 
now were further startled to see the innocent looking first 
stage blow up right on the launch pad, utterly destroying 
the pad in the process. Meanwhile the range safety officer 
watched in horror as, instead of stopping as expected, the 
intercept point continued to wobble inland. Ultimately the 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
61 
upper stages fell, harmlessly, into the Banana River. We 
were told that the multiple video monitors were installed 
shortly thereafter (along, presumably, with destruct 
packages in all of the stages). Technological humility far too 
often arrives after the fact and computer hubris all too often 
comes a cropper on the unexpected. Many years later, 
lessons such as this were to lead me into the center of 
debates about the advisability of allowing computers too 
large a hand in deciding to retaliate against a presumed 
hostile missile attack. The various “Star Wars” proposals, 
which tend to rely heavily on complex computer decision-
making, have seemed, and still seem to me, extremely 
questionable enterprises, fraught with the dangers of 
unanticipated circumstances. 
Although we never actually did any work at Cape 
Canaveral, some time later, still on the rocket kick, we were 
able to provide help at Vandenberg Air Force Base in 
California. There test missiles were going in the opposite 
direction, out over the Pacific, and sending back 
telemetering information to special equipment that wrote 
the data onto a sequence of magnetic (computer) tapes in 
one long string with no gaps. No one had thought ahead of 
time about the problem of reading such tapes. Data on tapes 
normally came in well-demarcated, manageable-sized 
blocks, each of which fit comfortably into memory. Here, 
however, was a seemingly unmanageable quantity of 
information, all in one indigestible pile. Fortunately we 
managed to devise a scheme in which, as the data was 
being read into the memory, we simultaneously wrote it 
back out alternately onto two other tapes. While one of these 
was receiving data, the other could catch its breath and 
write an end-of-record mark, thus making it possible to 
break the data into manageable-sized pieces for later 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
62 
processing. In addition we slyly repositioned the incoming 
data pointer occasionally so that although the data 
continued pouring in, it never actually overflowed memory 
and suffocated the machine. It was a clever counterpoint to 
the prior oversight, and we were particularly delighted 
because it used the IBM tape system in a way that no one 
had anticipated. It also kept the operators hopping, 
mounting and unmounting tapes at our direction. For once, 
we were in charge. 
At about this time IBM introduced a new pair of 
computers—the 1620, which was a “scientific” machine, 
and the 1401, which was the “business” version. The 
distinction was based on presumed differences in need 
between these two communities of users. (Even though by 
then the term “general purpose digital computer” had 
become standard parlance, the underlying idea hadn’t yet 
fully sunk in.) The 1620 was dubbed the CADET. Then 
some wit, noting that the machine had no ADD instruction, 
suggested that CADET stood for “Can’t Add Doesn’t Even 
Try,” and the name was quietly dropped. Some time later 
word went around that a programmer, in a fit of what must 
have been exquisite pique, had shot an IBM 1401 computer 
full of holes. What more need one say? Such an urge is 
surely familiar to many. 
It was now time to move on to the next project which, 
by contrast with trying to detect a missile attack, was 
concerned 
with 
detecting 
the 
presence 
of 
enemy 
submarines. If they didn’t get us from above, they would 
get us from below. It seemed we were exploring submarine 
detection by sonic means using steered arrays of detectors. 
Involvement in this project would soon immerse us in 
studies of underwater sound transmission. 
But first I have to tell you about the piano. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
63 
Chapter 5 
 
 
A piano enters the lab and comes up 
against TX-2. DEC is formed and there is an 
error on Page 217. Fourier is proven sound and 
we land on an aircraft carrier. 
 
am a reasonably good pianist. I’ve been immersed in 
music all my life and felt deprived at Lincoln without a 
piano to practice on. I knew that Oliver Selfridge, an early 
computer whiz I’d met through Howie Briscoe and who 
was now at Lincoln, had a piano in his office, and I thought, 
why not me too? It was an unusual request, but Frank 
rather liked the oddity of it and I promised not to practice 
except during lunchtime or after work hours. I located a 
suitable junker and made arrangements to have it arrive as 
unobtrusively as possible, but when the phone rang an 
incredulous guard said “There’s a man here claims he’s got 
a PIANO for you???” I arrived at the loading dock to find 
two guards restraining the mover, who was intent on 
getting a peek inside the super-secret Lincoln Laboratory. 
We finally got him out and rolled the piano through the 
halls by some raised eyebrows to my office. Soon my 
lunchtime practicing became accepted background to the 
bridge game. 
Now another use for my piano began to form in my 
mind. For many years I had watched my father struggling 
with music notation, first scribbling down a quick sketch of 
a piece of music before he forgot it, and then later going 
back over it, laboriously turning shorthand scribbles into 
I
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
64 
readable scores. Because it took so long to notate music, 
much wonderful material had been forgotten and lost. 
Although it was many years before word processing would 
become commonplace, I suspected that a computer might 
be able to help with the problem of notating music, just as 
text processors now help writers of prose. My initial 
thought was that the computer should be able, by analyzing 
the sound, to decide what notes were played, and then print 
out a score. After all, musicians could do it; why not a 
computer? Knowing what I now know, I realize how naive 
this was. I was neither the first nor the last to underestimate 
the sophistication and complexity of human cognitive 
processes. 
From the time I first arrived at Lincoln, I was 
subliminally aware of a very special group within the lab, 
the Advanced Development Group. Many of the people in 
that group had worked on Whirlwind at MIT’s Digital 
Computer Lab which had later been absorbed into Lincoln. 
These were the people who actually designed experimental 
computers and that group was, to my mind, the core of the 
matter, the pinnacle, the promised land to which anyone 
with a grain of ambition aspired. Lincoln had a seminar 
series in which lectures about the structure of the group’s 
new experimental computer, TX-2, were appearing with 
increasing frequency. These lectures were presented by 
people who came to be my secret heroes: John Frankovich, 
Jim Forgie, Ken Olsen, Dick Best, and last but not least, TX-
2’s chief architect, none other than the self-same Wesley 
Clark, whom I’d heard speak in Pittsburgh in the fall of 
1954. 
I indicated earlier that beyond the division between 
hardware and software, equally important specializations 
developed within each of these disciplines. On the hardware 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
65 
side 
there 
were 
already 
distinctions 
between 
the 
architects—those who designed the logic of the machine, 
viewing it principally from the programming point of view 
and breaking it into its logical components and logical 
steps—and the engineers, who were specialists in the world 
of physical realities and who dealt in electrical and 
mechanical constraints. The lectures by Best and Olsen were 
about the circuitry of the machine and I strained to 
understand the unfamiliar material. The lectures by Clark, 
Forgie, and Frankovich, on the other hand, were about the 
machine’s logical structure and I understood that part of the 
story relatively easily. It seemed to be a magnificent edifice 
and I loved the excitement and feeling of esprit de corps 
that emanated from the members of the group. I later 
learned that Clark and Olsen had collaborated on the 
design of previous machines, including the MTC computer 
mentioned earlier. 
I discovered that TX-2 had an analog to digital 
converter that enabled it to read analog signals—such as the 
sound waveforms produced by the piano—and then print 
them out. I was curious to see what these signals looked 
like, so I borrowed a tape recorder, played a few passages 
onto the tape, read it into TX-2 and printed out the 
waveforms.16 I was stunned to find that the printout looked 
like absolute gibberish. I could see clearly where the first 
note had been struck, but beyond that everything looked 
like garbage. It was back to the drawing boards. I decided 
to try something simpler so I played just three notes in 
succession. When I looked at the new waveforms I realized 
                                                 
16 By what subterfuge I managed this brief invasion of the sacred precincts 
I no longer recall. TX-2 was certainly not accessible to hoi polloi. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
66 
that my idea was in serious trouble; I couldn’t even tell 
where the second note had been played, the whole thing 
was still just one big jumble. 
Looking at the mess, I decided I’d better learn 
something about what was going on, so I went to the library 
and fished out a book on the physics of music. By the time 
I’d finished reading the chapter about pianos, which 
described the incredible complexity and variability of the 
actual acoustic waveforms, I realized that analyzing the 
sound with a computer in hopes of identifying the notes 
being played was far more of a task than I’d imagined and 
for all practical purposes, hopeless. This was my first head-
on encounter with the fact that many things we humans do 
so naturally that we assume they must be easy, are in fact 
extremely difficult (if not impossible) to program a 
computer to do. Such tasks seem easy for us only because 
they are accomplished using sophisticated mechanisms 
buried so deeply within our central nervous systems that 
we are blissfully unaware of their operation and thus of 
how they work. Giving up on getting the computer to 
analyze the sound waveforms, I began to explore the under 
side of the keyboard of my ancient upright with the idea of 
installing a switch beneath each key that could record 
directly the notes as they were played. That was about 1958 
and it was as far as I carried my thinking on the subject at 
that time. However, I continued mulling over the problem 
for many years until, thanks to numerous advances in 
computer technology, as well as my own understanding of 
the problem, it ultimately bore fruit in 1980 in the form of 
the first music score handling program, Mockingbird.  More 
about that later on. 
In late 1957 a subset of the TX-2 designers, under the 
leadership of Ken Olsen who had been the chief engineer, 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
67 
left Lincoln to form a company that was going to make and 
sell logic modules that could be combined under relatively 
simple rules to construct all manner of digital devices—
including computers. The modules were derived from the 
circuits that made up TX-2. These brash young men were, I 
believe, 
among 
the 
first 
to 
leave 
Lincoln 
with 
entrepreneurial ambitions. Ken was apparently convinced 
that computers should be mass-produced gadgets and was 
impatient with the cumbersome progress at Lincoln. They 
decided 
to 
call 
their 
company 
Digital 
Equipment 
Corporation—DEC for short. We wondered whether or not 
they’d make a go of it. 
But back to underwater sound transmission. I’ve 
indicated that Frank was always on the lookout for new 
application areas. Today, when computers have become 
ubiquitous, one can pretty safely assume that workers in 
practically every arena of scientific endeavor are aware of 
their existence and most of the more obvious application 
areas have long since been thoroughly explored and 
exploited. And even if some potential new arena for use 
arises, those working in that arena will probably 
automatically consider utilizing a computer. But in those 
days it was a very different story and so we often found 
ourselves acting as missionaries carrying the true word to 
the benighted. This often meant that we suddenly had to 
learn a lot about some new and unfamiliar area of work in 
order to understand how computers might be utilized 
beneficially. (The arrogance of many computer people who 
leapt to conclusions in fields they inadequately understood 
sometimes retarded rather than speeded progress, but of 
course our group never behaved in such a fashion.) 
In any case, we were certainly uninformed about the 
complex matter of underwater sound transmission, so 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
68 
Frank went to the library and found a book on the subject 
which he gave me to “look over.” When I opened it that 
night at home I knew I was in trouble. Like a pervasive 
mold, every page was covered with a layer of differential 
and integral equations of the most appalling inscrutability. 
It had been a long time since I’d dealt with anything like 
that. I decided there was only one thing to do. I chose one of 
the more frightening-looking pages and inserted a note to 
Frank that said “Not a bad book, but the author is really 
quite careless. Note, for example, the blatant error on page 
217.” I tucked the note into the book and next morning 
placed it on Frank’s desk before he arrived. After some time 
he appeared in the doorway of my office with an ashen 
face. “How on earth did you find it?” he said, looking 
stunned. Now it was my turn to wonder—what could he 
possibly mean? “That mistake—how did you find it? Did 
you really read that entire book last night?” What the devil 
was he up to? Was he turning the tables and conning me? I 
decided to come clean—he was my boss after all. “Er, 
uh…mistake?” I asked sheepishly. “Yes, of course. This one, 
right here on page 217” he said, pointing to the book. And 
there, indeed, right smack in the middle of page 217, was a 
blooper (probably the only one in the entire blasted book!) 
so obvious that even I was able to find it within a few 
minutes. 
We called it a draw and turned the whole matter over 
to the group mathematician/physicist who, miraculously, 
appeared to understand it all. Ships, it seems, have 
propellers that make a lot of noise as they churn through 
the water. The noise travels comfortably along for 
surprising distances. Each ship’s noise consists of 
frequencies characteristic of that particular ship, or kind of 
ship. As the noise percolates along through the water, 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
69 
certain 
frequencies 
become 
attenuated—the 
higher 
frequencies have a more difficult journey and tend to erode 
faster. Meanwhile, lurking on our shores are arrays of 
undersea detectors that act, for sound, somewhat like a 
radar receiver and can be electronically “steered” (never 
mind how) to point in whatever direction you wish. The 
problem we were to investigate was the sorting out of all 
the mixed signals that might arrive from the many ships 
driving around out there in the ocean. The question, of 
course, was whether one could spot an intruder among the 
normal shipping sounds. It was a bit like a blindfolded 
listener at a symphony concert trying to spot an errant 
clarinet in the string section. 
We decided that a good way to start to explore the 
problem was with a simulation. We split the job into three 
parts. The first was a program that simulated the ships’ 
noises. We could specify how much of each frequency a 
particular model of ship would generate and we could 
specify where various model ships were located in our 
model ocean. The second program utilized all those 
incomprehensible equations (well, some of them anyway) 
in that dreadful book. These defined how the ships’ noises 
would look after they had traveled through the ocean 
getting all jumbled together to where our simulated 
detector array sat lurking. The third program pretended to 
be the detector array itself, puzzling out from this jumbled 
mess where it thought various ships might be. Once we had 
this set of programs in place and working together, we 
could vary all sorts of parameters and rules to see what the 
effects might be, what worked best, and so on. 
Attached to the IBM 709 was a large oscilloscope screen 
about 18 inches in diameter. With sufficient programming 
effort, one could paint an image on this screen, but as there 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
70 
was a big buffer memory that held the image and it took 
some time to move information into this buffer, there was 
no way to update pictures fast enough to give the kind of 
dynamism you see on today’s screens. However, it was 
better than nothing and gave us some visual check on the 
waveforms our programs were producing. The image I 
remember best was one that we put up to verify that our 
wave synthesis programs were working properly. We all 
knew, as Fourier had shown at the beginning of the 19th 
century, that if you added a series of appropriately related 
sine waves together in the proper proportion, the 
combination would gradually approach a square wave as 
you added in more and more high-frequency components. 
That much we knew theoretically, from the mathematics. 
But now we were actually able to see it happen before our 
very eyes. As we added more and more components, we 
could watch the resulting waveform change shape, the 
corners gradually becoming sharper and squarer. Looking 
at the screen I felt a new level of conviction deep in my gut. 
I thought how Fourier would have loved to be able to peek 
over our shoulders. 
Sometime during this period, a number of us were 
overwhelmed by the need to do some fieldwork in order to 
come to closer grips with the problem with which we were 
struggling. We were invited to spend a few days aboard an 
ASW (Anti-Submarine Warfare) aircraft carrier, traipsing 
around out in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean. We were to 
fly out and land on the carrier at sea, and eventually ride it 
into Norfolk, Virginia where it would be staying in port for 
a while. We were presumably going in order to learn more 
about submarine detection, and I suppose we did, but I 
knew a boondoggle when I saw one and this was a textbook 
example. When the time came, we piled into a small twin-
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
71 
engine aircraft and headed out to sea. The carrier was 
several hundred miles off shore and when we arrived and 
looked down at it, it suddenly came to me that we were 
doomed. There was obviously NO way to land an airplane 
on an object that small, and yet as we descended I realized 
that the fool flying our plane was going to attempt it 
anyway. We were seated facing backward so that when we 
landed and the tail hook grabbed a cable bringing us to an 
abrupt stop, we would be squashed flat against, rather than 
thrust forward out of, our seats. 
As we approached I braced myself for the end, but then 
at the very last moment, we were suddenly flung into the 
air again as the engines roared into renewed life. The 
seaman who was our guide managed to put on a worried 
look and say “Gosh, that’s never happened before.” It was 
some seconds before we realized he might be joking. By this 
time we were pretty thoroughly unsettled (unmanned 
might be more honest), and as we circled for another try, 
we totally forgot what to expect so that when we actually 
landed and were driven backwards into the seats as the 
plane’s hook grabbed a cable, my only thought was, “Thank 
God, we’ve hit something soft.” Within seconds, before any 
of us could regain our composure, the door was flung open 
and a smiling face was saying “Well, are you guys going to 
stay in there all day?” 
From that point on things went immeasurably better. 
We had several wonderful days on board during which we 
learned many things, among them the fact that the guys 
flying the helicopters which were buzzing around dunking 
sonar detectors into the ocean listening for submarines, led 
an extremely dangerous life. The mortality rate was 
frightening. Giant scars on the main deck gave grim 
evidence of the hazards involved in the entire operation. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
72 
We watched as the twin-engined planes were hurled, one 
after another, into the air by steam-driven catapults, to then 
snoop with detectors from higher up. 
One afternoon we were told that there were to be night 
operations. “Good,” I thought, “we’ll finally see this thing 
lit up from stem to stern like a Christmas tree.” That 
evening, as we stood in the tower above the deck listening 
to the returning planes approaching, I waited for the lights 
to go on. As the sound of the approaching planes grew 
louder I wondered if something had gone wrong. Suddenly, 
out of the night, a plane appeared and, in total darkness, 
dropped onto the deck and screeched to a stop. “A 
miracle!” I thought. But then it happened again—and again 
and again. One after another the returning planes 
materialized out of the darkness and settled securely onto 
the deck. It turns out, of course, that you don’t light up a 
carrier, which would advertise it as a target for enemy guns 
or bombs. Instead the pilots were watching narrow light 
beams that guided them in. Here was technology that really 
worked. It had to. 
More fascinating experiences were in store for us before 
we finally drove (I’m told that’s the proper verb for a navy 
craft of this size) into port. We thought we had learned our 
way around this marvel of topological complexity, a 
mechanical city housing some three thousand sailors. 
Among other things we had discovered the ship’s store 
where denizens (including VIPs) could purchase items at 
ridiculously low prices. Those of us who were (then) 
cigarette smokers had packed into our luggage as many 
cartons of essentially free cigarettes (I think they were 
something like 9 cents a pack!) as we could cram in. But as 
we were approaching land I discovered yet another unfilled 
corner of my bag, and so leaving the others I rushed to the 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
73 
store for yet another carton. Getting there took some time 
and involved a tortuous trip up and down numerous 
ladders 
and 
through 
endless 
narrow 
passageways. 
Eventually I arrived and made my purchase, whereupon I 
was overcome with a feeling that there must be a shortcut. 
Grabbing a nearby ladder I ascended ten feet—to find 
myself emerging immediately beside my companions! 
Although the visit was memorable and fascinating from 
many viewpoints, I don’t think we learned anything that 
really helped or influenced our study of underwater sound 
transmission. If we had, it would have detracted from the 
purity of the boondoggle. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
74 
Chapter 6 
 
 
A moment of skepticism 
 
________________________ 
 
“Often, especially in those particularly complicated parts of 
the physical world constituted by living organisms, the 
knowledge that is accessible is separated from what we really 
want to understand by very hard questions whose answers we do 
not know how to obtain.  At one time or another in their lives 
most scientists realize the extent of this separation but they also 
perceive, probably correctly, that public faith and concrete 
investment in science depend on connection between knowledge 
and result that is much simpler. So, they are led to make 
extravagant claims for the operation of science, both for the 
objectivity and compelling power of a formulaic “scientific 
method,” and for the direct applicability of elementary knowledge 
to problems of human welfare. When challenged, they throw up 
an obfuscating cloud of quite interesting and sometimes even 
quite useful results of scientific investigation, in the hope that no 
one will notice that the original problem has not been solved, or 
that it has, but by a pathway quite unrelated to what they have 
been doing.” 
 
Richard Lewontin—The N.Y. Review of Books, Mar 
6, 1997 p. 52 
________________________ 
 
uring those years the burgeoning computer field 
was seeking and finding ever more arenas in which to 
D 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
75 
flourish. There often seemed no limit to the possibilities as 
new application areas opened up almost daily. Today’s 
world is full of hucksters selling computers for every 
conceivable use, often in situations where a far simpler tool 
would work as well or better. But during these earlier years 
we appeared to many as Merlins, able to enlarge their 
capacities beyond their wildest dreams. The opportunity to 
shape and hand someone an unexpected, powerful, new 
tool is wonderfully gratifying, and with such experiences 
filling our lives, a general euphoria pervaded the field. I 
suspect that a somewhat similar thing may be happening 
today among scientists as they unravel genetic codes. 
Such euphoria, however, can become a problem, so 
overstimulating the imagination that flights of fancy beget 
immoderate and unwarranted claims and predictions. Of 
course no one could be sure where the hard boundaries 
would eventually begin to establish themselves, and it is 
difficult to tease apart motivations and assess levels of 
optimism, but in retrospect it is clear that over the years 
many rosy images were portrayed of what computers might 
do for us—images that were far too optimistic and based on 
insufficient understanding. This is still happening today as 
the boundaries between fact and fiction, reality and fantasy, 
become increasingly blurred. 
Lay people, always anxious for miracles, have had even 
less basis for judging matters than the cognoscenti, and the 
desire to appease their longings led to statements and views 
by some “experts” that created public expectations which 
simply could not be fulfilled. The hype that for many years, 
particularly in the 1980s, surrounded the branch of 
computer science known as Artificial Intelligence is typical. 
Some distortion and exaggeration can be laid at the 
doorstep of the media, but not all. In my opinion, such 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
76 
indiscretions are folly—they grab headlines, but in the end 
damage the credibility of practitioners. Prudence would 
dictate a more moderate course than some have chosen to 
follow in their eagerness to satisfy an urge to notoriety. 
The topic that has probably evoked the greatest number 
of false hopes over the years, perhaps because it seems the 
most easily understood by the lay person, is the search for a 
computer system that could reliably understand continuous 
speech, independent of its content. Humans apparently 
accomplish this task effortlessly, so it was initially thought 
that it must be easy. Forty years ago some were predicting 
that within a short while we would be dictating freely to 
machines. It was not necessarily anticipated that the 
machine would (at least initially) comprehend what was 
being said, but it was expected that it would at least be able 
to perform the seemingly straightforward secretarial task of 
turning the sounds of speech into printed text. 
Gradually it became clear that even that deceptively 
simple task was far more complex than had been imagined. 
Tasks that seem easiest for us humans are the ones we 
accomplish through mechanisms that have become so built 
in, so instinctive, that we are largely or completely 
unconscious of the means by which they work. That makes 
them seem easy, but ironically, it also means that we don’t 
really understand how we accomplish them. That, in turn, 
means that we don’t know how to tell a computer to do it 
either. We may, of course, be able to find some way to 
accomplish the same end, without understanding how 
humans do it. But that’s not what the over-optimists had in 
mind forty years ago. 
It has turned out, as anyone might have predicted who 
thought 
about 
it 
deeply, 
that 
recognition 
and 
comprehension cannot easily be separated; for example, 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
77 
although we tend to think we’re speaking in words, the 
boundaries between the words are not at all apparent in the 
actual sound waveforms of continuous speech. It’s not 
dissimilar to the trouble I encountered in trying to sort out 
the notes of my piano playing. Finding these word 
boundaries seems likely to be tied to the overall process of 
comprehension with lots of feedback going in both 
directions. The consequence of these and numerous other 
unanticipated complications is that, although great strides 
have been made, today computers are still unable to 
understand the sort of continuous speech that even a young 
child has no trouble comprehending. 
This week I needed to check on the arrival time of a 
United Airlines flight and I used their automated system. 
It’s quite clever and allows one to use speech as an 
alternative to pushing the dial buttons for numbers and 
choices. A naive user might conclude that the system 
understands speech quite reliably—until they noticed that 
the repertoire of responses is extremely limited and involve 
either numbers or highly prompted individual words. 
Although 
wonderfully 
useful, 
this 
word-at-a-time 
interaction is not the sort of discourse that is meant when 
we talk about understanding continuous speech. That said, 
however, it is important to acknowledge that systems now 
exist that, when carefully trained to recognize a particular 
individual’s voice, do a reasonably good job of recognizing 
carefully 
spoken 
continuous speech. And we will 
undoubtedly do better and better over time. But it’s taken a 
lot longer than the enthusiasts (many of whom extracted tax 
dollars for their work) promised. 
A related subject, language translation, has suffered a 
similar history. Given the subtle differences between 
languages and the sorts of things they express (not to 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
78 
mention the varying cultural attitudes underlying language 
differences), the problem of translating from one language 
to another is a difficult one even for humans fluent in both 
languages. Many things simply cannot be fully translated as 
each language inevitably adds its individual flavor to the 
underlying ideas being expressed. At one end of the 
spectrum lies poetry, probably the most difficult sort of 
writing to translate in that it typically capitalizes on the 
individual flavor of a language. On the other hand, 
translating straightforward scientific information written in 
standard, widely-accepted technicalese, is a somewhat less 
formidable task. 
It is unfortunate that there has never been a clear public 
retraction, acknowledging that earlier predictions were 
dramatically overblown, and perhaps stating more realistic 
expectations. 
To 
quote 
Lewontin 
again, 
a 
“much-
proclaimed program…wasted away, died, and was buried 
in a remote corner of the cemetery without a public funeral. 
The heirs simply took the cash from the estate and invested 
it in another enterprise.” In this case, the new enterprise has 
too often been the same old lady simply clad in a new gown 
with differently arranged sequins. Periodically the news 
media get hold of the story of some new advance in speech 
understanding or language translation, and the hoopla is 
run by the innocent public yet once again. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
79 
Chapter 7 
 
 
In which I join the TX-2 group and 
encounter a different culture and some 
memorable characters. I simulate another 
machine, avoid a fire, and start to dip into 
hardware 
 
he leader of the Advanced Development Group, or 
TX-2 group as it later came to be known, was Bill Papian 
who, I knew, had done his graduate work at MIT under Jay 
Forrester, constructing the very first core memory. The chief 
designer of the group was Wes Clark. I recognized him as 
we passed occasionally in the halls, but even though I knew 
he was a friend of Frank’s, it would never have occurred to 
me to introduce myself; I thought of him as the first real 
genius I’d come across in the computer field and held him 
in too great awe to approach him casually. 
Then one day the news went round that someone in the 
TX-2 group had suddenly died. What kind of a vulture, I 
thought, would take advantage of such a tragedy. And yet, 
there it was, an opportunity held out by fate. I expected that 
there would be contention for such a plum position and I 
certainly didn’t look forward to telling Frank that I was 
considering leaving his group. I had come to understand 
that Frank was someone to whom work relationships were 
very personal. He both gave and expected great loyalty and 
would not be pleased by what he would no doubt view as 
desertion on my part. On the other hand, he had often 
spoken admiringly of his friend Wes, and we had discussed 
T
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
80 
the exciting developments that were taking place in the TX-
2 group. I felt that in many ways Frank himself would have 
liked to move into that milieu, but unlike me, he now 
headed a group of his own, and was thus no longer such a 
free agent. So as Frank sat in his chair, listening to my 
announcement, smoke could be seen pouring from his ears 
as the conflict within seethed. As he himself ultimately said, 
what could he say? 
I suppose I must have been interviewed for the 
position; I don’t recall. All I know is that a short while later 
I was moving again, finally invading the precincts of the 
promised land. I was excited and a bit intimidated. I knew 
that my life was undergoing a major shift and braced 
myself for the challenging new world I was entering. I was 
delighted to find that the members of the group, my mythic 
heroes, were extremely friendly and helpful people. Even 
Wes, when you could get to him, was attentive and 
encouraging. 
Before I go on with the story, I need to back up and give 
a bit of TX-2’s background. Prior to TX-2 there had been a 
TX-1 and, following that (oddly enough) a TX-0. TX-1 was 
the first of the series. It was to have been a vacuum-tube 
machine designed as a test-bed for the first large core-
memory array. But the design was never approved and the 
machine was never built. Instead Clark and Olsen proposed 
another machine, TX-0, for the purpose, to be built using 
transistor circuits designed by Olsen and other members of 
the group. That machine was built and continued to be used 
for many years. At the same time Clark began designing a 
much larger, more powerful transistorized machine that 
would incorporate many novel features (not to say bells and 
whistles). It was this machine, TX-2, whose design I had 
enviously watched evolve from a distance. Its world was 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
81 
very different from the ones I’d inhabited up until then and, 
in many ways, its method of utilization presaged what was 
to take place throughout the world many years later. 
To begin with, you might think that as TX-2 was one of 
the very first computers built from transistors rather than 
vacuum tubes, it would therefore have been of relatively 
modest physical size. But computer people are big 
spenders; give them an inch and they take the proverbial 
mile. So of course the same space (well, actually a bit less) 
had been filled with twice as much smaller circuitry. This 
made it a very dense and powerful machine. It was also an 
experimental machine and that meant that often people had 
their hands and tools inside of it, in the racks which held 
the modules of which it was built, forever changing and 
improving it. I’d seen this before, with the IBM machines, 
but in that setting, repairmen had invaded the machine’s 
innards only to heal something that had gone wrong or to 
do routine maintenance in the middle of the night. Here, 
people seemed to be constantly fiddling with, modifying, 
and improving things. 
TX-2’s racks were spread out so that some parts of the 
machine were a considerable distance from the console 
where the main power switch was located. In order to warn 
anyone whose hands were in the wiring to stand back 
whenever power was turned on, a deafening air-horn was 
sounded several seconds in advance. The power-up 
sequence actually involved many steps; the air-horn being 
merely the first and most apparent. Once power was up, 
further internal set-up was initiated by a button labeled 
CODABO. Here, at last, was an acronym one could love; it 
stood for COunt Down And Blast Off. Which brings me to 
the next, very important matter, the way TX-2 was used. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
82 
In those days, TX-2 was run totally differently from any 
machine I’d encountered before. The difference was much 
like the difference between taking public transportation and 
driving one’s own car. First, it was operated directly by the 
programmer rather than by an intermediary operator. 
Second, you didn’t just get a momentary shot at the 
machine and then carry away a printout to be pored over 
later, somewhere else. TX-2 users simply debugged their 
programs right at the console, sitting there sometimes for 
hours at a stretch. (The longer runs were usually at night.) 
This appeared to be a waste of valuable computer time, but 
it meant that programs could be debugged in a fraction of 
the calendar time that it would otherwise have taken. 
This way of using a computer evidenced a profoundly 
different philosophy: It emphasized optimizing the time of 
the human beings, rather than the time of the machine; it 
also looked forward to the day when a few seconds of 
unused computer time would no longer be so costly. Today 
when I turn off the computer on which I’m writing and go 
to bed for the night, I waste more computer power than 
earlier machines could provide in several months, running 
full bore. Wes Clark, who as its principal architect, was king 
of TX-2, foresaw this state of affairs and deliberately 
arranged the use of TX-2 in this then-unorthodox manner. I 
recall a seminar he gave at about this time in which he 
looked forward to the day when computer power would 
become virtually free. I remember the lecture vividly 
because he said that one should think about a computer as 
something that would one day perhaps just be painted onto 
any handy surface. I can still see the gesture he used, 
painting back and forth on the top of the desk from which 
he was lecturing. “Surely,” I thought, “that’s going a bit 
far.” 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
83 
Another thing about TX-2: It had a screen (about 10 
inches square) on which you could both paint and change 
images in a big hurry. For use with this display, Clark had 
invented a light pen, a device somewhat like Whirlwind’s 
and XD-1’s light guns, which allowed you to select items 
painted on the screen. Using these features, a young 
graduate student from MIT named Ivan Sutherland was 
constructing a system that displayed drawings with which 
users could interact, stretching, bending, and adjusting 
them in real-time. This first serious demonstration of 
interactive graphics would become famous as “Sketchpad” 
and would eventually move Ivan into the ranks of 
computer 
immortals. 
But 
the 
man 
behind 
such 
developments, the one who had had the vision to foresee 
the need and the possibilities of interactive computing, was 
the architect of TX-2 itself, Wes Clark. Another young 
graduate student named Larry Roberts was using the 
display to explore ways of compressing the information 
contained in pictures to facilitate their transmission over 
phone lines. Larry would later become famous as one of a 
number of so-called “fathers” of the Internet. (The Internet 
has a surprisingly numerous paternity. More about this 
later on.) 
Back to the horn. Although its sound seemed excessive, 
it was, in fact, a device of great importance. Earlier I’d 
encountered a fellow who had nearly been killed at 
Whirlwind years before when someone turned on the 
power unexpectedly while he was working with his hands 
in the machine. There were some high voltages in the racks 
and the shock he suffered had damaged him for life. The 
TX-2 horn was designed to prevent such accidents, but it 
also had more humorous effects. If a particularly smug new 
programmer appeared, somehow mention of the horn 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
84 
would be overlooked in his training, and when he went into 
the computer room alone at night for his first run and 
turned on the power, we knew he would be suitably 
chastened. 
 
 
The author at the Console of TX-2 
 
I mentioned before that somehow certain people stood 
out from the crowd. One of these was a colorful fellow by 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
85 
the name of Tom Stockebrand who worked in the TX-2 
group. Stocky was the chap who had been demonstrating 
MTC’s ability to play music years before. At about this time 
I heard the story of his encounter with IBM. It bears 
repeating not only because it reveals Stocky’s delightfully 
whimsical character, but because it emphasizes the 
enormous divide between the academic and the commercial 
worlds. 
It seems that Stocky had been hired by Lincoln to work 
on the tape drives that were part of the XD-1. These were 
the first of the big vertical units with the dual vacuum 
columns that allowed a small section of the tape over the 
read/write heads to be moved quickly without having to 
jerk the big tape reels themselves into motion so abruptly. 
Later, for many years, these tape drives became such an 
icon for a computer that whenever there was a television 
news story involving a computer, one of these units would 
be flashed on the screen as though it were “The Computer.” 
Stocky had been sent down from Lincoln to the IBM 
plant near Poughkeepsie where these drives were being 
manufactured. He was to work for a while on the 
production line and thereby learn about the drives from the 
bottom up. In those days, IBM was extremely straight-laced. 
You may think this is still true today, but things have 
relaxed substantially since those times. Tom Watson was a 
no-nonsense leader who wanted his employees if not to 
salute, at least to stand up straight, wear white shirts with 
coats and ties, sing the company song at the company 
picnic, etc. Into this starchy company strode Stocky who 
wore dirty fatigues, was often shoeless, and was his own 
man, not T.J. Watson’s. 
Stocky went to work on the production line in 
Poughkeepsie, and soon eyebrows began to raise. Finally 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
86 
one of his co-workers, unable to stand it, approached and 
said, “Tom, how is it that some days you come in here 
looking like a bum and smelling like Limburger, whereas 
other days you come in looking quite spiffy?” Stocky, in his 
usual forthright manner, answered that some days he woke 
up feeling bad; it would be raining and miserable and he’d 
just grab whatever clothes came to hand and come to work. 
On other days the sun would be shining, the birds would be 
singing, he’d feel like a million dollars, and so he would get 
all spruced up. The questioner’s jaw dropped; clearly such 
whimsy was beyond comprehension, probably illegal, 
certainly immoral, and absolutely not in the IBM book. 
Meanwhile Stocky, warming to his subject, said “You know, 
some days I get up feeling so good, I put on my Tux.” As 
the man’s eyes bulged, Stocky realized what he’d 
committed himself to. 
A few days later he strode in clad in tails and top hat. 
All morning he worked on the line. Not a word was said. At 
noon, down the aisle came his boss, his boss’ boss, and the 
plant manager. They invited him into the front office, and 
(here’s the surprise) instead of giving him a lecture, they 
offered him a job—at double his salary, whatever it might 
be. So white shirts were OK for the plebs, but at least some 
at IBM apparently understood how important spunk and 
originality were. Stocky, of course, turned them down. 
Now he was working in the TX-2 group on the design 
of a man-killer tape unit so enormous that it was hoped one 
would never again have to change tape reels. Of course one 
would have to be able to search such a large space at great 
speed and to permit this, motors of substantial horsepower 
were involved. In the course of checkout, occasionally a 
tape would fail to stop, and when the end of the tape came 
off the take-up reel at Mach 2, the sound that it made was 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
87 
deafening; it also turned the computer room into a lively 
place where one would sometimes find oneself wading 
around in snippets of tape. 
Up to this point I had been doing only programming, 
but I now began to drift gradually into hardware design. 
My initial assignment in the new group was to write a 
simulation program on TX-2, this time mimicking 
something altogether different from ocean sounds—namely 
another computer, the FX-1. For some time the search had 
been on for new memory technology that would allow 
faster computers to be built. Magnetic cores were reliable 
and had the considerable advantage that they retained their 
information even when power was switched off. But it took 
a while (we’re talking microseconds) to switch their 
magnetic field from one direction to the other and that 
limited how fast you could cycle the memory, which in turn 
limited how fast you could run the overall machine. A 
promising new technique, using thin magnetic films, had 
been developed at Lincoln and a computer was to be built 
that would incorporate a thin-film memory in order to try it 
out. The machine was known as FX-1 and would take some 
time to build. Meanwhile, in order to allow programs to be 
written, debugged, and ready to go when the machine 
started working, I was to construct a simulated version of 
FX-1 within TX-2 on which these programs could be 
checked out. The simulation would also help to verify the 
overall logic design of FX-1. 
A simulation of this sort does much the same thing an 
actor does when he takes on the rôle of a character in a play 
or a movie. The actor, to the best of his ability, takes on the 
persona of the character he is representing. In this case, I 
was to write a program for TX-2 that would make it behave 
like some other machine, namely FX-1. I was only supposed 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
88 
to simulate the actions of the machine (its instructions) not 
the 
underlying 
circuits. 
The 
actor’s 
abilities 
must 
encompass all of the abilities of his character; for example if 
the character is to speak French, then the actor must be able 
to speak French convincingly as well. (In movies it is 
sometimes possible to fake certain abilities, such as, for 
example, facility in playing the piano, but the audience is 
supposed to believe that the actor is performing the action.) 
Similarly, the machine on which the simulation was to run 
(TX-2) had to be able to perform all of the steps that the 
simulated machine (FX-1) could perform. To implement 
some FX-1 steps would require several, sometimes many, 
TX-2 instructions, but that was OK because it wasn’t 
necessary that the simulated FX-1 run especially fast. 
Finally, in order for an actor to portray his character 
convincingly, he must understand the character thoroughly 
in order to understand how to represent him under all 
circumstances. In order to do this job, I needed to 
understand in some detail how the logic of FX-1 worked. 
I had never looked at a machine so closely before. Two 
Johns, John Frankovich and John Laynor, were my mentors. 
They explained to me how FX-1 was meant to work. We sat 
for several days in front of a blackboard and gradually I 
pieced together an image of the machine. I then spent some 
time designing the program and figuring out how to fit my 
simulated FX-1 inside the structure of TX-2. Then I wrote 
the program. Fortunately I’d been prepared for my first 
night’s run; I knew about the horn and had heard it. But I 
was somewhat taken aback when I overheard Frankovich 
asking someone, “Is that fire-extinguisher still in there by 
the printer?” 
Ah yes, TX-2’s printer. It was one of the very first-ever 
xerographic printers. It was a monstrous machine, cobbled 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
89 
together from pieces of a couple of very early Xerox copiers. 
It painted images on a drum by shining a CRT beam 
through a mask that defined a specific set of characters.17  It 
was fully programmable, too fully perhaps. The paper it 
used came on a large continuous roll six or seven inches 
wide, and it was up to the user, employing a set of giant 
shears hanging nearby, to chop it into suitable pages 
(programs marked the page boundaries so you would 
know where to cut) as it emerged from the printer. John’s 
inquiry about the fire-extinguisher stemmed from the fact 
that a program bug could cause the paper to travel too 
slowly (or even, God forbid, stall) in the printer’s heater 
station with potentially catastrophic consequences. The 
paper should be warm as it emerged, but not brown and 
hot—and certainly not flaming. As this was the first TX-2 
program I’d written, and as it was going to drive the 
printer, John had reason to be concerned. He showed me 
where the fire extinguisher was. 
But in the event, things actually went swimmingly. I 
managed to avoid setting the place on fire, and one night 
not too much later, the program began working. I’d checked 
out my simulated console and screen (which used a subset 
of TX-2’s switches and a piece of the TX-2 screen as FX-1’s 
switches and screen) and all of the FX-1 instructions, and 
everything appeared to work properly. Even though it was 
eleven o’clock at night, I called Wes at home to announce 
                                                 
17 After it was built, someone invited Xerox representatives to see it and 
pointed out that it would make an excellent product.  They said “Very 
interesting!” then departed and were never heard from again. In that same 
era, Xerox was being lauded in the financial community as one of the best 
managed companies in the world. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
90 
victory. To my astonishment, instead of the “Good show” 
or whatever I’d expected, he said, “I’ll be right in. What 
kind of coffee do you drink?” He arrived shortly with a 
giant thermos of fresh coffee and as I watched, wide-eyed, 
he set about driving my FX-1 through the night—writing 
and running programs, flipping switches and entering 
instructions at blinding speed, as though he’d been 
programming it for years. Before I knew it, patterns were 
flashing on the screen—my screen. I was thrilled. In all the 
time I’d been building it, writing the simulation program 
and verifying the individual FX-1 operations, I hadn’t 
stopped to consider actually writing programs for it. So this 
was the first time it had really been used and, not 
surprisingly, I was delighted to see it respond. I was also 
thrilled to have a boss who behaved as this one did. We 
must have been there until three in the morning, playing 
with our new toy. It was a memorable night for me and 
formed the first layer of cement in a friendship that has 
continued to this day. 
My next job was to help connect an IBM tape drive to 
TX-2. A stodgy old IBM tape unit was anathema in that 
free-wheeling environment, but it needed to be done; 
someone important wanted to transfer data between TX-2 
and the IBM machine out back—perhaps that guy Chomsky 
again for all I knew. We fell to with a will. Chi Sun Lin, a 
delightful colleague, would design and build the hardware 
interface while I was to do the programming. In a design 
such as this, the trick is to build a minimal amount of 
hardware, just enough so that when manipulated by the 
software, everything that needs to happen can be made to 
happen—and fast enough. This is not because hardware 
designers are inherently lazy; it’s because that way there’s 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
91 
less to build and to break and because software is far easier 
than hardware to rearrange in order to get things right. 
Lin was very clever at pushing as much of the design as 
possible into the software, and for the first time I found 
myself writing a program that reached into and 
manipulated special hardware at a very low level. It was up 
to the program to run the tape forward and backward, time 
out the legislated gaps, and write or read the data to or 
from the tape at the appropriate rates. My prior experience 
with reading and writing information on tape was with 
commands that transferred blocks of data one direction or 
the other. The program I was now writing performed some 
of the micro-operations that were involved in such block 
transfers. I watched Lin operate an oscilloscope, probing the 
hardware as the program ran and pointing out when, and 
in what way, the program was doing the right or the wrong 
things. We finally got everything working so that we were 
able to write and then read back information, but we also 
had to be sure that the tapes we were making were in a 
format compatible with the IBM 709 computer. As a 
preliminary verification we wrote a record on the tape and 
then dipped the section we’d written into a volatile solution 
containing extremely fine iron filings. In solution, the filings 
were free to move about on the surface of the tape and they 
hauled themselves over to the areas that had been 
magnetized when we wrote the tape. Then the liquid 
evaporated, leaving the filings sitting on the tape. Peering 
through a magnifying glass we could actually see what we 
had written—honest to God visible bits—and in the right 
place as well. Suddenly I felt I had one toe in the hardware 
world. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
92 
Chapter 8 
 
 
The Big Dealers vs. the Little Dealers.  We 
poise for a leap 
 
ot long after our IBM-compatible tape unit began 
working, Wes asked me to poke around Lincoln, looking for 
specialized hardware that people had built for various 
projects—projects that might have utilized, and benefited 
from the flexibility of, a small computer, had a cheap 
enough one been available. Given that I had only the 
vaguest idea of what he had in mind, it’s perhaps not 
surprising that I found only one or two potential 
applications. Nonetheless it soon became evident that a new 
computer was in the works. Not just any old new computer, 
but an altogether different sort—one that would make a 
statement about what computers of the future should be 
like, how they should feel and be viewed and used. The 
statement was heretical; it crossed swords with prevailing 
opinion within the computer research community in what 
amounted to a religious war. Like the cold war, this one 
never developed into open hostilities, but it nonetheless 
manifested two profoundly opposed philosophies, and 
lasted for many years. It’s important to note that this debate 
took place within the comparatively narrow confines of the 
university and government-funded research community. 
The wider computer community, represented by industry, 
persisted in believing that batch-processing was the only 
sensible way to do business and that both factions within 
N 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
93 
what might be called the alternative research community 
were pursuing unrealistic approaches. 
Almost everyone within this alternative research 
community agreed that the batch-processing form of 
sharing was impossibly cumbersome and that some 
improved form of interactive use must be found. But 
beyond that basic agreement, opinion diverged markedly. 
On one side were the “Big Dealers,” those who believed 
that for the foreseeable future useful machines would 
continue to be extremely expensive to build and maintain, 
and that one therefore needed to find ways of sharing them 
more efficiently. The Big Dealers observed that when a 
person interacted with a computer, the computer often 
spent a large fraction of its time waiting for the person to do 
the next thing—strike the next key, whatever. Aha! they 
said, that means that the computer should be able to serve a 
number of people at (approximately) the same time. While 
one user is scratching his head or raising his finger to strike 
a key, the computer should be able to serve the needs of 
others. 
The Big Dealers’ solution was therefore to divide up the 
machine’s cycles in such a way that many users, sitting at 
individual terminals remotely connected to it, could use it 
at essentially the same time. Of course the users weren’t 
actually using the machine truly simultaneously, because 
these computers could really do only one thing at a time. 
However, the idea was that it could switch its attention 
between users so rapidly that each user would have the 
illusion of having the entire machine to himself. This 
approach came to be called “Time-Sharing.” 
Before proceeding I need to distinguish carefully 
between two very different kinds of sharing. Indeed 
machines often serve multiple purposes “simultaneously.” 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
94 
In fact the machine on which I am presently typing is a 
prime example—it is shared by numerous programs which 
perform a variety of different functions. Although only one 
is operating at a time, several are in the memory and ready 
to go if I ask for them. But there is a difference between 
such cooperative sharing and competitive sharing that occurs 
in a Time Sharing system. Since I am the only person using 
this machine, for the most part I am not competing with 
anyone or anything.18 However, in a Time Sharing system 
multiple users are competing for computing resources and 
under those circumstances, what one person does can 
influence the access of another. I will reserve the capitalized 
term Time Sharing, for this specific kind of use between 
individuals at terminals accessing a central machine and 
competing for its computing horsepower. 
A crucial question was whether a way could be found 
to avoid making users at the terminals wait for the 
computer’s attention. Of course there was no way to 
anticipate when each user would require servicing, so time 
was sliced into very tiny segments and complex 
mechanisms were devised to dole out access to the needy. It 
was vital to keep down the overhead (in machine cycles) of 
managing the sharing, in order to give the users service that 
was sufficiently fast to maintain the illusion that each had 
the sole attention of the entire machine. Jobs that required 
lots of computing could be handled in the cracks, between 
the more urgent business of servicing users sitting at 
                                                 
18 Occasionally I ask the machine to perform a task that requires the full 
attention of the machine in which case it's taken out of my hands while 
that task is performed. But that is under my control—and I can even 
change my mind and cancel the operation if  I become impatient. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
95 
terminals. Such jobs would thus take many times longer to 
complete in this piecemeal fashion, but who cared? 
Occasionally a user at a terminal might do something that 
triggered the need for extensive computing, but most users, 
it was presumed, needed very little of the computer’s 
attention most of the time. 
The possibility of some such a form of shared use had 
been discussed from the mid-fifties onward. I remembered 
such discussions almost from the time I first arrived at 
Lincoln. But John McCarthy, at MIT, was the first to 
document the concept of general purpose Time Sharing in a 
memo he wrote on January 1, 1959.  That note bounced 
around MIT and resulted in two demonstration projects 
being undertaken, one at MIT under Prof. Fernando 
Corbato and another at BBN under McCarthy and Ed 
Fredkin on BBN’s PDP-1 (the original copy of DEC’s first 
full-scale computer based heavily on the designers’ 
experience with MTC, TX-0, and TX-2). Both systems 
became operational in the summer of 1962. Not long 
thereafter almost the entire computer research community 
commenced a headlong rush down the Time Sharing path, 
and for many years thereafter Time Sharing, and the search 
for better ways to implement it, dominated research in 
computer system architecture within the ARPA community. 
Sizeable amounts of money, manpower, and ingenuity were 
expended on this approach over the course of many years. 
In these systems, the older punched-card, batch-
processing gave way to the use of teletype-style terminals 
connecting individual users to the central machine. Using 
these devices, communication between user and computer 
took place via lines of text typed back and forth. This form 
of interaction required the user to learn the arcane language 
required to communicate with the computer, but since at 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
96 
that stage it was still a limited cognoscenti who were using 
machines anyway, the impediment of language was 
accepted by most users. Although looking back, these 
devices and this sort of interaction seem unbelievably 
cumbersome, they nonetheless provided a primitive form of 
“interactive” use. Access to the machine was much more 
direct than anything that had previously been experienced 
except by the handful of people who had used the MIT 
machines, Whirlwind, TX-2, etc. Eventually somewhat 
faster, sleeker versions of terminals appeared, including the 
so-called “glass teletype” in which the text appeared on a 
screen rather than on a roll of paper. But virtually all shared 
the same fundamental serial text style of communication. 
And in fact that was not too badly matched to the limited 
computing power available to the individual users of a 
Time Shared system. 
A very different view was held by a tiny community of 
“Small Dealers” led by Wes Clark, who felt that real-time, 
interactive use via a display screen was crucial and that 
Time-Sharing would never be able to provide such 
capability. Of course fast displays had existed on dedicated 
machines (Whirlwind, MTC, TX-0, TX-2, etc.) since early 
days, and these displays had been an integral part of the 
computer itself. The terminals for Time Sharing systems lay 
distant from the computer and were connected to it by low-
speed telephone lines that could handle the rates of 
typewriter-like devices but not the far higher rates required 
to service display screens. Nor could early Time Sharing 
systems themselves provide the kind of prompt, high-speed 
service required by multiple users working with display 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
97 
screens.19 In fact, the delays and uncertainties of timing in 
Time Sharing systems mitigated against real-time use of 
any sort except at extremely slow rates. There were some 
attempts to circumvent these limitations, but essentially 
time-sharing was anathema to real-time computing at 
anything other than very slow rates. 
Instead, Clark argued that a computer shouldn’t have 
to be such an awesome affair, that it should be possible to 
build a computer that could be used by a single individual, 
moved from place to place as required, and turned off at 
night with a clear conscience, not so differently from other 
pieces of laboratory equipment. Such a machine should be 
able to provide interactive service via a display screen to an 
individual user. The vision was thus of a truly personal 
computer, not merely the illusion of one as promised by 
Time Sharing. Such a vision seemed so implausible at the 
time, and was so contrary to received wisdom, that the only 
way to make any headway in promoting it would be to put 
together a demonstration prototype, and that was precisely 
what Clark was quietly preparing to do. In sending me 
around the lab, he was discretely looking for potential 
clients for such a machine. 
In the days before integrated microcircuits, trying to 
build a “personal computer” was a daunting enterprise and 
required faith that ultimately the size and cost of hardware 
would shrink dramatically. It was clear that for the time 
being such a computer would be far less powerful than the 
existing big machines and would be too expensive for an 
                                                 
19 Today a substantial fraction of the “horsepower” of personal computers 
is dedicated to making them more accessible to the user through the 
graphical user interface that everyone now takes for granted. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
98 
individual to purchase. The trick would therefore be to 
build a reasonable approximation, keeping the cost as low 
as possible while still demonstrating all of the important 
features (albeit in primitive form) that might someday 
constitute such a device. The challenge was to show that 
many problems could be handled by a small computer if it 
embodied just the right array of features. Over the ensuing 
few years, a comparatively modest band of workers, led by 
Clark, would devote themselves to constructing such a 
computer to be used initially by workers in biomedical 
research applications whose needs provided much of the 
initial impetus for the design. I was fortunate to be a 
member of that troupe. 
The war between these two opposing views is one that 
today is largely forgotten, having been rendered obsolete by 
the later development of microcircuits that ultimately 
allowed the vision of the Small Dealers to flourish. The 
Time Sharing systems of those years, like other dinosaurs, 
are now a thing of the past, but for many years they 
dominated the research computing scene. Clark, as a 
member of a 1961 MIT Long Range Study Committee, 
differed with virtually the entire rest of that committee, 
which enthusiastically embraced Time Sharing as the 
solution to the Institute’s computing problems. Time 
Sharing was the bandwagon and the Small Dealers were 
decidedly beyond the pale. A small number of us, however, 
were persuaded by the force of Clark’s conviction, and 
some, in particular Charlie Molnar whom we’ll meet 
shortly, felt that they were able to see a possible way 
through the maze of technical obstacles. 
Although in the long run the Small Dealers’ image has 
come to dominate in that the vast majority of people sitting 
in front of machines today are utilizing individual personal 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
99 
computers, nonetheless virtually all machines (from 
personal computers to large servers of various types) are 
today “time-shared” in that multiple things are going on at 
the “same time.” During the years of Time Sharing 
dominance, a large amount of software development took 
place and a generation of proficient programmers grew up, 
honed their skills, and developed important understanding 
using Time Shared machines. These systems allowed 
programmers to develop many of the machine-utilization 
tools that everyone depends on and takes for granted today. 
Two important examples are the multiprocessing, which 
allows you to work “at the same time” with a number of 
different programs (word-processing, file-management, 
email, spread-sheets, etc.), and virtual memory which 
permits programs to expand beyond the limits of the 
(expensive) central memory by sloshing in and out of the 
much larger and cheaper hard disk memory. In addition, 
Time Sharing enabled exploration of higher-level languages 
and other software development tools, as well as 
development of many of the instincts and insights that 
characterize personal interaction with a machine. 
Most of these things would not have been feasible on 
the early small machines as they required the power and 
capacity of the larger machines. Of course even on the 
larger machines, the speed of the interaction was limited by 
the fact that they were far slower than today’s computers, 
especially given that their attention was spread among so 
many users. The issue of speed is far more important than it 
may seem because interactive usage simply becomes 
unworkable if the machine’s response is too slow. If the 
natural rhythms of a human being are too heavily 
compromised by a tool, the net effect is destructive rather 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
100 
than constructive. Try running at one step every second or 
watching a movie run at one-tenth speed. 
But there are many reasons why personal computers 
have replaced Time Shared use. The price is right and that 
means not only that individuals can afford to purchase 
them, 
but 
that 
within 
corporations 
bureaucratic 
involvement is minimal. A second important reason is 
territoriality—it’s mine, and I don’t have to compete with 
anyone else for its use. As compared with Time Sharing 
systems, it provides uniform response time that doesn’t 
vary depending on what others are doing. And although 
we’re all victims of indifferent software, at least with a 
personal machine we aren’t subject in addition to the 
whims of system wizards and administrators. 
As 
noted 
earlier, 
most 
advances 
in 
computer 
development have consisted simply in taking the next step 
forward. Often these steps follow more or less obviously 
from what has gone before. Occasionally, however, 
someone takes a more dramatic leap based on insights that, 
in retrospect, appear almost prescient. We were about to 
experience such a leap of faith and hope. In this instance it 
involved relatively few elements that in themselves were 
dramatically new. Rather, it consisted of bringing together, 
into a single machine, features that in combination 
constituted a new kind of entity, the forerunner of what 
would one day turn into the personal computer that has 
today become so ubiquitous. In fact the machine that arose 
is generally recognized as the world’s first personal 
computer. 
This was no accident. Clark had been one of the earliest, 
and continued to be the most ardent, advocate of personal 
computers throughout the era during which batch 
processing 
and 
Time 
Sharing 
dominated 
almost 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
101 
everywhere, including practically the entire MIT computing 
community. What was about to happen involved putting 
one’s money where one’s mouth was—nothing less than an 
effort to manifest an improbable vision in concrete terms—
and in the face of strongly opposed mainstream opinion. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
102 
Chapter 9 
 
 
The birth of the LINC. I become a midwife 
and leave Lincoln 
 
n the summer of 1957 a young man by the name of 
Charlie Molnar came to work in the TX-2 group. In the fall 
he commenced graduate studies under Prof. Walter 
Rosenblith20  at the Communications Biophysics Lab at MIT 
and continued using TX-2 for his thesis work. There had 
already been interaction between some members of the TX-
2 group (notably Clark, Farley, and Papian) and people 
doing neurophysiological research down at the main 
campus of MIT. Wes’ interest in neurophysiology had been 
evident in the lecture he’d given several years before in 
Pittsburgh, and one day, overhearing a conversation 
between him and Jack Rafael (developer of the thin-film 
memory), I was delighted to discover that, like me, Wes 
was hoping to find a way to do something with computers 
in a totally different, non-military arena. 
Neurophysiological research up to that time had been 
bedeviled by the lack of suitable laboratory equipment. The 
“dry” sciences—especially physics following the atom 
bomb—did considerably better in acquiring necessary 
research tools (big atom-smashers, for example). But the 
“wet” sciences got the dregs. The technological and 
                                                 
20 Rosenblith later became Provost of MIT and, subsequently, Foreign 
Secretary of the National Academy of Science. 
I
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
103 
logistical barriers that separated experimental work from 
the processing and analysis of data limited the progress of 
research. There was no way that data could be processed as 
an experiment proceeded in order to influence the course of 
the experiment. Instead researchers had to wait for the 
results, which, in the case of experiments with animals, 
invariably meant starting over with a different animal with 
no way to know whether the electrodes were in exactly the 
same place as before, etc. 
In 
order 
to 
facilitate 
the 
processing 
of 
neurophysiological data, special equipment was designed 
and built for particular purposes—such as the averaging of 
response signals, for example, in order to increase the 
signal-to-noise ratio.21 But such special equipment was, by 
definition, limited to a particular kind of data processing. 
What was needed instead was a much more general 
purpose machine, one that could be adapted through 
suitable programming to diverse kinds of data processing. 
Such a machine should be able to take in signals directly in 
analog form, convert them to digital form, subject them to 
whatever kinds of processing the researcher wanted under 
control of parameters that the researcher might wish to 
vary, and finally display results—all in real time. Batch-
processing and Time Sharing were anathema to such use. 
The researcher needed sole access to the machine for 
extended periods. In addition, the machine needed to be 
                                                 
21 Clark had designed a machine called the Average Response Computer 
(ARC) for this purpose. Individual responses were so noisy that they could 
not be seen. But by summing a sequence of responses, the noise, being 
random, tended to be self canceling, whereas the actual response signals, 
always occurring at the same time, added together and thus became visible 
above the noise. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
104 
small enough to live comfortably within the confines of a 
laboratory environment. Ideally such a machine should be 
viewed as just another piece of laboratory equipment that 
could be at the user’s elbow during the course of an 
experiment, to be turned on and off as needed. No such 
machine existed and the size and cost of most computers 
rendered such thoughts essentially fantasy. Nonetheless, 
the desire for such processing provided strong motivation 
to a computer designer such as Clark who had contact with 
the needs of neurophysiological researchers. 
As Wes ruminated about these matters, Charlie’s 
studies were interrupted by family illness, causing his 
student deferment to be canceled. (We were between wars, 
but the draft was still in force.) He was called to active duty, 
but fortunately he was assigned to the Air Force’s nearby 
Hanscom field and, although his thesis work was put on 
hold, he began discussions with Clark about the possibility 
of designing a computer specifically around the needs of 
neurophysiological 
researchers. 
Thus 
commenced 
a 
friendship and alliance between the two that would grow 
over ensuing years into the closest collegial partnership 
either was to know. Although Charlie had been working 
with TX-2 for some time, it was only at this point that I 
began to be peripherally aware of the presence in the lab of 
a trim young man clad in Air Force uniform. 
Today, thanks to the great proliferation of computers, 
the design of most machines is constrained by the need for 
compatibility with existing programs and methods of use. 
But in the early sixties things were still much more in flux 
and style had by no means settled down. The initial stages 
of design of a new computer were therefore the hardest to 
understand because the overall conception, the recognition 
of a hole waiting to be filled, required in many ways the 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
105 
keenest insight, the purest invention. When the developers 
of the first xerographic copying machine put their toe in the 
water with a market survey, they were told that there was 
no need for such a thing—people didn’t want to do that 
much copying. It took imagination and conviction to defy 
this now laughable analysis. Similarly, during the middle-
ages, when a wide variety of currents and cross-currents 
swept back and forth across the conceptual space as a host 
of now long-forgotten architectural experiments took place, 
it took especially keen insight to decide that the thing to do 
was to try to build a personal computer. 
As the concept for a new kind of computer begins to 
firm up, as the niche it is to fill becomes more clearly 
defined, a process of distillation commences in which 
ensuing design becomes a matter of slowly refining the 
ideas in ever greater detail. The first steps define the broad 
architecture of the machine and delineate how it will be 
perceived by the user. 
When Wes asked me to tour the lab looking for possible 
applications that would help to justify such a machine’s 
sponsorship, I now believe that my search was a post hoc 
exercise. He already knew, generally, what he was about. 
As time passed those of us working with him came to rely 
on his instinct and judgment—too much perhaps. Many 
months later I came into his office one day to find him 
looking worried and staring abstractly into space. When I 
asked what was the matter, he said, with some agony in his 
voice “Charlie thinks I know what I’m doing!” I didn’t dare 
tell him that the rest of us were suffering from the same 
delusion. 
That spring (1961) Wes disappeared from the lab for an 
extended period. When he returned he brought with him 
notebooks containing a preliminary design for a new small 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
106 
computer. A number of us gathered around to listen as he 
laid out the prospective design. We took notes furiously. 
Then he disappeared once more, leaving us to try to 
remember, ponder, and critique what he’d done, and to 
figure out how to program such a beast. This latter task fell 
to me and a newcomer named Mary Allen Wilkes, a 
philosophy major from Wellesley who had recently joined 
the group. Together we tried to sort out what Wes had said 
and to understand how his new brainchild worked—well 
enough to be able to write some trial programs and see how 
it felt. 
In the weeks that followed, Wes would reappear 
periodically to accept our insights, answer questions, and 
and then quietly announce that the design had changed—
here was the new version. Undaunted, we’d go back to our 
deliberations, readjust our thinking and start over. Fairly 
quickly the process converged and a solid design began to 
emerge and acquired a name—the α-Linc. It was Wes’ 
design; we were mere hangers-on, and I use the term 
advisedly. I wasn’t used to a machine design that constantly 
shifted under my feet, and I hung on for dear life. 
Gradually the description of the machine stabilized and 
started to be reduced to logic diagrams. I’d had no direct 
experience with logic diagrams, but Wes felt strongly that 
everyone should learn as much as possible about the entire 
process; there was to be no escaping into a narrow 
specialty. He made it easy for us novices by starting with 
simple pieces of hardware logic and showing us how they 
were put together to form bigger, more complex devices. A 
gentler, more encouraging teacher would be hard to find. I 
began designing small exercise devices (not unlike the 
process I’d gone through several years before when I was 
first learning to write programs). Gradually I began 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
107 
following the design of the machine as it progressed, 
learning new things every day. 
Wes decided to build the machine out of the new logic 
modules that DEC was now marketing—the very same 
Digital Equipment Corp. that Ken Olsen, Harlan Anderson, 
Dick Best, et al. had departed from Lincoln to form not long 
before. In principle, these modules could be treated as black 
boxes that performed various logic functions and could be 
connected together following a few simple rules; but that 
principle was only approximately true, and there was more 
to learn here than with programming. A programmer was 
provided with a well-defined set of instructions whose 
definitions had hard edges. If an instruction didn’t work as 
advertised, the machine was broken by definition and you 
called in the hardware experts. With logic design, even with 
DEC’s comparatively well-behaved, well-defined black 
boxes, the “analog” world of electronics, with all of its 
complexity, was lurking just below the surface to rise up 
and bite you in some mysterious way if you unwittingly 
overstepped some bound. 
It was at this stage that Charlie began to emerge from 
the shadows and forcibly entered my consciousness for the 
first time. Although as an Air Force officer he was still only 
peripherally involved officially, he was nonetheless rapidly 
emerging as the co-star of the project and was starting to 
make major contributions to the design. In fact, although I 
came to realize it only later, he had been doing so for some 
time. As Wes described it later, Charlie had an intimate 
relationship with every electron in the known universe. He 
not only had serious electrical engineering credentials, but 
superb taste and judgment. He was the most thorough and 
careful engineer I was ever to come across. Thus when 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
108 
important engineering decisions needed to be made, Wes 
turned naturally to him. 
But Charlie was also just plain fun to work with. He 
had an irrepressible sense of humor and unmatched skill at 
weaving it into every aspect of technical work. He seemed 
to view engineering as an enormous joke that, if properly 
done, could be played on the the Gods who give grief to 
engineers. He was also a titillating and natural teacher who 
employed the Socratic method everywhere. Those of us 
who were effectively his students, quickly adopted his 
“Don’t Trust Nobody” dictum. 
Another colorful member of our “gang” was Tom 
Stockebrand who, as I’ve indicated earlier, had prior 
experience with several different kinds of magnetic tape 
units. Wes wanted a pair of small “snapshot” tape units to 
be a standard part of the α-Linc. These would be a 
significant 
innovation, 
not 
only 
technologically but 
logistically. They were the forerunner of later diskettes and 
floppies in that they provided the user for the first time 
with small, removable devices for storing one’s own 
programs and data—something far more compact than the 
cumbersome card decks of commercial machines. Wes had 
devised a clever method by which pre-numbered blocks of 
information on the tape could be located, read, and written. 
I was given the job of figuring out how to pre-mark the 
tapes with the information necessary to control the tape 
movement and locate the blocks. Greater faith, I thought, 
hath no man than he who assigns such a sticky bit to a 
novice like me. Stocky was to design the physical tape units 
themselves—tape heads, belts, reels, motors, etc., and 
associated mechanics and electronics. We began working 
together closely as I started to understand how the tape 
control logic would work. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
109 
 
 
The Original LINC Crew 
 
Wes and Charlie continued to oversee what we were 
doing. At one juncture, as we were discussing a bit of my 
design, it became obvious that although it worked properly, 
I had misunderstood some crucial fact. I defended myself, 
pointing out that after all, my design did work. Whereupon 
Wes drew himself up and announced that “In this business 
it’s not sufficient to be right; you’ve got to be right for the 
right reasons.” It has sometimes seemed to me that this 
statement defines a nice demarcation between the 
engineering and the scientific mind-sets. 
As we moved into winter (1961-62), the actual machine 
began to take shape. I was about to discover further 
differences 
between 
constructing 
a 
machine 
and 
programming one. In programming, the design and coding 
were pretty much the entire job (aside from uncovering and 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
110 
correcting mistakes). The job of converting one’s code into a 
running program was but the work of a few minutes with 
the aid of an assembly program, compiler, or whatever. Not 
so with hardware. Once the logic design was complete on 
paper, the job was only just barely begun. The ensuing 
process of transforming the design into an actual physical 
machine ready to be debugged, was a major piece of work. 
For instance, you had to decide where each of the various 
logical pieces would be located physically within the 
machine, and if you did a bad job of laying that out, the 
wires that connected things together could become 
nightmarishly messy. In order to minimize such “steel 
wool,” things that required lots of interconnections needed 
to be located as close as possible to one another in an 
orderly way. (In designing later, far faster machines, the 
lengths of wires would become critical in determining the 
speed of the machine because even at the speed of light, the 
length of time it takes signals to travel along the wires can 
become significant. These days, the very operability of the 
machine depends on how well the wiring is laid out. In the 
comparatively sluggish α-Linc, it was more a matter of 
neatness and order.) 
Once all of the modules had been assigned to specific 
locations within the machine, wiring lists needed to be 
prepared that would be used by technicians to install the 
thousands of wires, in this case soldering each one in place 
in turn. As the years progressed, a wide variety of 
techniques for wiring machines have been tried and 
discarded as, one after another, new techniques replaced 
them. This process has been driven by the ever-increasing 
compaction of logic elements into more and more dense 
packages. The density of packing, the level of “integration,” 
has increased extraordinarily rapidly until today the 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
111 
number of external connections (i.e., those between 
packages) represent only an infinitesimal fraction of the 
total inter-connectivity. Virtually all of the wiring of earlier 
machines has been replaced in today’s computers by fine 
traces within the individual integrated circuits themselves. 
The compression of many circuits onto a single chip has 
eliminated the need for the numerous wires and cables and 
connectors that joined together the various parts of earlier 
machines. 
Somehow, as those things will, a schedule had evolved, 
along with a target date for a demonstration of the working 
machine to all of Lincoln. Early one foggy morning, having 
worked throughout the night, Stocky and I were able, for 
the first time, to write and read blocks of information on the 
prototype tape units. As the rising sun struggled to pierce 
the mists, we celebrated our achievement by climbing a 
nearby radar tower to peer into the fog. Despite the gray 
weather, we were exultant; we happily ate breakfast while 
we waited for the others to arrive and share our excitement. 
For months afterwards I was to look down at my feet and 
see a splotch of bright orange paint that had transferred 
itself from the antenna ladder onto one of my shoes as we 
clambered up. It was a mark I secretly treasured. 
Miraculously everything came together on schedule 
and in March of 1962 the demonstration went off without a 
hitch. The final machine consisted of four boxes: a control 
panel with lights and switches for manipulating the 
machine; a box containing a small (3” x 5”) display and 
analog knobs that could be used to vary parameters in a 
program; a box that contained plugs for connecting the 
machine to external devices, both analog and digital; and 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
112 
finally our precious dual tape unit.22 These sat together on a 
desk and were connected by cables to a larger box, 
variously described as refrigerator-sized or coffin-sized, 
containing the power supplies, logic, and associated 
electronics that made the whole show go. We pushed this 
part as far out of sight as we could, thereby suggesting that 
it would someday disappear altogether. Few of us 
anticipated that most of the other boxes would also 
disappear and that the whole shebang would one day fit 
into something you could tote around as easily as a 
notebook. 
 
 
Wes Clark Demonstrating the LINC at Lincoln Lab 
 
                                                 
22 This describes what, after a few minor modifications, ultimately became 
a “Classic LINC.” The prototype initially demonstrated at Lincoln Lab 
differed slightly in detail. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
113 
Almost immediately the machine went on the road to 
Washington, where first it was demonstrated to the 
National Academy of Sciences and then in labs at the 
National Institutes of Health (NIH). These demonstrations 
were extremely successful and over the coming months 
plans emerged for an enlarged program in biomedical 
computing under NIH support. Things looked extremely 
promising early in 1962, but then we hit an unexpected 
snag. Lincoln management, accustomed to the more 
generous overhead allowances of its military funders, was 
unwilling to deal with a new set of sponsors. Following this 
unfortunate revelation, at our weekly meeting Wes 
announced to a stunned gathering that he would be leaving 
Lincoln Laboratory—and that, by the way the α-Linc 
(which everyone had naturally assumed stood for Lincoln) 
was henceforth to be the LINC—the Laboratory INstrument 
Computer. 
Aside from their superb technical abilities, the human 
qualities of Wes and Charlie stand out as utterly unique in 
my experience—I could not imagine working with a finer 
group of people. After the meeting I went for a walk with 
Wes and assured him that whatever home could be found 
for the LINC would suit me fine; we soon learned that most 
of the others in the group felt similarly. Stocky, however, 
opted to join DEC, taking with him the design of the tape 
system which he and others redesigned and turned into the 
DEC tapes that would serve as the principal program 
input/output mechanism on forthcoming DEC machines23. 
                                                 
23 The idea of small, portable snapshot devices, originally represented by 
LINC tapes, would ultimately metamorphose into today's floppies, 
diskettes, etc. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
114 
When I saw Stocky a few years later he was unrecognizable. 
Heretofore he had been at best a casual dresser. (I retain an 
image of him hopping around on one foot in the lab, busily 
massaging the other foot as he argued some engineering 
question with Charlie. He’d been barefoot and had come a 
cropper on a raised electric plug fixture.) Now he was 
wearing a suit and showing surprising interest in business 
matters. It seemed out of character, but I needn’t have 
worried. Before we leave Stocky for good, I must punctuate 
his departure with a story from more recent times when I 
looked him up a few years ago in semi-retirement in 
Albuquerque. 
Like many inventive engineers, Stocky had a small lab 
in his home and, peering into the clutter, I could see that the 
suit had been only a temporary diversion; Stocky was 
clearly still the same lovable, glue-and-safety-pins fellow I’d 
known in the past. Not long before, the house had been 
burgled, and in their haste the thieves had wreaked havoc 
in most of the rooms. Miraculously, however, Stocky’s lab, 
in which precious experiments were under way, hadn’t 
been touched at all. When the police arrived, they started 
methodically going through the house, room by room, 
recording without comment the extensive damage. On 
reaching Stocky’s lab, however, they drew back in horror, 
exclaiming “Boy, they really trashed this place.” 
The rest of us felt bound to one another; we had 
practically become a family by then. Each of us had poured 
a large quantity of blood into the LINC development and 
we weren’t inclined to let it go. Moreover, we had 
developed a conviction that we were on an exciting trail 
and that our futures lay ahead in biomedical computing. I 
was tired of the military ambiance of Lincoln, fed up with 
the absurdity of having to show a badge to guards who 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
115 
knew me. So although the immediate future was uncertain, 
I felt no hesitancy about leaving Lincoln, and as 1962 drew 
to a close we prepared to pull up stakes and move. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
116 
Chapter 10 
 
 
We move to Kendall Square where we 
accomplish the impossible 
 
y the time we left Lincoln in January of 1963, 
considerable spade work had already been done in 
providing a new venue for our work. Earlier in the year a 
proposal had been made to NIH to establish a multi-
institutional Center for Computer Technology and Research 
in the Biomedical Sciences, with MIT acting as host. Many 
of the major universities in the New England region had 
signed on in principle and the proposal had been accepted 
and funded to the tune of some $5 million for the first year, 
with the promise of more substantial funding ($27 million) 
over the ensuing five years as the center grew. In the first 
year, an office was to be established that would 
simultaneously work on developing plans for the 
forthcoming center and proceed with further development 
and dissemination of the LINC. This office was given the 
absurd, 
albeit 
descriptive, 
name 
of 
The 
Center 
Development Office for Computer Technology and 
Research in the Biomedical Sciences—affectionately known 
as the CDO. We moved into a building in Kendall Square in 
Cambridge, snuggled up against MIT proper. Ironically just 
up the street lay MIT’s grand Technology Square complex 
wherein an ambitious Time Sharing system (Project MAC) 
was simultaneously under development. Our modest 
quarters above a health-food store symbolized the 
B 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
117 
contrasting attention being paid at the time to the two 
visions of computing. 
Our initial task was an ambitious experimental 
program, funded by a combination of NIH, NASA, and 
NIMH (National Institute of Mental Health) and known as 
the LINC Evaluation Program. Approximately twenty 
copies of the LINC were to be built, installed, and evaluated 
in a variety of biomedical research laboratory environments 
around the country. 
We knew that since there would be no maintenance 
organization to repair these machines when trouble arose, 
each laboratory would have to be able to provide for the 
care and feeding of its own machine. In order to empower 
the 
researchers 
to 
take 
on 
this 
formidable 
and 
unaccustomed task, we decided to produce the LINCs in kit 
form and to bring the researchers (each with an 
accompanying technician as desired) to Cambridge in two 
waves. There, over the course of one month for each wave, 
they would assemble and debug their own computers 
under our supervision. Virtually none of these individuals 
had any prior experience with a computer and in one 
month we would have to teach them not only how to 
program the machine but also how it worked, and how to 
maintain it as well. It seems we knew no fear in those days. 
It is interesting to contrast this situation with today’s. 
At that time both hardware and software were far less 
complex than they are now, even in the most modest 
contemporary computer. But the hardware, with all the 
little separate pieces and connections, was inherently more 
susceptible to failure than that in a modern computer 
(although the urge to press the limits of speed and capacity 
has always helped to depress hardware reliability). Not 
only was the hardware inherently more vulnerable back 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
118 
then, it also contained a much larger fraction of the total 
system complexity than it does today. The LINC came with 
no elaborate operating system or application programs, 
only a relatively straightforward assembly program. 
Virtually all of the software that a user would employ 
would have to be developed and written directly by that 
user, who would thus be intimately familiar with its 
purposes and implementation. Today a far larger fraction of 
the overall system complexity lies in the software provided 
to users by the computer manufacturer and others. Most 
users are thus utterly at the mercy of the developers of the 
system software as well as the vast array of application and 
utility programs that inhabit a modern computer. 
Meanwhile the hardware, with all its connections that used 
to flap vulnerably in the breeze now compressed into a few 
integrated circuit chips, has become much more reliable. 
My experience suggests that hardware designers are, by 
nature, more careful and more thorough than most software 
designers and programmers. They have to be, given the 
relative difficulty and cost of correcting hardware design 
errors. The cost of a hardware error today can run into 
many millions of dollars and this produces a healthy sense 
of paranoia in the minds of hardware designers. Modern 
programming tools, on the other hand, provide software 
developers with powerful means for manipulating and 
easily changing programs. Furthermore, the rapid decline 
in the cost of memory has encouraged the constant addition 
of features in programs, often leading to rococo structures 
that no one fully understands. Software engineering 
practices have been developed to contain and counter these 
problems, but unfortunately they are more often honored in 
the breach than in practice. The consequence of these things 
is a software industry afloat in revisions and changing 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
119 
versions that often leave the user futilely shaking a fist at 
the screen. The end user has been conditioned to accept (if 
not love) programs that, as a result of endless bells and 
whistles he’ll never use, are cumbersome, flaky, and often 
poorly suited to his real needs. The acronym KISS (for Keep 
It Simple, Stupid!) has been thrown out the window by the 
new generation of programmers feasting on today’s 
memory abundance. 
Teaching programming and providing significant 
hardware understanding to twenty users with virtually no 
engineering background (doctors, for heaven sake!) was an 
ambitious undertaking, particularly as, before it could 
commence, the LINC needed major redesign after which we 
would need somehow to assemble some twenty or so kits of 
parts. But we were young and invincible, and by that time a 
number of us felt confident of our own understanding of 
the machine. None of us, however, had had any experience 
in even limited quantity production. At about this time one 
of the crew (Don O’Brien) reported a vivid dream in which 
Wes was driving a steamroller directly towards the edge of 
a precipice while Charlie was furiously attempting to attach 
wings. Bill Simon (another member of the crew) sat in the 
rear, speed-reading a book on aerodynamics! An altogether 
apt image it seemed. 
By now (the spring of 1963) it was ski season and one 
day Mary Allen appeared on crutches wearing a serious 
looking cast on her leg and saying “The doctor says I can go 
back to work tomorrow!” That week at our regular 
gathering, Wes announced in no uncertain terms that there 
was to be no further skiing until the machine was finished. 
We were a small team and every absence presented a 
sizeable problem. 
 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
120 
 
Mary Allen 
 
At this juncture, Mishell Stucki joined the team. Mish 
was a long, lean ex-Harvard student who had previously 
worked under the vigilant eye of Charlie Molnar at the 
Communications Biophysics Lab. It soon became evident 
that Mish carried Charlie’s careful work and thought habits 
to an extreme that even Charlie could envy. Over coming 
years he would exhibit a level of caution and fastidiousness 
that could immobilize any project he was working on until 
he was completely satisfied that he understood every 
relevant nook and cranny of underlying theory. Mish and I, 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
121 
who made a sort of Mutt and Jeff team (Mish being nearly 
twice as tall as I) worked closely together over the next few 
years and for a while, following my separation from my 
first wife, we shared an apartment. (One day the apartment 
was burglarized and we tried to imagine what kind of 
misshapen thief had made off with a pair of my pants and 
one of Mish’s jackets!) 
 
 
Mish and Howard24 
                                                 
24 Howard Lewis was one of our superb technicians. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
122 
 
The LINC redesign went smoothly for the most part. 
Wes redesigned the control panel and I helped design the 
logic that underlay it. I then redesigned the somewhat 
expanded tape-handling logic. Charlie reworked the 
physical tape unit itself and where our work met was in the 
signals between his tape heads and my tape logic. In lieu of 
a quality control department we had instituted a betting 
regimen—the better to keep errors to a minimum. 
Wherever anyone foresaw a possible problem, a bet 
(usually consisting of one or more martinis, depending on 
the complexity and importance of the matter) would be 
placed to the effect that the designer could not possibly get 
it right on the first try. The tape head signals for the various 
channels varied in polarity and underwent individual sets 
of inversions as they passed through amplifiers and gates 
on their way from the heads to the logic circuits. The same 
applied to the signals going in the other direction for 
writing on the tape. The likelihood of an error somewhere 
in this chain seemed semi-infinite—a situation that clearly 
warranted a substantial wager. I bet Charlie (I forget how 
many martinis) that he couldn’t possibly get all of the 
polarities right on the first try, figuring that getting it right 
would more than repay the cost of all those martinis. 
Although Charlie was nearly infallible, this was a difficult 
challenge and some insurance seemed in order. Charlie 
took the bet seriously and pondered the matter carefully, 
but nonetheless he lost and collapsed on the floor in a fit of 
despondency that lasted for days. Meanwhile, of course, 
things were corrected and ultimately the tape units worked. 
 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
123 
 
Charlie 
 
While this was going on, Mary Allen was working on 
an assembly program for the machine that would allow 
programs to be written using mnemonic instructions and 
address tags. Since the redesigned machine wasn’t yet 
working, it was arranged that she should use TX-2, which 
of course required that first she do for the LINC what I’d 
previously done for FX-1, namely, write a LINC simulator 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
124 
that she could then use to debug her LINC assembly 
program. Lifting herself thus by the bootstraps required 
much traveling back and forth to our old haunts at Lincoln 
to access TX-2. 
One night I arrived late to a darkened lab and 
discovered Wes underneath a table fiddling with the 
controls of an oscilloscope and muttering to himself “First 
you’ve gotta get its attention.” I had just managed to get the 
logic for the control panel working and after we turned on 
the lights I demonstrated it for him. It seemed to work 
properly, and after we had checked out everything he said, 
“Lets give it the Forrester test” —whereupon he picked it 
up and, to my horror, proceeded to drop it onto the 
workbench from a height of about six inches. After that of 
course nothing worked, and when the shock wore off I 
realized I’d been given yet one more lesson: in this business, 
it’s not enough to get it working; it’s got to go on working, 
even when it’s thumped. Hardware design was proving a 
tough racket. 
We had become a very close-knit group by that time, 
closer than any other group with which I would ever work. 
We worked without regard for the clock until we were 
ready to drop, eating together irregularly in the nearby deli 
which grew accustomed to serving breakfast to us at three 
in the afternoon or dinner at seven in the morning. Despite 
the closeness, we remained rugged individualists. One day 
five or six of us were gathered around a huge set of tables 
that had been assembled for working on the big logic 
drawings. Each of us was working away at his or her own 
piece of the design when suddenly I realized that all of us 
were whistling or humming different tunes—one Mozart, 
one Brahms, one Bach, one Rachmaninoff, and one Bartok. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
125 
Then, as such things will, at a critical moment a serious 
memory flap arose. The authorities (Wes and Charlie) 
weren’t sure why the memory didn’t work and reserves 
were called in. Professor Jerome (Jerry) Cox, another superb 
electrical engineer who himself was looking forward to 
receiving one of the machines, arrived from Washington 
University in St. Louis. Together, he and Charlie eventually 
figured out what was wrong and worked the necessary 
repairs. Once the memory was working, I could begin 
checking out the tape logic. I recall feeling both satisfaction 
and some loneliness as the others all trooped out about 10 
PM leaving me alone with the machine and a fast-
approaching deadline. 
When I left in the wee hours, I had a rather messy test 
program stored in the memory. Since without working tape 
units I had no way of saving it, and since reentering it via 
the control panel was a slow and tedious process, I left a 
note requesting that if at all possible the memory contents 
should be preserved. Next day when I arrived, I found a 
complete memory module (all 4,096  12-bit words in a neat 
6” by 6” by 6” package) sitting on my desk with a note 
saying “Here’s your program.” Recognizing that the little 
cores in core memories retained their magnetism even 
when not powered, Charlie had simply unplugged the 
memory module containing my program and plugged in a 
replacement unit for his work with the machine. In the light 
of today’s technology such a maneuver seems utterly 
mundane, but at that time the idea of casually replacing a 
computer’s memory startled and bemused everyone. Sure 
enough, when I plugged things back together that evening 
(with the aid of the requisite memory-installing rubber 
mallet), my program was sitting there intact, waiting for me 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
126 
to proceed. Over the next few nights I managed to debug 
the logic and get the tape units working. 
Our technicians developed a proprietary attitude 
towards the physical machine as it came together, and with 
good reason; they knew how much trouble a superfluous 
bit of solder could cause and quickly learned which of us 
could be trusted with a soldering iron in our hands. I soon 
found that by merely picking up a soldering iron I could 
produce a technician from out of the woodwork, one who 
would be more than happy to implement the change I’d 
had in mind. 
Once the tape units were working it was time for a 
celebration. A large number of us piled into Bill Simon’s car 
and headed for a restaurant in downtown Boston. Parking, 
even back then, was notoriously difficult, and as Bill drove 
around back streets searching for a space, Wes’ voice rose 
periodically from the depths of the rear seat saying, “Go 
around front, Bill. They’re holding a place for you.” We all 
laughed, of course, at the absurdity of this repeated mantra, 
until we happened to pass that way when, lo, there indeed 
was a place, right in front. On another occasion Bill was 
taking a break throwing darts at a board in the lab. He was 
making heavy weather of it when Wes stopped briefly in 
the doorway to watch. Then as Bill advanced to the board to 
retrieve the darts for the next round, Wes picked up one of 
them and saying, “No, Bill. Not that way; this way.” 
without looking, he tossed the dart backward over his 
shoulder as he withdrew and disappeared down the hall. 
Bill and I watched, open-mouthed, as the dart found its way 
directly to the bulls-eye. As I observed our mentor for clues 
to success, not only in engineering but more generally, I 
noted that he occasionally made such improbable 
predictions. I finally figured out that he was relying on the 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
127 
fact that outrageous predictions that chanced to be fulfilled 
would be remembered, while the numerous ones that failed 
would be quickly forgotten. Thus are soothsayers’ 
reputations formed. 
One day not long afterward I was called into the lab to 
observe a tape unit that was behaving erratically. It had 
somehow gotten into a mode in which it was rocking gently 
back and forth as though searching for, but never finding, 
some block on the tape. Such problems were my domain, 
and gradually our heads bent lower and lower over the tape 
unit in an attempt to discover precisely what was going on. 
Suddenly the air was rent by a violent explosion right 
under our noses. We reeled back in time to see a dense 
black cloud, a miniature mushroom cloud, rise majestically 
out of the unit. After the dust had cleared we discovered 
the remains of a capacitor which had exploded, calling a 
halt to both the tape’s unusual behavior and our 
investigations. More lessons in electrical engineering. 
The tape units were being put together by a small 
company in Nashua, New Hampshire. Late one evening 
Charlie and I set out to visit them and retrieve the prototype 
unit that had been lent them as a model, along with the 
drawings. Later, as we got into the car to return home with 
it, I noticed that Charlie was chuckling. When I asked him 
what it was about he said that he could see evidence that 
they had taken the unit entirely apart and then reassembled 
it, a totally unnecessary procedure as the model was only to 
provide a general picture of how things went together. 
Charlie speculated that they had realized that this tape unit 
was likely to become a commercial success (as, indeed, a 
later DEC version did), and that in their eagerness to 
understand it, they had taken it apart and then put it back 
together again. The reason Charlie was chuckling was, of 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
128 
course, that without understanding the logic in the main 
machine that actually controlled the unit, there was no way 
that exploring the physical unit was going to reveal 
anything about how it worked since there was almost 
nothing there in these mechanically primitive units. 
While we were working on the LINC, people at DEC, 
who shared our Lincoln/TX-2 roots and consequently some 
of the same attitudes, had been designing a small machine 
of their own, the PDP-5. It had a simpler set of instructions 
than the LINC and lacked the special features that lent the 
LINC its unique power—the small magnetic tapes, the 
display, and the analog capabilities. It was a more 
conventional computer than the LINC, except for its 
“logical size.” It was meant to be a small machine, but only 
became physically small when repackaged some time later 
as the PDP-8, which was to prove an extremely popular 
computer. Small computers were beginning to make 
headway, but, except for the LINC, none of them had an 
integrated display that looked forward to a more interactive 
form of use. 
Finally we got the redesigned machine working and 
found manufacturers to provide or build all of the 
necessary pieces. By far the most complicated part was the 
wired frame into which the machine’s numerous logic 
modules were plugged. On its surface lay the nests of wires 
connecting everything together. Every wire was recorded in 
an enormous wire-list, copies of which were then provided 
to the company that manufactured the frames. But we knew 
that there would be errors, and debugging a machine is 
difficult enough when everything is properly wired 
together. Half a dozen wiring errors can render the task 
virtually impossible. We devised a method for verifying the 
wiring and somehow everything got finished—in the nick 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
129 
of time. By early in the summer of 1963 when the first group 
of “participants” showed up, many of them famous medical 
researchers, we were exhausted but nearly ready for them. 
 
 
A LINC Kit 
 
While the finishing touches were being put on their 
kits, we lectured to them, stalling for time. Some of these 
middle-aged gents hadn’t been worked so hard in decades. 
A tremendous amount of information needed to be pumped 
into them (one said he felt like pâté de fois gras), and we 
drove both them and ourselves ruthlessly day after day, 
night after night. They were first amused, then frightened, 
and ultimately exhausted by what was happening to them. 
But there was no time to spare. We had to get them up to 
speed and help them get their machines assembled and 
debugged before the second wave of participants was due 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
130 
to descend. Somehow we and they managed it, and three 
days after the first group departed with bloodshot eyes and 
unopened golf bags, we were confronted by the second 
wave. This time we were somewhat better prepared and 
things went more smoothly, if just as intensively. Shortly 
after they too left, we packed up all of the machines and 
watched as they were loaded onto a large moving van that 
was to deliver them to the various laboratories around the 
country. Heaving a great sigh of relief, we staggered home 
to sleep for a week. 
In retrospect I cannot imagine where we found either 
the bravado or the strength to bring it off, but somehow it 
all went like clockwork. Somewhere along the way we had 
become possessed of missionary zeal. We were cracking 
open a whole new area of computer application, one that 
unquestionably had a humane purpose, while at the same 
time promulgating a dramatically new technique of 
computer usage in which complete control was vested in an 
individual “owner.” No doubt our vague understanding of 
these matters carried us, like soldiers in war, well beyond 
our normal capacities. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
131 
Chapter 11 
 
 
Tragedies overtake us; the prime number 
drop; we move to St. Louis where we design 
some new building blocks and encounter the 
evil synchronizer bug. I assist in brain surgery 
 
e were of course elated at our success, and 
naturally a celebration seemed in order. One afternoon 
shortly thereafter we found ourselves purchasing the 
necessary supplies at the local supermarket when suddenly 
the news went round the store that President Kennedy had 
been shot. We rushed back to the lab where we listened to 
the radio in shock and disbelief. When it became apparent 
that he was indeed dead, one by one we dispersed to our 
homes where we retreated into our individual sorrows. We 
had watched TV with deep concern in our local deli. as 
Kennedy had defied the arrival of Soviet missiles in Cuba. 
Aside from missing this man who had so captivated the 
entire nation, we wondered what would happen now. 
But far closer shocks were in store for us as our dream 
of a major inter-university center suddenly foundered on 
the rocks of MIT politics and eventually vanished before 
our very eyes. As plans for the proposed center had 
unfolded and it became evident that it had the potential to 
become a major MIT institution, members of the academic 
faculty naturally began to take serious interest in the 
development. Gradually a power struggle emerged 
regarding who would control this new organization. 
Having conceived and developed the machine that gave 
W
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
132 
birth to the whole idea, our group was inclined to retain 
control of developments. But of course we were outsiders 
(none of us had serious faculty positions) and naturally the 
faculty expected to exercise its normal prerogatives in such 
a situation. Ultimately the decision fell to Professor Charles 
Townes, the renowned physicist who was at that time 
provost of MIT. In a dramatic gathering in Townes’ office 
one afternoon it became clear that he had little choice but to 
back his faculty. 
It was a terribly discouraging time, particularly for 
Clark who had been the real pioneer and the driving force 
behind the development. He said sadly at the time that the 
decision had set back the introduction of computers to 
medical research by many years. Probably this estimate was 
unduly pessimistic as events were to unfold, but certainly 
our hopes were dashed that day by political forces. Even 
though NIH had already set aside substantial funds for it, 
the Center was not to be. Unwilling to hand over the infant 
we had borne, we had no choice but to seek another home 
for our activities. Today one might well think in terms of 
starting up a commercial enterprise, but that was far less 
feasible back then as the revolution we had in mind would 
have been incomprehensible to potential funders. Besides, 
we had academic leanings and were determined to cultivate 
further the embryonic relationship between computers and 
biomedical research that we were hoping to foster. That 
meant looking for a university with good engineering and 
medical schools in which the top management would look 
favorably on our enterprise of interbreeding the two 
disciplines. Experience had taught us how important such 
top-level support was. 
Early that spring (1964), various members of the team 
flew around the country visiting potential host institutions. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
133 
We finally settled on Washington University in St. Louis, 
where Jerry Cox had already established a beachhead with 
his Biomedical Computer Laboratory near the Medical 
School. George Pake, who would later become the director 
of Xerox PARC and still later director of research for all of 
Xerox, was at that time Provost of Washington University, 
and his understanding and support for what we were 
trying to do was a major factor in our decision to move the 
group to St. Louis. 
Soon afterward, Wes and Charlie began work on a new 
proposal to NIH, describing the situation at Washington 
University, what work we would do, etc. The writing was 
going slowly and Jerry Cox, sitting in St. Louis, began to 
fidget, wondering what was holding things up. Finally, 
overcome by curiosity and concern, he climbed onto a plane 
and came to Boston. When he arrived he found Wes and 
Charlie locked in a debate about whether 2047 was or 
wasn’t a prime number; Charlie said no, Wes said yes. (A 
prime number is one, like five or seventeen, that is divisible 
by 1 and by itself but by no other numbers.) There sat the 
untended proposal, while Wes tried successive candidate 
divisors. Jerry promptly ordered the two of them back to 
work, promising that he would figure out whether or not 
2047 was prime. So, starting where Wes had left off, he 
continued looking for possible divisors. Finding none, he 
announced that 2047 was indeed prime—whereupon 
Charlie’s hand instantly shot out and he said, “Wanna bet?” 
Had Jerry known Charlie better, he would never have 
accepted the bet, but as it was, he agreed to treat everyone 
to dinner if proved wrong. It turned out that in his part of 
the search, Wes had overlooked the fact that 2047 is 
divisible by 23. Jerry paid up, but was ever after convinced 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
134 
that he’d been duped by what he referred to as “the prime 
number drop.” 
Later, in a memorable meeting between our NIH 
supporters and Washington University senior management, 
Pake confidently told the NIH people that he intended to 
take all of us on as faculty and staff members, regardless of 
whether or not NIH decided to continue their support of 
our activities. Occasionally the convictions of a single 
individual can help to shape history, and that day Pake 
fearlessly backed something he had come to believe in 
deeply. This was the kind of support we had not found 
previously and we were all extremely grateful. 
But the NIH people also wanted to know what we were 
planning to do at Washington University. They understood 
that we were going to continue supporting the LINCs in 
their various domiciles around the country and that we 
hoped to build a strong set of ties between Washington 
University’s engineering and medical schools (whose prior 
degree of separation was symbolized by the giant park that 
separated the two schools geographically.) But, they 
insisted, what were we going to DO? What new research 
directions did we have in mind pursuing? 
We’d had some rather vague discussions about this 
matter, but nothing terribly firm had come out of them. We 
felt that it was important to be able to design computers, 
and related pieces of special purpose digital hardware, far 
more easily than was then possible. It should be feasible, 
Wes felt, to come up with a limited set of building blocks 
that were truly logical elements of significant power, in 
which the rules for interconnection should be extremely 
simple. The builder should not be required to have any 
electrical engineering background whatsoever, so all 
questions of electrical loading, timing, etc., would somehow 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
135 
have to be pre-solved. One should furthermore be able to 
build systems of arbitrary size and complexity; the units 
would need to be extensible. We called these building 
blocks “Macromodules,” lending them a reality which, at 
that stage, they didn’t posses at all. In truth, we had little 
idea how to accomplish such an ambitious goal. 
In the meeting all eyes were on Wes as the group’s 
guru, and watching him I realized to my dismay that he 
was in no state to make a strong case to the NIH committee. 
The collapse of our enterprise at MIT and the consequent 
split-up of the group had been a devastating blow, and at 
that moment he was depressed and it showed. To their 
credit, our supporters decided to continue their backing, 
despite the tentativeness of our presentation, trusting that 
the miracle we’d produced would continue to grow and 
prosper. Ultimately it was settled that we would move to 
Washington University, and shortly thereafter firm offers 
arrived in the mail. 
The move from Cambridge to St. Louis represented far 
more serious geographic dislocation than had the move 
from Lexington to Kendall Square in Cambridge, and some 
of the group opted to stay in Massachusetts while others 
chose to accept appointments at other universities. Mary 
Allen punted and climbed onto an airplane for a year-long 
trip around the world. Of greatest concern was the fact that 
Charlie, so essential a member of the group, would have to 
remain in Massachusetts for another year in order to 
complete his Ph.D. and his military assignment. As we 
shared a bottle of scotch one night, Wes expressed grave 
concern on this point. “Charlie is the key,” he said. 
The rest of us packed up and in the summer of 1964, 
one by one we arrived in the “Hub of Missouri” (later 
referred to by some of us as the “Hub of Misery”)—a play 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
136 
on the Bostonians’ famous assertion that Boston is the Hub 
of the Universe.  My second wife, Elizabeth, and I and our 
cat arrived at midnight, and as we pulled in we spotted a 
large, rotating sign indicating that the temperature was 100 
degrees F. It was clear that we were in for a rough stretch, 
and I later told Wes that all I could promise for sure was a 
three-year hitch. 
Mish and I, being two of the first arrivals, soon set to 
work together trying to figure out what Macromodules 
might be. Unbeknownst to us, we were embarking on one 
of the more innovative periods of our careers—at least of 
mine. Wes was still suffering postpartum depression and 
watched over us from a somewhat greater distance than 
usual. We found that a truly clean sheet of paper opens the 
mind wonderfully, and as neither of us was afraid to appear 
the fool in the other’s eyes, we plunged in fearlessly. 
We soon realized that working with the constraints and 
goals mentioned above, the kind of signaling system used 
inside most computers simply wouldn’t work. Most 
computers operate based on a central clock that ticks 
regularly25. These are known as synchronous systems since 
all changes in the machine take place exactly at clock ticks. 
Between ticks, the news about what happened as a result of 
the previous tick must be able to propagate everywhere 
throughout the machine so that it can figure out what to do 
on the ensuing tick. If the clock runs so fast that the next 
tick comes before the results of the previous one have 
                                                 
25 When a computer is advertised as a 300 megahertz machine, it means 
that its clock is ticking three hundred million times every second—a 
frightening number when you think of it. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
137 
arrived everywhere, then the machine can make a wrong 
decision about what to do next and chaos will result. 
Signals take some time to percolate throughout a 
machine; they travel along wires and pass through various 
logic elements that tend to slow them down. The bigger the 
machine, the longer the wires, the more elements, and thus 
the more the slowdown. Because we wanted to be able to 
use our modules to construct machines of arbitrarily large 
size, for any given clock rate, as larger and larger systems 
were built, sooner or later some signal would arrive too late 
at some unit and would produce an error. We therefore 
concluded that our building blocks would have to be self-
timing (asynchronous) in that they would somehow have to 
guarantee that any change would be made known 
throughout the system before proceeding to the next step. 
This led us to invent a totally new signaling scheme and to 
devise circuits that implemented this scheme. 
Every day Mish and I would together invent something 
new and then, going home and sleeping on it, one or the 
other of us would have a new insight and would arrive at 
work to announce excitedly that yesterday’s idea was all 
wet and here was a better one. And then we would be off 
once more at high speed. We recorded our progress with 
frequent Polaroid photos of our chalkboard with one or the 
other of us standing smirking beside our latest brainchild. 
Sometimes our disdain for yesterday’s idea or for one 
another’s current suggestion would become surprisingly 
harsh and in the excitement of invention our anxiety at 
times verged on hostility. It was merely overstimulation, 
but others listening to us shouting at one another 
sometimes must have thought that we were having a 
dreadful row. They seemed surprised to see us later jawing 
calmly together over lunch. Occasionally Wes would 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
138 
appear and we would brief him on our progress. I 
remember that on one occasion, after listening silently, he 
turned to us and announced that we were making good 
progress, that we’d now reinvented ILLIAC III. That sent us 
scurrying to find out what the hell ILLIAC III might have 
been. (It was, indeed, a previous asynchronous machine.) 
As we continued to work, our ideas gradually started to 
jell and a group of basic building blocks began to crystallize 
in our minds. We were able to describe these blocks as 
logical units and understood how they would operate and 
could be connected together to form arbitrarily large 
systems. Our new signaling scheme extended naturally as 
the system grew. Wes started spending more and more time 
with us and the excitement intensified. Another bright spot 
was the arrival, at this juncture, of a student of Charlie’s 
from MIT, one Warren (Mackie) Littlefield. (It was to 
Mackie’s computer class that I spoke not long ago). Charlie 
had indicated that I was going to like Mackie and, as usual, 
he was right. Mackie’s contagious enthusiasm and high 
good humor provided an excellent antidote to some of the 
less appealing aspects of St. Louis. Our friendship was 
instantaneous and electric, and has endured to this day, 
despite significant later shifts in direction for both of us. He 
immediately began offering welcome critique of everything 
in sight, and with such good humor that we all promptly 
accepted him into the fold. Besides, he was frequently right. 
The problems of reviewing scientific research are 
substantial. Who, after all, is competent to judge what goes 
on at or near the leading edge of investigation; which 
activities appear likely to be fruitful and which should be 
judged dead-ends? NIH engages in a routine process of 
peer review in which qualified experts drawn from the 
broader technical community, often as consultants, gather 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
139 
to review the work of a particular group of researchers. This 
process relies on the integrity of the workers involved 
because it could obviously tend to produce an old-boy 
network of mutual admiration and support. My impression, 
however, is that it works extremely well in most cases since 
it is the nature of scientists to try to knock down ideas and 
kick holes in theories in the broad search for scientific truth. 
In any case, our group was occasionally the subject of such 
site visits. One, in particular, stands out in my memory 
because it included Alan Perlis as one of the reviewers of 
our work. Perlis was one of the deans, if not the dean, of 
American computer science. Besides, he was a memorable 
character, already bald as a billiard ball and with a 
bottomless sense of humor. I was to re-encounter him again 
many years later in a very different context and ultimately 
he was to become a good friend. 
By this time some of our support was coming from the 
Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO) of ARPA 
and soon we were visited by the director of that office, our 
old friend from Lincoln, Ivan Sutherland, together with his 
deputy, Bob Taylor (who would soon become the director). 
Ivan was by far the most astute technical critic we had had 
and we were anxious to see what his reaction would be. He 
quickly grasped our explanations and promptly sat down 
with a large sheet of blank paper and set about designing a 
small computer using our new Macromodular building 
blocks. We watched with delight as he filled it in and as he 
was putting on the finishing touches he said, “By Golly, 
fellas, I think you’ve done it!” Coming from Ivan, this was a 
twenty-one gun salute and we were thrilled. I like to think 
that this may have been Ivan’s first serious brush with 
asynchronous systems, something that would increasingly 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
140 
occupy his attention as the years rolled by—and Charlie’s 
too, for the rest of his life. 
But there was one problem that we seemed unable to 
solve: how to join a system built out of these units with 
some other system, built either of similar units or of 
synchronous (clocked) devices. In the course of working on 
this problem, we stumbled26  onto a fundamental 
conundrum that would occupy both theorists and practical 
designers for some time to come. It came to be known as 
“the synchronizer problem” or “the glitch problem.” The 
problem was enunciated in simple terms in the literature in 
a joint paper by Mackie, Tom Chaney (another member of 
the lab) and me entitled “Beware the Synchronizer.”27 
A rough description is included in Appendix 1, but 
what is perhaps more interesting is how difficult it was to 
convince others that the problem even existed. By the mid-
1960s, many logic designers (I among them) had, to varying 
degrees, lost contact with whatever electrical engineering 
roots they might have once had. Many had come to believe 
that the units with which they were working were ideal 
“black boxes” that always obeyed a relatively simple set of 
rules, typically specified by the unit’s manufacturer. 
Unfortunately those rules embodied tacit assumptions, 
which in some perverse cases, could actually be violated. 
Such situations were exceedingly rare in most computer 
                                                 
26 Wes reports that it was I who insistently pressed the question “But what 
if they do arrive simultaneously!?” 
27 Mackie and Tom wrote a more complete paper at about the same time: 
W. M. Littlefield, and T. Chaney, “The Glitch Phenomenon”, Technical 
Memorandum No. 9, Computer Systems Laboratory of Washington 
University, St. Louis, 1966. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
141 
systems and many designers argued that they simply 
couldn’t occur at all. But careful analysis led us to conclude 
not only that they could but that, under the right 
circumstances, they must. To resolve the matter, Tom 
designed some very sensitive experimental apparatus that 
enabled him to focus narrowly on the situation that would 
provoke the anomalous behavior and then observe its 
occurrence. And sure enough, it showed up just as 
predicted, right there on Tom’s oscilloscope. 
During 1965-66, much of our time was devoted to 
supporting the LINC. DEC had decided to manufacture and 
sell LINCs and part of our contract with NIH required us to 
document the machine so that anyone who wanted to could 
obtain a kit and build one. After all, it had been built with 
taxpayer money; the knowledge should be available to the 
public. The documentation effort was substantial. Every 
feature of the machine was depicted and explained in gory 
detail in a giant series of documents. Others besides DEC 
intended to build the machines as well. One company 
(Spear Electronics) decided to redesign it using the then 
new emitter-coupled logic (ECL) circuits that would make it 
faster, and shortly they did precisely that. 
DEC’s interest in the LINC was fading (during 1964 
DEC had made some 50 or 60 “classic” LINCs) as PDP-8 
demand increased, so to keep their interest alive, Wes 
persuaded them to combine the LINC and their PDP-8 into 
a single machine that would be called a LINC-8. Wes was 
providing consulting help in merging the two designs and 
he sub-contracted a piece of the work to me. Much of the 
logic of the LINC tape commands could be handled by a 
PDP-8 program, and Wes gave me the job of writing that 
program. Some hundred and fifty LINC-8s were built but 
later DEC redesigned it as the PDP-12 which, for a number 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
142 
of years, was a truly popular machine (over a thousand 
were sold) that ultimately embodied most of the world’s 
LINCs. 
In addition to the documentation effort, we also helped 
a number of people, who had obtained separate funding 
outside of the LINC Evaluation Program, to procure and 
assemble their LINCs. And we continued supporting the 
various LINC users around the country who were 
struggling to incorporate the computer into their research. 
This involved organizing a number of meetings in which 
the users could share experiences, programs, etc. In 
addition, many of us traveled a good deal during this 
period, working with and helping the researchers with their 
varied tasks in their own labs. The diversity of applications 
was striking28 and we had to become conversant with bits 
and pieces of wholly unfamiliar disciplines in order to be 
useful. I myself spent time in half a dozen different labs, 
consulting on the design of experiments and helping to 
connect equipment and write suitable programs. I recall one 
in particular that stands out in my memory as by far the 
most dramatic. 
One of the participants in the program had been a 
neurosurgeon 
and 
neurophysiological 
researcher 
at 
Washington University by the name of Sidney Goldring. He 
intended to use his LINC for mapping response areas on 
the surface of the human brain. Not only is this important 
as a general matter of understanding the structure of the 
brain, but in addition he hoped to be able to determine 
                                                 
28 A more complete listing can be found in the ACM Conference 
Proceedings, History of Personal Workstations, W. A. Clark, The LINC Was 
Early and Small, Palo Alto, CA, 1986. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
143 
individual response areas in the course of brain surgery in 
order to be able to avoid damaging critical areas. I learned 
that brain surgery is at the same time both more primitive 
and more sophisticated than I had imagined. 
The LINC was located in the amphitheater directly 
above and overlooking the operating table. Thus while 
working with the machine we were able to watch the 
proceedings in detail. For a lay person it was a frightening 
experience to see saws and drills at work on the skull of a 
live human being. Even more astonishing was the fact that 
these patients were often conscious during the operation. 
Although we were given to understand that they were not 
suffering significant pain as a consequence of the 
proceedings, it was difficult to believe that, and at one 
point, as an operation was commencing, I heard Howard 
Lewis, who had accompanied me on this visit, murmur 
“That’s a brave man down there.” 
This was a preliminary phase of the study, and we were 
helping to get the equipment and the programs in shape. 
An array of electrodes were placed on the surface of the 
exposed brain and various stimulae (light flashes, sound, 
touch, etc.) were presented to the patient. The signals from 
the electrodes were fed to the LINC’s analog inputs whence 
they were sampled, recorded, and displayed. By moving 
the electrode array to different locations on the brain 
surface it was possible to locate the areas of response to the 
various sorts of stimulae. 
That, at least, is the general picture I retain of what was 
happening. Not surprisingly these people, who had never 
encountered a computer before, had the program in 
something of a tangle, but it was a simple matter to show 
them how to put it all straight and leave them with 
programs that did precisely what they wanted and that 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
144 
they more or less understood. One morning Dr. Goldring 
arrived looking deeply troubled and announced that he had 
spent a sleepless night having come to the realization that 
the research, which he had previously assumed would 
occupy his attention for the next ten years, would now, in 
all probability, be completed within a year. He was 
wondering what he would do for the remainder of the 
decade! 
Fortunately not all of the experiments were quite so 
dramatic and some even produced amusing anecdotes. In 
one operant conditioning experiment a rat was being 
trained (I don’t recall why) to wait for a fixed interval 
between successive pressings of a lever. Properly spaced 
pushes would produce reward in the form of food. If the 
lever was pressed too rapidly or too infrequently, no food 
would result. The rat seemed not to understand the 
situation and initially pressed the lever quite randomly, 
only occasionally producing food. Then at one point his tail 
apparently itched and after a successful pressing, he turned 
and chewed on his tail for a moment to relieve the itch. 
Turning back he again pressed the lever and, as this had 
produced the proper interval, food appeared. The 
researcher claimed that you could see the rat momentarily 
stop and ponder the situation—and then quickly turn and 
bite his tail again and return to press the lever once more 
He had decided that this action—biting his tail between 
pressings—was what produced food. I learned that such 
“superstitious behavior” is not uncommon in training 
animals. (Humans too, it would appear, are not immune 
from such confusion between cause and effect.) 
In the years that followed, the LINC would have the 
effect of speeding up research in many areas of biological 
exploration. The real-time, interactive processing of 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
145 
experimental data was absolutely revolutionary and 
changed both the face and the pace of biological research 
forever. The LINC furthermore provided much of the 
impetus for further work in computers in medicine that 
took place under the leadership of Clark, Molnar and Cox at 
Washington University’s computer laboratories long after I 
had left. This includes such things as advances in cardiac 
monitoring and the development of the PET scanner. 
Today there is hardly any piece of medical equipment 
that doesn’t incorporate at least one computer in its inner 
workings, and doctors, medical technicians, and even 
patients now take for granted the ability of instruments not 
only to measure, but to analyze and present data in 
graphical and pictorial form. The LINC was the forerunner 
of such equipment, and as such it remains one of the high 
points of my own evolution as a computer scientist. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
146 
Chapter 12 
 
 
Charlie to the rescue; we take a LINC to 
Chile and climb down an elevator shaft. Water 
juice 
 
bout a year after the rest of us had arrived in St. 
Louis, Charlie finished his work at MIT and shortly 
thereafter came to join us. He had, of course, visited 
occasionally in the interim, but now he arrived to take up a 
full-time position at Washington University and to work 
directly with our group. Everyone was, of course, 
immensely pleased, perhaps Wes most of all as he had 
come to depend heavily on Charlie’s insights and abilities, 
and the two of them had developed a uniquely close 
working relationship. We had sorely missed Charlie’s full 
participation and now welcomed his critique of all we’d 
been doing. He immediately zeroed in on the fundamental 
problems and implications of the Macromodular work we 
had been doing. In years to come he was to carry his ideas 
about such self-timed circuits to lengths none of us could 
then foresee. In his final years he came to California to work 
with Ivan, as the two of them had become convinced that 
self-timed circuits provided a possible key to faster 
computers for the future. As I write this, Charlie has been 
dead for over three years, but that question is still under 
investigation by Ivan and his associates. 
One day in the spring of 1966, Wes came to me and 
asked how I would like to join Charlie in taking a LINC to 
Santiago, 
Chile, 
to 
be 
used 
in 
conjunction 
with 
A 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
147 
presentations that were to be made there at a meeting of the 
International Brain Research Organization (IBRO). I was 
delighted at the opportunity; IBRO had all the right 
connotations so far as I was concerned—International and 
Brain Research. What could be better? I learned that a giant 
squid that lives off the coast of Chile has an extraordinarily 
large nerve that lends itself nicely to experiment, and this 
helped to turn Santiago into a center of neurophysiological 
research. A number of the presenters at the meeting would 
be from the U.S. and some of these had incorporated LINCs 
into their research so integrally that in order to demonstrate 
their work at the meeting a machine was needed on the 
premises. It was our job to provide it. 
Prior to the LINC, a computer was not something that 
you just unplugged and carted off to a new location. Or if 
you did, you were almost certain to be in for a considerable 
stretch of reincarnating it in its new home. Computers, 
aside from their size and the fact that they tended to be 
built into their living quarters, were fragile affairs and 
moving them around was not generally considered feasible. 
However, we had already had considerable experience 
moving LINCs on special moving trucks, and even once in 
the back of a rented station-wagon. We had found, to our 
great delight, that most of the time you just cabled the 
pieces back together (which took perhaps fifteen minutes), 
plugged it in, turned it on, and by gum, the bloody thing 
simply worked. This doesn’t seem like much of a miracle 
today, but in those days it was new and stunning. 
Taking a LINC to Santiago, nonetheless, was a 
considerable challenge. Among other things, before we left 
a machine had to be prepared to operate on the 50-cycle 
power that would be available in Santiago. Charlie, who 
understood such matters, added the necessary extra pieces 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
148 
and jury-rigged them temporarily inside the machine. The 
requisite export papers were obtained and a few weeks later 
we were on our way with the LINC on board. At that time, 
neither Charlie nor I had traveled much outside of the U.S. 
and the trip turned into an epic adventure for us both. 
It started out literally with a bang. Shortly after taking 
off from Miami, the plane suddenly dropped precipitously. 
There were shrieks as heads momentarily appeared, prarie-
dog like, above the seat backs and then settled back down 
as we abruptly bottomed out. Charlie turned to me with a 
concerned look on his face and said, “Are you thinking 
what I’m thinking?” It turned out I wasn’t. I was hoping we 
weren’t going to end up in the drink; Charlie, on the other 
hand, was wondering what the impact had done to the 
heavy equipment he had rigged inside the LINC. Had it 
come loose and slammed into the logic boards? 
As it turned out, he needn’t have worried. When we got 
to Santiago next morning, the main cabinet (containing his 
modifications) was nowhere to be seen. Six items had been 
sent and six containers were sitting there, but the main 
cabinet wasn’t among them. Amidst torrents of Spanish, it 
eventually became clear what had happened. Six items had 
gone into U.S. export control in Miami and six had come 
out the other end, but one of the items that had entered as 
two boxes bound together emerged as two separate items. 
Six items went onto the plane and not surprisingly it was 
the heaviest one that was left behind. As Jim Morris was to 
remark many years later, “You’re always one off in this 
business.”29  The next day we put through a call to Wes for 
                                                 
29  Having a count off by one used to be a common programming error. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
149 
help, and then waited while the official machinery slowly 
ground its teeth on the problem. 
The Chileans were an extremely hospitable lot and, 
unlike we compulsive Americans, not given to worrying. 
The consequence was that over the ensuing week, as we 
waited for the missing cabinet to arrive, we attended 
numerous parties and events (including a memorable 
formal audience with the local Monsignor who must have 
wondered what, in the name of the Almighty, a computer 
might be). Our hosts introduced us to the wonders of Pisco 
Sours, we sampled the excellent Chilean wines, and stuffed 
ourselves with cherimoyas in orange juice. Between parties, 
we leaned out of the window of our hotel room, gazing at 
the frenetic activity in the street below—people scrambling 
onto overcrowded busses, the outermost clinging only to 
other, slightly more inboard, passengers. One day, riding a 
bus, I noticed Charlie flinch as he peered forward. Turning, 
I found that we were about to collide with the car in front of 
us. To our amazement we not only collided with it—we 
kept right on going. The car had broken down and the bus 
driver was giving it a lift, pushing it fearlessly through the 
dense downtown traffic. 
Finally the LINC arrived, having been stranded on the 
Argentine frontier, waiting for a “runway incident” (read 
earthquake damage) to be repaired. On the way to the 
airport we stopped at a “restaurant” that turned out (to the 
chagrin of our host) to be a front for a brothel, and at the 
airport we watched, horrified, as the LINC came out of the 
plane’s cargo door upside-down with the temporary power 
supplies once more menacing the logic boards. Eventually 
we got it to the room where the meeting was to take place, 
and where the other pieces had been waiting. Finally we 
could go to work putting the machine back together and, 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
150 
left alone, we set about it. To our delight, in short order we 
had a working machine. As we set out to celebrate, 
however, we discovered that we had no way to lock the 
door behind us—we’d not been left a key and the cavernous 
building we were in was utterly deserted and vulnerable to 
the all-too-frequent theft. Undaunted, Charlie took the door 
lock apart and discovered that, with one of us on either 
side, we could reassemble the lock in such a way that it 
locked the door. Fine, but how would the one on the inside 
then get out? I think it was Charlie who spotted the elevator 
shaft. It was tiny and clearly intended for a one-person 
elevator, which hadn’t yet been installed. It was a perfect 
escape hatch for a rock-climber, however, and after we put 
the door together, I shinnied down the two floors into the 
basement. After stumbling around in the dark for some 
time, with the aid of Charlie’s shouts I found my way out 
and we went off to celebrate. Euphoric and left to our own 
devices, we threw caution to the winds with disastrous 
digestive consequences. 
A short while later other participants started to arrive 
from around the world and the meeting took on a more 
routine aspect. The contrast between the high-pressure, 
high-tech environment we had left behind in the U.S. and 
the world we were plunged into in Santiago was truly 
mind-boggling. To me the Chilean people seemed 
wonderfully human and I reveled in their warmth and 
irrepressible humor. (They explained that in my ruptured 
Spanish I had been asking not for a glass of water as I’d 
thought, but rather for water juice. “Ah, you Americans,” 
they said, “you always want the very essence of the thing.”) 
On a more serious level, among many of our confreres I 
found far more liberal social and political views than I was 
accustomed to encountering in the U.S., and I felt great 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
151 
empathy with their attitudes and concerns. When 
eventually it came time to depart, it was with great 
ambivalence that I climbed aboard the northbound plane. 
The LINC had proved to be the star of the show and within 
a few years more of them would begin to appear in South 
American laboratories. 
Days later in St. Louis, sitting in a traffic jam and 
looking out over the sea of cars, each with but a single 
occupant, probably most of them like me fuming at the 
traffic snarl, I found myself wondering which society was 
truly more sensible—more humane. In the years that were 
to follow, I would find myself pondering this sort of 
question many times. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
152 
Chapter 13 
 
 
Macromodules work; St. Louis is hot; we 
build the Chasm, and I depart for Boston 
 
fter our return from Chile, we resumed work on 
Macromodules. By this time, with Mish pressing ahead in 
our absence, the designs had been reduced to circuit 
diagrams, and not long afterwards sample modules were 
ready in the lab. These prototypes were substantially larger 
than they would ultimately be, but here, finally, were 
physical manifestations of our many months of conception 
and design. On the day we first pushed the button 
activating a simple sequence of actions between modules, I 
broke out a bottle of wine that I had brought back from 
Chile for the specific purpose of celebrating the occasion. 
Despite warnings that good Chilean wine “doesn’t travel,” I 
had fetched along a bottle of the very best stuff. To our 
great disappointment we discovered that the warning had 
been well-founded. Nonetheless, the first Macromodules 
performed as expected, and the wine misfortune was soon 
forgotten amidst the jubilation. 
It was a time when the Viet Nam war was beginning to 
show signs of serious unpopularity. Mackie and I both felt 
that the war was a terrible mistake and began participating 
in a daily noontime silent vigil on the campus. The 
gatherings were small at first and people passing by 
wondered what we were doing, standing there in a circle 
looking so glum. But we were profoundly distressed by 
what our government was doing and felt the need to 
A 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
153 
express our sentiments in some way. So, for a change, we 
dressed in suits in order to indicate that at least some 
substantial citizens also disapproved of the war. We stood 
there wondering what else one could do. 
In the summer of 1967 I took a lengthy vacation with 
my family. Just before we left St. Louis, a heat wave struck 
producing numerous power outages and brownouts as air 
conditioning everywhere was turned up full tilt. Without 
power and air-conditioning it was impossible to work, so 
we packed the car and fled westward, never stopping until 
we arrived in the cool of the Rockies. We swept through the 
west, visiting old climbing haunts in Canada and ending up 
in San Francisco to visit friends in Berkeley. The three years 
I’d agreed to stay in St. Louis were drawing to a close and 
as I began looking for something to do next, the Bay Area 
seemed appealing. However, it was 1967 and Silicon Valley 
and all of its job opportunities still lay a bit in the future. I 
stopped in at one or two commercial computing outfits, but 
with no letters of introduction. They’d never heard of a 
LINC or a Macromodule and I wasn’t even an official 
electrical engineer. What use could I possibly be? 
Knowing that I was planning to leave St. Louis soon, 
Wes kindly set about helping me find something fun and 
interesting to do. I’d had a good time in South America and 
liked to travel. A job running a computer center in Nigeria 
came up, but that sounded too full of the wrong kinds of 
challenge and I demurred. By this time Ivan Sutherland was 
teaching at Harvard, and Wes sent me off with a good 
strong recommendation to talk to him. Harvard was 
looking for someone to teach an introductory computing 
course that would lay the foundations of both hardware 
and software. Knowing of my keen interest in music and 
computers, Ivan put me together with a graduate student 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
154 
and others with similar interests. He made me a very 
tempting offer that seemed to be everything I’d wanted, 
and to this day I’m not sure why I didn’t jump at it. Instead 
I chose to go to work once again with my old friend Frank 
Heart who, by now, was in charge of a group of people and 
a number of projects at the consulting firm of Bolt Beranek 
and Newman in Cambridge, Massachusetts. And once 
again, although there was no way to foresee it, I was 
moving in a direction that would soon carry me into the 
next major computer wave—networking. 
At about this time Charlie decided to build a combined 
LINC plus Macromodule system for modeling neuron 
behavior (specifically the spike output behavior of a neuron 
in response to specifiable distributions of inputs). In 
addition to allowing one to study the behavior of the 
neuron model, the system would demonstrate the power of 
combining the flexibility of a general purpose computer 
with special hardware (the Macromodular part of the 
system) which speeded up the most frequently repeated 
parts of the operation. Another researcher, Antharvedi 
Anné, and I assisted with the design. When it was finished 
we needed a name for it, but anything truly descriptive was 
hopelessly lengthy. I proposed that we call it simply 
CHASM, standing for “CHarlie’s, Antharvedi’s, and 
Severo’s Machine,” and in looking back through the 
literature from that era, sure enough I find a paper bearing 
that name boldly in its title (with no explanation of its 
derivation). 
As the time to leave St. Louis drew near, I wondered 
more and more what I was doing and why I was leaving. 
We had worked together so closely and so intensively for so 
long that the idea of separating was painful. And besides, 
the promise of the Macromodule project, on which I’d 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
155 
worked so hard, seemed large at that juncture. As history 
was to unfold, the Macromodular approach would 
eventually be overtaken by advances in microcircuits and 
microcomputers. The cost/performance ratio of computers 
was about to plummet and tiny, virtually throw-away 
microcomputers would obviate the need for building, even 
temporarily, most special purpose equipment. Ironically we 
were hoist on our own petard: Macromodules were simply 
too 
expensive 
to 
compete 
with 
the 
forthcoming 
miniaturization. However, the core of the approach—self-
timed systems—was to survive and to attract the attention 
of advanced designers for many years. Today it is alive and 
well and may yet provide a fundamentally new approach to 
the design of future machines. 
But at the time, none of this future was obvious and it 
was with terribly mixed emotions that in the fall of 1967 we 
drove across the bridge through East St. Louis heading once 
more for New England. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
156 
Chapter 14 
 
 
I join BBN; some comments on ARPA; 
Encounters with TENEX; some coffee-tables, 
and a teletype through the wall. The 
ARPANET is born 
 
 
olt Beranek and Newman (BBN) was a somewhat 
unusual firm: it had many ties with MIT and liked to think 
of itself as half-way between a company and a research 
institute of some sort. It had been founded in the 1940s by 
three MIT professors in architectural acoustics who had 
given the company its name, but by this time it had grown 
considerably and had strayed into computers as well as 
other fields only remotely related to acoustics.30 J.C.R. 
Licklider, who became a grand old man of computer 
science, had worked there on an early experimental Time 
Sharing system on a DEC PDP-1 computer. (The PDP-1 was 
the first full-blown computer that DEC made and BBN’s 
was the very first of the series. Ben Gurley, a former TX-2 
engineer, had designed the PDP-1 with some oversight 
from Wes Clark.) By the time I arrived on the scene, BBN 
was 
running 
a 
commercial 
Time 
Sharing 
system 
                                                 
30 One wit quipped that the only reason BBN didn't run a brothel in 
Cambridge was that they didn't have the appropriate talent. This was 
unduly harsh, but after years of academic association, BBN did seem 
comparatively “commercial” to me. Time-sheets, for heavens sake! 
B 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
157 
(TELENET) and had two computer divisions. The one I was 
joining was headed by Frank Heart, and its mission was to 
design and build a wide variety of computer systems for 
clients. The other, headed by Jerry Elkind, was more 
explicitly research-oriented and, among other things, was 
developing experimental Time Sharing systems supported 
by government money. 
In 
computer 
research, 
government 
money 
had 
increasingly come to mean ARPA money, because ARPA 
had become the agency that provided by far the largest 
share of government funding for computer research.31 
Initially hired by Jack Ruina, then director of ARPA, J.C.R. 
Licklider had set up an Information Processing Techniques 
Office (IPTO) within ARPA to oversee and fund research in 
the burgeoning computer field. The National Science 
Foundation and the National Institutes of Health continued 
some support, but far below the level of the funds available 
to ARPA through the Defense Department’s always ample 
budget. 
Of all the money that the Defense Department spent, 
that which was funneled through the ARPA office (as IPTO 
was known within the computer community) was 
unquestionably some of the very most productive. It 
fostered much of the computer research and development 
that took place in this country during the middle-ages. 
Much of that work took place at universities, but a few 
places with close connections to Universities such as BBN 
                                                 
31 As mentioned earlier, some of the support for our Macromodule 
research had come from ARPA. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
158 
and the Stanford Research Institute (later SRI32) which were 
centers of excellence outside of a university, also gained 
ARPA support for computer research. 
I was personally always unhappy about this situation. 
It was part of a more general concern that so much of 
government-funded research was focused on military 
matters and funded through the Department of Defense 
(DOD). I felt that this distorted national research priorities 
and left far too little for other, non-military concerns. 
However, although DOD of course hoped that military 
applications would eventually be found for the products of 
the research ARPA funded, the money from IPTO was 
largely dedicated to very general, quite unspecific computer 
research. When developing tools as broadly applicable as a 
“general purpose computer,” it is impossible to set limits on 
what one might be used for. In any case, during the mid-
1960s it was nearly impossible to do significant computer 
research anywhere in the U.S. (except perhaps at IBM) 
without working indirectly for ARPA one way or another. 
As first head of IPTO, Licklider had established a 
standard of excellence that was to persist for many years 
beyond his own tenure. The people who followed him—
Ivan Sutherland, Bob Taylor, Larry Roberts, Bob Kahn—
were outstanding individuals who dedicated a few years of 
their lives to overseeing federally-sponsored research in the 
field. Of course it was an important and powerful position, 
                                                 
32 At that time, SRI was a part of Stanford University.  It was changed into 
a separate nonprofit corporation sometime in the 1970s, which was when 
its official name was shortened to “SRI.”  That happened during the 
Vietnam War as a result of student activism that banished all classified 
research from the University. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
159 
but I also came to realize that the job entailed elements of 
personal and professional sacrifice in that these individuals 
could have had (and eventually did have) jobs with many 
more emoluments outside of government, perhaps even as 
ARPA-funded researchers. I remember riding to the airport 
one day with Larry Roberts when he was head of the office, 
and discovering that as a government employee he was 
constrained to use the cheapest available car rental, which 
meant that we had to be ferried from some distant rental 
site to the airport. 
It may seem strange that I ended up in what was 
nominally the less research-oriented division of BBN. This 
had primarily to do with my long-standing friendship with 
Frank, but it also had to do with the fact that the other 
division was focused heavily on research in Time Sharing 
systems. This Big Deal concept was anathema to the Little 
Deal “Gospel according to St. Louis,” that I arrived bearing. 
But beyond these factors, it’s also incorrect to characterize 
the construction of dedicated computer systems as non-
research. Designing and building the kinds of systems 
Frank’s division was working on involved plenty of 
research. It’s just that in addition to the research, there were 
commitments to finished systems, hard deadlines, etc. It 
seems that often one person’s research is another person’s 
routine engineering. In any case, the term “research,” (like 
terms such as “executive” and “mansion”), has become so 
over-used that it has lost much of its original pith. 
Although in Frank’s division a significant effort was 
under way in medical computing, it was of a very different 
sort from the direct, real-time laboratory use in which I’d 
been involved. I also wanted to explore a totally new 
application area and so I began working with Wally 
Feuerzeig who, together with Seymour Papert of MIT, was 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
160 
researching applications in education. Wally and Seymore 
had designed the special computer language LOGO, which 
they felt would be easy and instructive for children to learn. 
I began looking for ways to design a machine that directly 
implemented that language. 
I had also agreed to teach the computer design and 
programming course that Harvard had wanted, so it was 
arranged that I would be hired through BBN to teach a 
graduate seminar at Harvard. This would enable me to pull 
the material together for an undergraduate version of the 
course in ensuing years and would provide me with 
teaching assistants. Not surprisingly, since this was the first 
time I’d taught such a course, preparation took a good deal 
of my time and perhaps for that reason I failed to make 
progress with the LOGO project and eventually became 
discouraged about my ability to make a contribution to it. I 
also came to realize that I didn’t share my colleagues’ deep 
conviction that computers could revolutionize education. 
So my enthusiasm waned and I began to think that perhaps 
after all I really belonged in the other BBN division which 
was developing hardware, something I by now understood. 
So I moved over into Jerry Elkind’s division and began to 
learn more about Time Sharing. 
There was plenty to learn and plenty of bright new 
people to get to know. Danny Bobrow, like me, was 
teaching a course at Harvard and at that time I met Ray 
Tomlinson, who would later become famous as the 
originator of the @ sign for email addresses (totally 
swamping the far more significant fact that he had extended 
the intra-site message exchange system into an inter-site 
system, thereby creating the first primitive email system—
not to mention his more fundamental contributions). Ed 
Fiala, who would turn up again later at Xerox PARC, was, 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
161 
as always, deeply buried in the most esoteric complexities 
of the system software. Perhaps the most memorable figure 
of all was Dan Murphy who, because of his last name, was 
blamed for virtually everything that went wrong. Our boss, 
Jerry Elkind, would later hire me to work in the Computer 
Science Lab at Xerox PARC in California. 
The group was preparing to shift from an SDS-940 
system to a DEC PDP-10. That was an upgrade to a more 
powerful machine and the BBN engineers had designed 
special hardware to make the PDP-10 more amenable to 
Time Sharing. The new system, consisting of hardware and 
software felicitously intertwined, was referred to as TENEX 
and would become a de facto standard at many ARPA-
supported sites over ensuing years.33 One of the most 
important features of TENEX was a virtual memory system 
that allowed programmers to believe they had more high-
speed memory than actually existed (by surreptitiously 
swapping information between high-speed memory and 
disks). And of course the system allowed multiple 
programs to share the machine and run “at the same time.” 
These features (virtual memory and multiprocessing) are a 
standard part of virtually all computers today. I received 
my first introduction to these concepts from Jerry Burchfiel, 
a senior member of the TENEX group. 
A substantial number of research projects at BBN 
depended on this Time Sharing system and some of them 
involved real-time processing. As I’ve indicated, real-time 
processing doesn’t mix well with Time Sharing since such 
processing demands the attention of the computer in 
reaction to events beyond the computer’s control. The 
                                                 
33  TENEX was eventually licensed to DEC as TOPS-20 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
162 
computer must be ready to jump up and salute whenever it 
is needed. But under Time Sharing, the computer’s 
attention is directed to the needs of the multiple users 
sitting at their terminals. There is an inherent conflict in 
trying to serve these two demands simultaneously. 
Nonetheless, plans were afoot to design a special hybrid 
processor that would be attached to TENEX, enabling it to 
provide some level of real-time processing. 
I tried to put my attention on this undertaking but 
ultimately failed, because—as in Don O’Brien’s earlier 
nightmare—I felt that indeed we were trying to attach 
wings to a steamroller. When I questioned a colleague 
about the wisdom of the whole approach, to my dismay he 
simply quoted “Ours not to question why; Ours but to do 
or die.” This was a long way from the sort of response I was 
accustomed to, and I wondered what sort of outfit I’d fallen 
in with. But then a consultant, Chuck Seitz, appeared on the 
scene and we quickly found that we had a good deal of 
common ground and shared many of the same attitudes. 
Among other things, he was teaching a course at MIT 
similar to the one I was teaching at Harvard and we 
showed one another what we were up to. 
A large disk system was to be added to the PDP-10. 
Today the capacities of disks are measured in megabytes, 
or, increasingly, in gigabytes. Back then, disks were 
measured in feet. We’re talking about a set of disks roughly 
four feet in diameter. As the disks were being installed, they 
filled the halls near the machine room and then gradually 
disappeared, one by one into its maw. In order to be able to 
get at information quickly, they turned at alarming rates, 
and in doing so, they swept a film of air along on their 
surfaces. In order to allow the bits of information to be 
closely spaced so that lots of them could be crammed in, the 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
163 
heads that read and wrote the disks needed to be very close 
to the disk surface. As the heads moved in close, the film of 
air offered substantial resistance. (Recall that your 
automobile rides on the air in your tires and that metal and 
rocks can burn up upon reentering the atmosphere; air 
becomes a material to reckon with when sufficiently 
compressed.) The heads thus had to be forced toward the 
disks to overcome the air resistance. 
Perhaps you’re wondering, “But what happened when 
the disks slowed down and the resistance of the air film 
decreased?” 
Excellent 
question. 
The 
designers 
had 
considered this matter and in such a situation—when the 
power failed, for example—a safety feature instantly 
retracted the heads from the disks. The day arrived when 
the disks were working and everything had been tested—
everything, that is, except this safety retraction mechanism. 
Alas when the power switch was shut off for testing, there 
ensued a frightful screeching sound as the heads failed to 
retract and instead ground their way into the surfaces of the 
disks. Shortly thereafter the halls were once again filled 
with disks as replacements began to arrive and the 
damaged ones were converted to coffee tables or discarded. 
The safety feature was redesigned and after a few weeks, 
things were once again ready for action. 
The question then arose whether or not to test the 
redesigned mechanism. After considerable debate it was 
decided NOT to test it. Power failures were infrequent and 
should one occur, we would know soon enough if the 
mechanism worked. In such contests between man and the 
perversity of nature, man is invariably the loser. Within 
days a power failure occurred and once again the halls were 
filled with disks. But engineers are a persistent lot, and in 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
164 
the fullness of time the disks were tamed and became part 
of the working TENEX system. 
One day, for a reason I can no longer recall, I needed to 
talk to John Barnaby, one of the TENEX programmers. 
When I entered his office, I couldn’t help noticing a huge, 
ragged hole in the wall by his desk. I could see right 
through it into the neighboring office, but somehow I knew 
that it would be unwise to ask how it had come about. As 
we talked, that hole stared at us like a pink elephant whose 
presence everyone has tacitly agreed to ignore. Later I 
learned that, despite a mild manner, this was a fellow who 
could become quite distressed if he encountered trouble 
with his program or the system on which it was running. I 
can’t say for sure which of these problems had arisen, but I 
did discover that on a night not long before my visit, 
something had infuriated him to the point that he (a largish 
fellow) had picked up his roughly fifty-pound model-33 
Teletype (the terminal of choice at the time) and hurled it 
bodily through the wall. Programmers of his caliber were 
hard to come by, so this minor infraction was overlooked. 
The hole remained for some time and I thought of it as 
vivid testimony to the frustrations induced by over-stressed 
Time Sharing.34 
Although people raised an eyebrow at such behavior, 
many understood it full well and secretly sympathized with 
                                                 
34 Some years later my wife Laura became a victim of a Time-Sharing 
system known as TENEX, the computing environment with which she was 
then interacting via a model 33 teletype. She is a skilled knitter and in 
between responses from TENEX she had ample time to beaver away at an 
elaborate sweater containing thousands of very fine stitches. When it was 
finished she dubbed it her “TENEX Memorial Sweater” since most of it 
had been knitted while waiting between responses from TENEX. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
165 
and even admired such a forthright response. I’ve often 
thought that if more people responded as Barnaby did (or 
the guy who shot the 1401 full of holes), expressing their 
frustration with similarly overt action, perhaps the 
computer industry would be forced to shape up and give us 
less defective products. As it is, we may never know how 
many personal computers continue to be secretly abused by 
their frustrated users. 
I realized I didn’t belong in this Time Sharing 
division—I’d settled among disciples of the wrong religion. 
I was becoming quite discouraged by this point and felt that 
perhaps after all I’d made a serious mistake in turning 
down Ivan’s offer at Harvard. I’d found no place at BBN to 
apply my skills constructively, but when I talked to some of 
my colleagues at Harvard their lives sounded differently 
bad as they described their struggles to avoid committee 
work and obtain funding. I was having a serious talk with 
Frank about the situation, when he pushed across the desk 
a document that had just arrived from Washington. He said 
it was a request for proposals (RFP in the lingo) for building 
some sort of network of computers and suggested that I 
take it home and look it over. With very little enthusiasm I 
put it in my briefcase to read that evening. I didn’t 
understand all of the details, but I got the general drift and 
decided 
that 
what 
it 
described 
was 
a 
relatively 
straightforward, if not simple, engineering job. The next 
morning I went into Frank’s office and, putting the 
document on his desk, told him I felt that we could 
certainly build it, but that I couldn’t imagine why anyone 
would want such a thing. The network the document 
described was to become known as the ARPANET, 
forerunner of today’s Internet. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
166 
There is no question that, in retrospect, my initial 
sentiment (“Who would want such a thing?”) seems 
ludicrous. However, hindsight is far easier than foresight, 
and the request for proposal that came from ARPA made 
no mention of e-mail or the World Wide Web.35  These 
things, which actually caused networking to “take off,” 
were to come later, more or less as afterthoughts. Instead, at 
the outset, there was talk of eliminating duplication and 
fostering “Resource Sharing” —the sharing of programs, 
results, and access to computers among workers at the 
various 
sites, 
mostly 
universities, that ARPA was 
supporting. But these things seemed difficult to believe in, 
given the diversity of machines, interests, and capabilities at 
the various sites. Although it seemed clear that with 
suitable effort we could interconnect the machines so that 
information could flow between them, the amount of work 
that would then be required to turn that basic capacity into 
features useful to individuals at remote sites seemed 
overwhelming—as, indeed, it proved to be. A long road 
and many years of difficult, ground-breaking work lay 
between the interconnection of the first few ARPANET sites 
and the world we now inhabit in which a computer that 
can’t access and utilize the Internet would be deemed 
virtually useless. 
As originally conceived, the network was to consist of 
the large host computers at each site “talking” directly to 
one another. It was Wes Clark who, one day riding in a car 
with Larry Roberts (and others), urged the innovation 
                                                 
35 Amazingly, today there exist almost no copies of the original RFP from 
IPTO. I take this as some indication that I was not alone in failing to grasp 
the historic significance of what was happening. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
167 
wherein the network traffic handling was off-loaded from 
the main (“host”) computers at each site to a small auxiliary 
computer. This small computer was dubbed an Interface 
Message Processor or IMP. It is probably not overstating the 
case to say that this suggestion was critical to the success of 
the entire network project. In addition to relieving the host 
of the work of handling network traffic for other sites, it 
had the advantage that each host had only to deal with its 
IMP in a standard fashion, rather than having to interact 
with the different types of computers at all the sites to 
which it was connected. Eventually, of course, since the 
IMPs really only passed the bits along blindly, the host 
programs did have to deal with and understand one 
another. Standard host-to-host protocols, by which the 
hosts communicated with one another, would be defined 
and refined over the coming years. Think, for instance, of 
the simple protocol whereby we all say “Hello” and “Good-
bye” when we use the telephone—a device which, like an 
IMP, simply passes the data (our voices) along without 
understanding anything we say. If someone violates these 
conventions, it causes at least momentary confusion. 
Anyway, here at last was something I could get my 
teeth into—a challenging engineering problem. Although I 
didn’t know where it would lead, it didn’t seem like a bad 
idea, so back I came to Frank’s division as we began to put 
together a proposal in answer to ARPA’s request. Before we 
could write a sensible proposal, we felt we needed to 
understand in detail how what we were proposing would 
work, and that meant that we needed to do a pretty 
thorough system design. It soon became evident that some 
very large corporations and defense contractors were also 
interested in bidding on this job and we felt that tiny BBN 
would need to have a really superior proposal if it were to 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
168 
stand any chance against these giants. We had another 
problem as well. Several of us knew Larry Roberts from 
Lincoln days and we knew that he would be concerned 
about any appearance of favoritism and would therefore be 
cautious about giving the job to BBN. We therefore had to 
write a proposal that not only Larry but anyone could see 
was the best of the lot. Fearlessly we plunged in and set 
about not only figuring out how the system should work 
but actually proceeding to design it to a level of detail 
unusual for a proposal. 
Our old colleague Will Crowther was still working at 
Lincoln, but we thought that for a job like this he might be 
induced to come to work with us. We discussed it with him 
and even before he had completed the formal transfer, he 
began acting as an informal consultant in the design. At that 
time Bob Kahn, who would later become head of the ARPA 
IPTO office, was working at BBN. He was interested in the 
potential of the network, had contributed to the error 
detection scheme contained in the proposal, and wanted to 
learn some fundamentals of hardware design. So I 
commenced working with him on the design of the 
interfaces and other special hardware that would be 
required on the IMPs. Teaching is an excellent vehicle for 
coming to grips with and understanding a problem, and we 
enjoyed working together as the interface designs quickly 
took shape. 
The hardware design was relatively straightforward 
since it was obvious what was required and the choices 
were somewhat limited—it was just a matter of being 
careful and thorough. The more complex design decisions 
lay in the software, where most of the character and 
behavior of the IMP, and thus of the network, would be 
determined. The software team was made up of Dave 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
169 
Walden, Will Crowther, and Bernie Cosell, with Frank also 
deeply involved and the rest of us making occasional 
suggestions and comments. It was just the right level of 
difficulty and we all enjoyed ourselves enormously, feeling 
that the design of systems such as this was ideal grist for 
our mill. We had high regard for one another’s abilities and 
our mutual understanding was such that a great deal of 
abbreviated language was used in communicating with one 
another. I was getting to know Dave Walden for the first 
time and I remember being impressed that such a bright 
young guy had such good judgment as well. Bernie was 
already well known to me (and, in fact, to the entire BBN 
community) as a programming wizard. He was notorious 
for having inadvertently caused Bob Newman (the “N” of 
BBN) to imagine briefly that he was typing to a person 
(Danny Bobrow) at another terminal, when in fact he was 
actually typing into Bernie’s cobbled-together version of 
Eliza, a simple simulated-psychoanalyst program originally 
concocted by Joe Weizenbaum at MIT. 
As more and more time was spent in preparing the 
proposal, the “overhead” costs began to pile up. The 
company’s management, feeling that the probability of BBN 
winning the contract was vanishingly small, was appalled 
at the amount of money that was being spent in preparing 
the bid—more money (I believe) than BBN had ever before 
spent on such a thing. But by the time we finished, we had 
great confidence in our design. As I recall it did not fully 
comply with ARPA’s RFP; we felt we had found better 
ways to do a few things. We had already designed all of the 
special hardware and had actually written the time-critical 
inner loop of the program, as well as designing the rest of it 
in some detail. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
170 
We, and a small number of other bidders, were 
individually called to Washington for discussions with 
Larry. We defended our design decisions with great vigor 
and Larry quizzed us unmercifully about every detail. As 
the weeks passed and we remained in the running, our 
hopes began to rise. Then, to the astonishment of many 
(probably especially to some of the larger bidders, not to 
mention the BBN management), we were finally awarded 
the contract. That evoked a hilarious telegram from Ted 
Kennedy, congratulating us for winning the contract to 
build the “Interfaith Message Processor.”  But aside from 
the hilarity, we were elated as well as appalled at what lay 
before us. 
Recognizing that we would need to beef up our forces, 
we shortly hired Will Crowther and began hiring the best 
students from the course I’d been teaching at Harvard. The 
first of these was a very bright young fellow by the name of 
Ben Barker. Shortly after he came on board, Ben joined us 
for a meeting with AT&T people at their New York 
headquarters in order to discuss details of their lines and 
the 50 kilobit modems to which we would be connecting. 
AT&T was somewhat reluctant about the whole endeavor; 
they didn’t really want novices like us mucking about with 
their terminal equipment, and moreover felt that the entire 
enterprise was somewhat silly.36 But Larry held a heavy 
governmental sword over their heads so they laid on a 
rather formal meeting, replete, it turned out, with cigars, 
candy, and nameplates at each seat. As we entered the 
                                                 
36 Later, when we complained about interruptions in the lines on the order 
of a few hundredths of a second, they simply could not comprehend why 
anyone would possibly care about such a tiny matter. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
171 
room, I thought to myself that this must be rather heady 
stuff for a young student such as Ben, but later, when our 
plane home was canceled by a snowstorm and we were 
reduced to riding the train back to Boston, suddenly Ben 
snapped his fingers and said “I should have thought of it 
earlier; we could have taken Dad’s helicopter.” Clearly Ben 
could take AT&T and their nameplates in stride. 
We had selected the Honeywell 516 computer as the 
basis for the IMP37 and had presented extensive justification 
for the choice in our proposal—including the fact that we 
planned to use a hardened, military version built like a 
tank. Now it was time to convey to Honeywell all of the 
additions and modifications to the basic machine that 
would be necessary to turn it into an IMP. At that point we 
were not familiar with the particular logic packages that 
Honeywell used and so the designs that we gave them, 
though detailed, were in terms of general logic rather than 
explicit packages. It seemed to us a straightforward task to 
render the design into Honeywell’s own logic modules, but 
to be sure that there were no mistakes, we spent a number 
of sessions explaining everything carefully to the designer 
they had assigned to the project. This was to turn out to be 
an extremely painful part of the project. The software was 
under our control; we were doing it ourselves. But for the 
hardware we were dependent on Honeywell’s special 
                                                 
37 This was based in part on work that Dave Walden and Alex MacKenzie 
had done earlier evaluating the Honeywell 516 for another project. 
Honeywell, furthermore, was willing to help BBN bid on the proposal 
(they were hard-pressed to respond quickly to the several bidders that 
wanted to use the 516), and quickly agreed to build the special hardware 
for us. Many computer companies hate doing special hardware, wishing to 
reserve any available talent for new machines that can be sold in quantity. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
172 
systems division and that turned out to be a hotbed of 
incompetence. 
Week after week we struggled to get the Honeywell 
engineers to understand what was wanted. In the process 
we became familiar with their logic elements and were thus 
able to see that one mistake after another was being made. 
As time passed it became evident that the design was 
converging too slowly for the schedule and ultimately we 
were forced to accept a machine that we knew we would 
have to rework substantially. Ben was a great help in all of 
this and together we finally managed to get it going. We 
then gave a set of revisions to Honeywell so that ensuing 
copies would, we naively presumed, be correct. Alas, we 
were to learn, it would take many months before all the 
corrections were finally incorporated. In the meantime we 
had to make repairs to every machine that arrived. We 
instituted a plan under which we gave Honeywell test 
programs and insisted that they run them in their plant in 
our presence so that we could certify each machine before it 
was shipped. One day, despite our previous day’s refusal to 
accept a machine, it showed up on a truck at the BBN 
loading dock. Frank, watching the proceedings through a 
window, registered disbelief as he saw me refuse delivery, 
turn the truck around, and send it back. This caused some 
chaos at the Honeywell plant and, along with some of my 
more forceful language, apparently garnered sufficient 
attention that things then began to change. 
In the meantime the software crew had been busy and a 
test version of the program began to operate in the first 
fully-functioning machine. Since we had only that one 
machine 
to 
work 
with, 
for 
testing 
purposes 
the 
communication interfaces (both to the host and to the 
modem lines) were shunted so that outgoing channels were 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
173 
connected directly to incoming channels. We were elated 
that, despite the troubles with Honeywell, things were 
going well, but then a strange thing began to happen After 
many hours or days of continuously successful operation, 
the machine would suddenly stop in a strange state, never 
the same way twice. We had what amounts to a system 
designer’s worst nightmare—an extraordinarily rare, 
seemingly random, intermittent failure. Despite numerous 
attempts, we were unable to catch it in the act in order to 
capture some symptoms. Then suddenly Ben or I (or 
perhaps the two of us together38) remembered the 
synchronizer glitch problem that I’d encountered several 
years before in a totally different environment. Could this 
be a manifestation of the glitch problem, and what could we 
do to verify this suggestion? 
There were lots of 516s out in the world serving 
faithfully in many other settings—that was one of the 
reasons we had selected it—and no such problems had been 
reported before. But we also knew that our several high-
speed interfaces were driving the machine’s input-output 
section much harder than most other applications. And 
most other applications didn’t require the machine to 
operate continuously, 24 hours a day, for months on end 
without a single hiccough. Ben pored over the logic 
diagrams of the machine and finally, in the part where 
requests for service by external devices are handled, he 
found a possible culprit. He designed a clever piece of 
hardware that aggravated this part of the machine even 
more intensively than our interfaces did, and lo, it stopped 
                                                 
38 I had described the problem to my Harvard class as part of the 
introduction to synchronization. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
174 
almost at once. We then excitedly hooked up an 
oscilloscope so that we could observe what was happening 
and, dimming the room lights, so that we could see a very 
faint occasional failure trace amidst all the bright correct 
ones, we peered at the scope’s face. And sure enough, there 
it was—an occasional failure that Ben’s device had made 
just frequent enough to become visible. 
This was one of the best pieces of hardware detective 
work any of us had ever experienced. We were thrilled and, 
now having hard evidence in hand, we immediately called 
Honeywell. Their preliminary reaction was defensive: the 
troublemakers at BBN were not only complaining about 
their interfaces and the schedule, but were now questioning 
the very design of their basic 516! After considerable 
persuasion we got them to produce the machine’s original 
designer from the back room, the first really competent 
Honeywell engineer we’d met. He expressed considerable 
skepticism at first but agreed to come have a look, and after 
listening carefully to our explanation and peering with us at 
the evidence on the scope face, he was finally forced to 
concur. In the meantime, Ben had devised a simple fix to 
the machine that would cure the problem.39 We instituted 
the change and the failure never occurred again. We 
recommended that Honeywell adopt the change, install it in 
all future machines, and retrofit existing machines. I believe 
this happened; we certainly checked all future machines 
that came to BBN to be sure the fix was installed. 
                                                 
39 The problem can't be truly eliminated, but Ben's fix reduced its 
probability to the point where its occurrence was measured in hundreds of 
years rather than hours. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
175 
The day approached when we were to deliver the first 
IMP to UCLA and in short order packers arrived to encase 
our precious cargo in a sturdy wooden box. Given that the 
version of the machine Frank had chosen was “hardened” 
—it had a rugged steel case, and appeared capable of 
withstanding a direct nuclear hit—this extra packaging 
seemed a bit redundant, but it provided a place to affix a 
destination address label. Finally I added numerous arrows 
saying “This Way Up,” and a note that said simply “Do It 
To It Truett.” Frank, in an excess of compulsiveness, had 
decided that someone from the team should accompany the 
machine on its journey—I mean ride with it in the cargo plane!  
This proved impossible—the air transport company simply 
refused—but it was watched carefully onto and off the 
plane. Truett Thach, a member of the BBN team, was 
waiting in Los Angeles and shortly more of us joined the 
festivities when it finally arrived at UCLA. 
Given the careful testing the machine had undergone at 
BBN, including not only the self-test, but also testing with 
another IMP in the same room through a pair of modems, 
we were not surprised that the machine worked as soon as 
it was plugged in and turned on. In fact, since it was 
shipped with the program installed, I believe it came alive 
of its own accord when it was plugged in, thanks to a 
“watchdog timer” we’d provided to reset and restart it 
automatically should it ever falter. We had met the 
schedule, something quite unprecedented in the computer 
field. The UCLA crew had expected that we would spend 
several days getting the machine working, and in fact had 
relied on this to allow them time to finish their own 
preparations of the program and interface for their host 
machine. Thus they had to scurry some, but shortly the 
connection was made and the much-touted initial message 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
176 
was sent through the IMP from one part of the Host to 
another. Having done a great deal of such testing on our 
home turf, we were not as impressed with the event as the 
UCLA people were. 
 
 
Frank Heart with an early IMP 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
177 
The initial contract had called for four IMPs, and right 
on schedule the other IMPs were delivered to their 
prescribed sites. There was a good deal of reluctance by 
some of these initial site managers because they viewed the 
network as an intrusive nuisance that interfered with their 
routine operations. But once again Larry held a trump card 
(funding) and they were forced to knuckle under and 
provide suitable hardware and software interfaces. It would 
be several years, however, before the fruits of this trouble 
were to begin paying significant dividends. During those 
years, the software communities at the ARPA sites would 
gather their forces and begin to develop standards by which 
diverse computers could communicate with one another.40 
Given the diversity of the hardware and software systems 
that would be joined into a single network, this was a 
complex and daunting undertaking. Steve Crocker, then a 
graduate-student at UCLA, would become visible on my 
radar screen as one of the principals in this enterprise and it 
was some years later that Bob Kahn and Vint Cerf, together 
with others who have received considerably less credit, 
would define the discipline that would allow networks to 
be joined together to form the Internet as we know it today. 
By this time my second marriage was beginning to 
falter and would soon break-up. Throughout this difficult 
period I continued teaching at Harvard and in the second 
year we turned my course into an undergraduate one. On 
opening day nearly 100 students showed up and we were 
forced to turn quite a few away as we had insufficient lab 
space and equipment. Fortunately by then I had lined up 
                                                 
40 The fact that TENEX and the IMPs all came from one place (BBN) 
facilitated much of the early ARPANET protocols and application work. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
178 
some superb teaching fellows (including Ben Barker) and 
together we went to work. I had a good set of lecture notes 
from the preceding year and felt much more secure about 
what I was doing. I began to relax and enjoy the teaching. It 
was exciting to see understanding dawn and my informal 
manner shortly led to friendly badinage with the class. We 
were working together, bringing them on board for an 
exciting journey. I asked Dave Walden to give a lecture on 
Time Sharing systems and he did a superb job. At one point 
he lost the thread of where he was going and simply turned 
to the class and said, “Come on guys—help me out here.” 
They were a bright bunch and quickly put him back on 
track.  When the time came for the final exam we put 
together some really intriguing problems and after it was 
over, as one student was leaving, she turned to me and said 
“That’s the best final exam I ever flunked!” 
Other things bound us together as well. It was a time of 
anti-war protests, and the students had clearly noted the 
resist button on my jacket and knew that I was on “their 
side.” When I came across some of them gathered in a 
crowd outside a meeting in which the faculty was 
considering taking a stand against the war, they hurried me 
inside. At BBN I felt considerable ambivalence about my 
work. On the one hand I was strongly against the war but 
on the other, here I was working hand in glove with a 
branch of the Department of Defense. I was able to see that 
the military connection of our work was pretty tenuous, 
that the implications of what we were doing were extremely 
general, but nonetheless, under the circumstances I had 
some level of discomfort drawing my pay indirectly from 
the Department of Defense. Frank knew this and one day as 
we departed for a meeting at the Pentagon, I mentioned 
that I was considering moving my resist pin onto “the 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
179 
general’s” jacket when we all hung up our coats at the 
commencement of the meeting. Frank wasn’t sure whether 
or not I might actually do such a thing. Neither was I. 
Meantime, Ray Tomlinson, a bright colleague from my 
brief TENEX excursion, noticed that it would be relatively 
simple to extend the already-extant intra-TENEX inter-
person communication feature to permit communication 
between individuals at TENEX systems at remote sites. Ray 
inadvertently achieved immortality through his adoption of 
the “@” sign to indicate a remote network address. More 
importantly, his “hack” marked the beginning of inter-site 
email which promptly blossomed into the most widespread 
use of the network. As email started to become ubiquitous, 
other mail programs began to show up with improved user 
interfaces. However, truly “user-friendly” systems would 
appear only after the switch from teletype-style, terminal-
based systems to the sorts of display screens virtually 
everyone uses today. 
As the ARPANET grew and prospered, it shifted 
imperceptibly from an experimental vehicle into a utility as 
people began to depend on it more and more.  We had, of 
course, realized from the outset that reliability would be 
critical and had taken numerous steps to assure that when 
an individual IMP died, the network as a whole would 
continue to function as traffic was rerouted around the sick 
IMP. Right from the outset, features were designed into the 
IMPS that allowed them to be monitored, reloaded, etc., 
from what soon became a Network Control Center (NCC) 
at BBN. Alex McKenzie, a member of the team, was an early 
and ardent advocate for viewing the network as a utility. 
Alex, a meticulous fellow with a booming voice as forceful 
as Frank’s but in a lower register, took over management of 
the Network Control Center and was to find himself 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
180 
increasingly acting as a buffer between the users of the 
network and the providers at BBN. 
 
 
Alex showing the NCC to some Chinese visitors 
 
Because of its special rôle in overseeing the network, 
there were particular sensitivities at the BBN node. One day 
it became necessary to install a jumper—a single short piece 
of wire—between two points on the back-panel of BBN’s 
own IMP. The IMP was busy running in the network at the 
time and, because of its critical role at the network control 
center, we decided to ignore the normal discipline, whereby 
one would turn off a machine before touching the wiring.  
The place where the jumper needed to be installed was 
awkwardly close to the base of the machine and as I got 
down on my hands and knees, with the crew surrounding 
me shouting suggestions, I peered at the pins to which the 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
181 
jumper needed to be attached. Finally I reached forward 
gingerly—and almost immediately touched something I 
shouldn’t have, abruptly shutting off the machine. Chaos 
ensued as the control center crew erupted into action, 
kicked us out of the way, and quickly restarted the 
machine—so quickly, in fact, that it was up and running 
before we could take advantage of the time to install the 
jumper while the power was off! 
So there we were again, right back where we’d started. 
One thing was clear—I’d had my chance, and it was now 
up to someone else. I couldn’t believe it when Ben Barker 
stepped forward and said, “Here, let me.” Ben was a very 
tense fellow and I’d noticed that intense concentration on 
his part was often accompanied by a shaking hand. Here, I 
thought, was a catastrophe not only waiting but impatient 
to happen. Ben crouched down and as I knew it would, his 
hand commenced shaking. Then, as I watched in disbelief, 
his hand suddenly stopped shaking as it shot out, shoved 
the jumper into place, withdrew, and immediately resumed 
its shaking. To this day I don’t know how he managed it. 
All of the early sites were Time Sharing systems and 
users of those systems accessed remote sites on the network 
through terminals attached to their local “Host” system. 
The IMPs acted somewhat like the phone company, merely 
passing information along. The Host computers dealt with 
the terminals and connected them logically with the desired 
remote Host. But there were users, not associated with any 
nearby Host, who wished to access remote sites by 
connecting directly from their terminals to an IMP and thus 
to the network. This unanticipated development required 
an upgrade to the IMP that added a sort of mini-host inside 
of the IMP through which terminals could speak with 
remote Hosts. In addition to the mini-Host software, we 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
182 
needed hardware through which the terminals could be 
connected to the machine—these terminals were of many 
different types and speeds. Ben came up with a clever idea 
for this hardware which accommodated a wide variety of 
different terminals. While the software team made the 
necessary additions to the program, we set about designing 
and building the hardware. 
This was an era in which a technique known as “wire-
wrap” was the method of choice for building prototype 
devices. By this time we were using integrated circuits (ICs) 
of the sort that would now be described as small scale 
integration. These little bug-like gadgets plugged into 
sockets on one side of a board. On the other side, the prongs 
of the sockets extended about half an inch, forming 
something that looked like a miniature, dense bed of nails. 
The wires that provided the required interconnections 
between the ICs were wrapped around these prongs. 
Special machines (owned and operated by sub-contractors) 
did the wire-wrapping, but the mechanisms for providing 
the machines with the information from our drawings 
regarding precisely which sets of points to connect together, 
was, to say the least, primitive. Today such mechanisms are 
fully automated, but in those days most wiring lists were 
made up by hand41.  Thus one had to contend not only with 
design errors, but also with clerical errors introduced 
during the transcription process. This made debugging 
something of a nightmare and caused harsh thoughts, and 
sometimes even words, to be exchanged between us and 
the company that did the wire-wrapping for us. 
                                                 
41 Some research institutions were then busy developing automated 
systems but they hadn't yet percolated to places such as BBN. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
183 
After the hardware was built, Tony Michel, another 
member of the growing IMP team, and I worked together in 
debugging it. As always, there was considerable time 
pressure and as we worked late night after night, Tony 
started to fall asleep even as he was running oscilloscopes 
and moving probes around. He later confessed that I’d 
pushed him so hard during that period that he had 
seriously considered quitting. But he didn’t, and shortly we 
had working hardware. The software required major 
upgrading and the whole thing took a number of months to 
complete, but eventually we got it all working. 
As people began using the Terminal IMPs (called 
“TIPs”), they were plagued by problems with the telephone 
connections between their terminals and the TIP. Strictly 
speaking, these weren’t BBN’s problems (just as the 
connection from your computer to your Internet Service 
Provider isn’t part of the Internet), but the users didn’t care 
about that; they viewed their terminals as connected to the 
remote site and weren’t interested in the distinction 
between the individual line connecting them to the TIP and 
the further network connections to the remote sites. If any 
part of it failed to work, BBN got the blame. So we 
developed a system wherein periodically a computer at 
BBN dialed each of the terminal ports on every TIP in turn, 
connecting to and testing each one to be sure that the 
terminal lines were working properly. These, of course, 
were just plain old regular phone lines, and sure enough 
one day one of them seemed to be failing. Unable to figure 
out what was wrong, the technicians decided to listen to the 
line as it was dialed and tested. They heard it ring and try 
to whistle at the TIP (think FAX), but instead of the 
expected answering signal, to their astonishment, they 
heard an angry voice shouting “Oh, it’s YOU again is it!” 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
184 
and the receiver was slammed down. Someone had entered 
a wrong number in a table of TIP phone numbers, and an 
innocent victim had been receiving the repeated test calls. 
At that time faxes hadn’t yet come into widespread use and 
the recipient of the calls, never having heard such a thing, 
assumed it was some prankster repeatedly calling and then 
whistling into the receiver. 
There was considerable interest abroad in networking, 
particularly in England where much parallel thinking about 
so-called “packet-switched” networks had taken place. 
Shortly Donald Davies, who had been a pioneer in thinking 
about such networks, came by for a visit. Davies might 
easily have built a network in England before the 
ARPANET, had he had access to the kind of funding ARPA 
was able to provide. Interactions with our group began to 
develop in other parts of Europe as well, and within a year 
or so we were making trips both to report on our work in 
various meetings and also to explore with potential 
customers their need for computer networks. Once again 
Frank’s instinct for seeking and finding new applications 
was an enormous asset. 
I myself think the verdict is by no means in regarding 
the ultimate benefits and costs to society of computer 
networking. Obviously it’s already had an enormous 
impact, but things are moving so fast, and the air is 
presently so full of hype, that it’s impossible to say how it 
will all ultimately settle out. Like so much technology, the 
final effect will depend on the way society chooses to utilize 
it. Today the glowing predictions are largely based on 
optimistic assumptions about how this will work itself out 
and about potential economic benefits. But there are other 
impacts as well, and I can envision possibilities that are far 
more ominous than those presently being touted. I suspect 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
185 
it would be wise to reserve judgment until the present wave 
of euphoria settles down and matters clarify themselves as 
developments unfold over coming years. 
Most of us have forgotten the sorts of hype that 
accompanied the advent of television in its early years. It 
was hailed then as a great educational vehicle. But against 
the limited educational programming that actually exists 
today, 
one 
must 
balance 
the 
far 
more 
prevalent 
entertainment programs, which, by and large, have had a 
dumbing-down effect on society—not to mention the 
enormous perversion of the political process that has 
resulted. Perhaps computer networking, because it permits 
multi-way, rather than just one-to-many communication, 
will provide a countervailing force, as some are hoping and 
predicting, but much remains to be seen. 
Before I leave the ARPANET (and its offspring, the 
Internet), I feel obliged to comment on what has happened, 
in recent years, to its paternity. As its importance has 
become obvious to everyone (even to me), so-called 
“fathers” have been cropping up all over the place. It’s the 
same old story of the press identifying and celebrating 
certain individuals as “the Father of the Internet,” whereas 
in truth the thing came about as a result of the convergence 
of numerous technical developments and the ideas and 
energies of a large number of individuals. Although some 
people were obviously more central and influential than 
others, trying to point to any one person or a few 
individuals as responsible for either the end result or the 
vision is absurd. Nonetheless, regrettably, a number of 
former colleagues have allowed themselves to be singled 
out and celebrated as particularly important figures, 
whereas others, probably even more central, who are by 
nature more reticent, have received far less attention. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
186 
I have come to believe that it was J.C.R. Licklider and 
his disciple Bob Taylor, who provided the principal 
impetus for networking in the U.S. Not that they 
themselves “invented” any part of it. But they foresaw and 
believed deeply in the tremendously cohesive impact it 
would have and used their influence to push research and 
development in the direction of networking. The depth of 
their conviction and Taylor’s extraordinary persistence in 
pursuing their vision of the computer as primarily a 
communication device, are, to me, absolutely stunning—
especially given that neither one was anything like a 
technical whiz. It may be precisely because they themselves 
were not directly in the trenches, where the many 
formidable obstacles were often all that one could see, that 
they were able to hang on to their vision. But hold to it they 
did, and my hat is off to them. It’s also off to Larry Roberts, 
the person who not only ran the ARPA office during that 
period but also had ample technical ability to climb 
repeatedly into and out of the design trenches during the 
crucial early years of the network. And likewise to Frank 
Heart, whose firm hand on the tiller and general paranoia, 
produced a design that set the kind of high standards for 
later developments in networking that would enable it to 
become a new kind of utility for the entire world. 
A number of years ago, BBN held a self-congratulatory 
party to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the 
beginnings of the Internet. Forgotten was the horror with 
which, at the time, the earlier management had viewed the 
cost of writing the proposal. Instead, now there was much 
raucous 
breast-beating. 
Frank, 
however, 
who 
had 
spearheaded BBN’s initial involvement in networking and 
had overseen its blossoming, was a model of reserve, saying 
only, with considerable eloquence, that it was a rare 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
187 
privilege to have had the opportunity to ride the crest of 
such an important technological wave. Would that all who 
have been involved could emulate the reserve such a 
statement reflects. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
188 
Chapter 15 
 
 
The Aloha Network precedes Ethernet; the 
first microprocessor appears; we design a true 
multiprocessor 
 
uring the late sixties and early seventies there 
were annual meetings of a Systems Conference in 
Honolulu. Each winter people trooped happily to the 
Hawaiian meetings and some significant papers were 
presented there. These meetings had been put together by 
Professor Norm Abramson, a computer scientist at the 
University of Hawaii, with a view to both bringing his 
colleagues to his surfing domain and helping to enhance 
University of Hawaii computing. 
The University of Hawaii has a scattered campus with 
branches on several islands. In order to permit computers 
on the various islands to communicate with one another, 
Norm devised what I believe may be the first instance of 
multi-way 
electronic 
communication 
over 
a 
shared 
medium. Traditionally, when there were only a few devices 
to be connected together, direct links were provided 
between each pair of devices. But it was impractical to 
provide dedicated links between all the pairs of Hawaiian 
islands; instead radio was the obvious means of 
communication. Norm’s innovation was to share a single 
radio link among all the sites as opposed to having separate 
individual links between each pair. 
 
D 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
189 
To understand Norm’s proposal, imagine half a dozen 
people sitting blindfolded in a room so that speech provides 
the only means of communication among them. Norm’s 
idea was simple enough—whenever anyone has something 
to say, he first listens. If someone else is speaking, he waits 
until he hears silence. He then speaks up, says to whom he 
wishes to speak, and then says his message. A problem 
obviously arises if two or more people happen to start 
speaking at once; there will be a conflict and confusion will 
result. But, being able to hear, a speaker can promptly 
notice any conflict and desist, wait a bit, listen for silence, 
and try again. If the delays before retry are varied 
randomly, then eventually some speaker will get through, 
whereupon the others will wait for silence before trying 
again. This, very roughly, was the basis of Norm’s scheme 
for an inter-island computer network which he called the 
Aloha Network. He demonstrated that it worked, and used 
it for communication between the various islands. 
Later on, as computers proliferated and there was 
increasing 
need 
for 
groups 
of 
machines 
to 
intercommunicate locally, others explored further the idea 
of using a shared medium. At Xerox PARC, Bob Metcalfe 
and David Boggs used a shared coaxial wire (they dubbed it 
“Ethernet”) to interconnect locally large numbers of 
computers at very high speed. They introduced numerous 
refinements into Norm’s initial scheme that vastly increased 
its capability, and eventually the idea of Local Area 
Networks (LANS) spread through the computer world, 
creating a major sub-industry. But as far as I know, Norm 
was the first person to build and demonstrate a working 
system based on the concept of a shared medium for multi-
way electronic communication. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
190 
At about this time the first microprocessors made their 
appearance. As we discussed the implications of this 
development at BBN, Frank raised the question whether it 
might not be possible to build a powerful computer by 
ganging together a number of smaller computers in some 
way. The IMPs were already limited in the traffic they could 
handle and it was clear that the way the network was 
growing much more powerful switching nodes would be 
required in the not too distant future. But IMPs aside, 
Frank’s question was titillating and had implications across 
a broad range of other applications that demanded heavy 
computing power. We started mulling over possibilities. 
ILLIAC IV at the University of Illinois was thought to 
be one of the most powerful computers in the world at that 
time. It was what is known as an “array processor” and 
consisted of multiple computers that operated in lock step, 
simultaneously performing the same operations but on 
different sets of data. The image that began to emerge in 
our minds as we discussed possibilities was quite different, 
however, and consisted of multiple processors, each able to 
perform any task that came along, and all working 
cooperatively but independently to do whatever tasks 
needed doing at the moment. Each machine would work on 
whatever task needed to be performed next, and in general 
all the machines were doing different things at any given 
time. With any machine able to perform any task, the more 
machines there were, the faster the tasks could be 
performed and thus the faster the overall job could be 
handled. This seemed a promising image and as we 
considered it, we realized that having multiple machines 
had another advantage as well. 
Because reliability had for so long been uppermost in 
our minds, we began to think of ways that multiple 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
191 
computers might also be used to check on one another. 
Over the ensuing months, questions about how to arrange 
this absorbed much of our attention, and soon high 
reliability became as important an objective as high speed. 
The reliability objective raised many fascinating questions. 
If the ability to excise a troublesome machine existed, how 
could one avoid the possibility that the trouble-maker itself 
would do the excising? If the ability to reload a neighbor’s 
program existed when it seemed to be failing, how could 
one be sure that one’s afflicted neighbor wouldn’t reload 
one with its crazy program? Clearly some sort of voting 
mechanism was called for. Some of the questions that arose 
bore a striking resemblance to problems that arise in human 
society and someone craftily suggested that such a machine 
should be called “The Association of Computing Machines” 
—a play on the name of the largest and oldest computing 
society, The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). 
As our ideas began to firm up, we commenced looking 
around for a suitable computer on which to base our 
design. There were, in fact, very few choices. As we 
envisioned it, the computers would need to work very 
closely together, so closely in fact that they would need to 
share access to a common main memory. Most computers 
are designed in such a way that the connection between 
processor and memory is carefully tuned for high speed 
and is protected from any external access (other than 
carefully crafted Input/Output mechanisms) that might 
interfere with it or slow it down. As we would need to 
intervene in this processor/memory connection, we needed 
to have access to it. Our eye was caught by a new machine, 
the SUE, that was made in unusually modular form by 
Lockheed Electronics and in which access to this connection 
was explicitly made externally available. Although we 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
192 
would have to design a good deal of special hardware to 
mold the machine to our special purposes, its general 
structure seemed amenable to the design. We visited 
Lockheed in Los Angeles to discuss possibilities, but then, 
before things could get fairly under way, an unexpected 
interruption occurred which turned my life upside down 
for a time. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
193 
Chapter 16 
 
 
China! 
 
early a year before, in May of 1971, I had attended a 
workshop in Aspen, Colorado. The topic was computer kits 
for education and I found myself among an elite group of 
computer scientists from around the country. Over drinks 
one evening I put forward an idea that had occurred to me 
some time before. How about a group of computer 
scientists making a visit to China? I love to travel and had 
lain awake speculating on the most exotic places one could 
go. China seemed a suitably implausible and inaccessible 
target in those days. The U.S. had not had diplomatic 
relations with China for over twenty years, but some 
loosening of the barriers was in the wind. No one then 
knew that Nixon was quietly preparing to make the trip 
himself (it would be announced a couple of months later), 
but ping-pong diplomacy had commenced. Realizing that 
formal invitations would be required, I reasoned that a 
group of distinguished American computer scientists 
might, just conceivably, tempt the Chinese. So although I 
was a rather junior member of the group that night, I 
tentatively raised the question of a possible visit to see what 
response I might get. To my delight no one laughed and 
several people expressed real interest. 
When I returned to Boston I drew up a formal proposal 
setting out the parameters of a potential visit: its goals, 
personnel, timing, estimated costs, possible funders, etc. I 
circulated the proposal to a group of colleagues for 
comment and a short while later some of us made an appeal 
N 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
194 
directly to the board of the computing umbrella society 
AFIPS (American Federation of Information Processing 
Societies) for moral and financial support in the unlikely 
event that the trip might actually take place. I regret to 
report that we were made to feel small and given to 
understand that when a computer group ultimately went to 
China, it would be they and not some bunch of professors 
and mavericks who would go. We quietly withdrew. 
A few weeks later I drew up a list of some fifteen of the 
country’s best-known computer scientists. It was an 
impressive list of names, only a few of whom I knew 
personally, and as I picked up the phone I wondered what 
sort of response I’d get. My first call went to Al Perlis. As 
mentioned earlier, I’d encountered him several years before 
when he was part of an NIH visiting committee reviewing 
our work at Washington University. At that time I’d been a 
junior member sitting quietly in a corner and I was quite 
sure that he wouldn’t remember me. Nonetheless, when he 
came on the line I briefly reminded him of our “meeting” 
and promptly launched into a description of my proposed 
trip to China. As I went on I sensed that his interest was 
piqued. After a while he interrupted. “WHO did you say 
you were?” he asked. I quickly reiterated my earlier 
explanation and returned to China. “Sounds interesting.” 
he said. “Who’s going?”  I fearlessly read off the names on 
my list, to none of whom I’d yet spoken. “Sounds like a 
blue-ribbon group,” he said. “Count me in.”  I put a check 
mark beside his name and moved on to the next person on 
my list. This time I was able to announce that Al Perlis was 
going, and that was a clincher; if it was good enough for Al, 
it must be OK. As I continued down the list, my task 
became easier and easier, and the sheet rapidly filled with 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
195 
check marks. By the time it was finished I felt I’d earned my 
certificate as a con man. 
I had asked everyone to send me their curriculum vitae 
and over the next few weeks some extremely impressive 
packages were to arrive on my desk. My next move was to 
try to contact the Chinese embassy in Ottawa. (The U.S. had 
no formal relations with China at that time, and thus no 
embassy.) I managed to find their Ottawa phone number 
and enlisted the help of Tom Cheatham, one of the 
prospective participants, at Harvard in making the call. I 
thought that the Harvard connection would enhance our 
credibility, but when the phone was answered we suddenly 
found ourselves face to face with the impenetrable caution 
and reserve of the inscrutable east. We explained briefly 
what we wanted, but all that came back in return were 
barely perceptible grunts of acknowledgement. Clearly we 
needed help. 
At that time there were articles in the paper about 
increasing contacts with the Chinese, and someone named 
Daniel Tretiak was often quoted as a China specialist. His 
name turned out to be in the Boston telephone directory 
and when I called and explained what I had in mind, he 
expressed considerable interest and suggested that he might 
be able to help. We arranged for him to come to dinner and 
when he arrived I was startled to see someone only about 
four feet tall striding up the front walk alongside a 
statuesque black woman who turned out to be his 
delightful wife. I wondered briefly whether I had somehow 
found my way into a James Bond movie, but such thoughts 
were quickly dispelled by their completely natural charm. 
Here, moreover, was someone who spoke with authority, 
obviously had connections that could be invaluable, and 
spoke fluent Chinese. He agreed to accompany us to 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
196 
Ottawa and introduce us to the staff at the embassy there 
with whom he was already familiar. 
This was a real break. I contacted Cheatham and not 
long afterward the three of us stood outside the embassy in 
Ottawa. Stretching as high as he could reach, Tretiak rang 
the buzzer. When the inscrutable east answered, Tretiak 
swung into rapid fire Chinese and shortly we were ushered 
into a mini-China, replete with what I would come to 
recognize as all the standard trimmings—antimacassars, a 
large thermos of tea, and profound reticence. I had never 
before seen human features that revealed so little; the full 
meaning of the word inscrutable was becoming clear. 
Proceedings were one-sided as Dan, unreeling his quiet 
Chinese, explained the purpose of our visit. I, meanwhile, 
tried to determine whether they thought we were spies or 
merely insane. After a while, Dan indicated that it was time 
to hand over the formal request I’d prepared together with 
the sheaf of résumés. After a few further “pleasantries” we 
were returned to the street, where Tretiak assured us that it 
had gone well. I’m not sure how he knew, perhaps because 
we hadn’t been bodily ejected. In any case, who could tell 
what the officials at the other end in China proper might 
conclude. These guys were mere functionaries; the total 
absence of any reaction was, of course, precisely what 
they’d been trained to exhibit. Back in Boston I reported to 
the prospective participants and then proceeded to forget 
about the whole thing. We’d done what we could do; now it 
was in the lap of the Gods and the powers-that-be in 
Beijing. 
Nearly a year later, as spring came on and we had 
heard nothing, we concluded that the predictable thing had 
happened to our request; it had been “filed” somewhere. 
We’d asked to go in the summer when school would be out. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
197 
Many of the participants were professors who now began 
dispersing to the far corners of the globe. Then one day in 
April, just when I’d completely forgotten about it, an 
innocent looking envelope appeared on my desk. When I 
opened it there it was: an invitation for six computer 
scientists to come to China, together with their wives, for a 
three week visit! 
Overnight the world changed. The U.S. government 
suddenly expressed interest. A letter arrived from Nixon’s 
Science Advisor, Ed David, on impressive-looking White 
House stationery. The National Academy, which for years 
had been trying to establish contact with the Chinese 
scientific community, but had been rebuffed because of its 
close ties with Taiwan, commenced treating us with respect 
and promptly offered to pay our travel expenses. Gradually 
the realization came over me that this was to be far more 
than a mere travel experience—suddenly we were in the 
middle of international politics at a critical moment in 
history. The importance of our mission was belied by the 
modesty of the letter that had arrived. We had apparently 
been singled out as having just the right character to 
comprise the first scientific delegation in a generation: We 
had no direct government ties and were researchers and 
academics in a field that the Chinese wanted to learn more 
about. Our invitation was a signal that the door was 
cautiously opening. 
I had the immediate problem of selecting six out of the 
fifteen people we’d originally proposed. Having suggested 
the trip in the first place, and having done virtually all of 
the arranging, there was no question in my mind that I was 
going to go. That left five others to select. I didn’t want to 
take responsibility for making such a difficult choice single-
handedly, and arranged for the group to self-select from 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
198 
within its own ranks by voting. When the dust settled, the 
six who went were myself, Al Perlis, Herb Simon, Wes 
Clark, Tom Cheatham, and Anatol Holt. Although the most 
junior member of the group, I was nonetheless the person 
who had made the formal contact and whom the Chinese 
thus recognized as the head of the delegation, a rôle I 
would slowly grow into. In the meantime Nixon and his 
cortège took over the spotlight and made history with their 
trip, which I was sure had helped pave the way for our own 
venture. 
The days leading up to our departure were frantic. As 
we climbed onto the plane for Hong Kong, some of us were 
meeting one another for the very first time. But we had 
many hours to get acquainted during the long flight and 
several days thereafter in Hong Kong during which we 
made final arrangements. As we finally crossed the border 
and were met by our Chinese hosts, the significance of our 
visit was brought home to us—we were greeted with great 
gravity and formality and treated like V.I.P.s. Each of us 
had been provided with a private car, a driver, and a 
translator. It took some time for us to adjust to such 
treatment. 
Although we hadn’t reckoned on it, we had unwittingly 
brought along our own personal ice-breaker in the form of 
Al Perlis. Al was suffering from multiple sclerosis and by 
that time could walk only with difficulty using canes. The 
Chinese instantly produced a wheel-chair and the 
combination of Al’s disability, his perpetual good spirits 
and omnipresent sense of humor (which the Chinese 
immediately sensed), broke through all the barriers of 
formality and allowed genuine human contact to flourish. 
Our hosts also recognized the heroism of someone who 
would make such an arduous trip under the circumstances, 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
199 
and Al quickly became their favorite. Eventually we were to 
meet with China’s senior and most honored scientist, Kuo 
Mo Ro, head of the Chinese National Academy. As he 
shook hands with each of us in turn I watched as a broad 
smile burst onto his face when he came to Al. Kuo Mo Ro 
was elderly and recognizing a fellow sufferer, drew him 
instantly to his side. Sadly neither Al nor his wife Sydelle 
nor Kuo Mo Ro is any longer with us. In later years I would 
come to know Al and Sydelle as close friends and to 
appreciate even more deeply his extraordinary pluck and 
great humanity and her devotion in caring for him. 
Our visit took us initially to Canton where there was 
very little to see in the way of technology. There, however, 
we were treated to the first of many banquets at one of the 
best restaurants I’ve ever been to. Our host for the evening 
was a giant of a man who, although clearly friendly, had the 
aspect of a menacing Chinese tank driver from an American 
comic strip of the period. I am basically a non-drinker (all 
this talk of Martinis and Scotch notwithstanding), and had 
been assured that the Chinese don’t drink. I was therefore 
eying the multiple glasses at our places with some 
uneasiness when, to my disappointment, this leviathan 
filled one of his glasses with a villainous looking liquid, 
stood up, and began to toast me as head of the delegation. 
He finished up with a phrase I was to come to loathe, “Gan 
Bei” which clearly meant “bottoms up” (literally “dry 
glass”). In a flash I saw that my choice lay between utter 
disgrace and, in all probability, throwing up all over the 
gentleman as I attempted futilely to duplicate his act. 
Wesley, bless his heart, recognizing my predicament, 
promptly stood up and, after a short speech, casually tossed 
back the entire contents of his glass. International relations 
had been rescued from the brink, but some damage had 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
200 
been done to my personal reputation. In the fullness of 
time, it would be repaired. 
Over the next two days we visited a museum and a 
kindergarten, and were treated to a movie of a heroic, 
revolutionary ballet that we were later to see live in Beijing. 
We also witnessed two major operations utilizing nothing 
but acupuncture for anesthesia. These events allowed us to 
become accustomed to our new environment, to our hosts, 
and to the behavior that was expected of us. We were quick 
studies, although I never completely managed to forego 
occasional attempts at informal communication. But it 
never worked. We were being shoved into the rôle of semi-
official emissaries, whether it fitted or not. Everyone was 
extremely friendly and hospitable, but there were clear 
bounds to which we Americans were unaccustomed. 
After Canton we proceeded to Shanghai where we 
presented lectures and held discussions with members of 
the Shanghai Computer Institute of the Academy of Science. 
The computers we were shown were several years behind 
what one would find scattered around the U.S. at that time. 
In reading over a summary of our trip that Wes and I wrote 
shortly after the event, I find the statement: “Generally 
speaking, Chinese computer technology seems to be 
pursuing a course not dissimilar to that followed in the 
early days of development in this country, that is, prior to 
the great proliferation of machines in the mid-sixties.” It 
seems that regardless of when one looks back, the “great 
proliferation” appears to have just occurred. 
We found that practically all of the pieces of a machine 
were manufactured, often by hand, in the factory where the 
machines were produced. There were no separate suppliers, 
no sub-assemblies; no real support industry had yet 
evolved. We later saw evidence, in other contexts, of an 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
201 
absence of the sort of production engineering that would be 
taken for granted in the U.S.—even things as simple as 
laying out the production process in a sequential line. 
Instead, items were moved around hither and yon as they 
passed through the various stages of production. 
After Shanghai came Beijing where we exchanged 
lectures with scientists at the Computer Institute and Tsing 
Hua University. The Chinese were particularly curious 
about large, powerful machines and about the latest 
advances in large-scale integrated circuit design (something 
our particular group was ill-prepared to discuss in any 
depth). 
Our visits to Tsing Hua University revealed the 
magnitude of the changes wrought by the cultural 
revolution. The University was now administered by a 
Revolutionary Committee consisting primarily of workers, 
peasants, and soldiers, with some professors and students 
also participating. Teachers and professors went to work on 
farms and in factories as part of their “re-education,” and in 
general academic standards appeared to have relaxed. 
Between lectures we visited the cultural and scenic sites 
that were to become standard stops on China tours over 
coming years. We were housed in a great caravansary next 
to the Forbidden City and one night, having gone out on the 
balcony of my room to cool off, I was dismayed to hear the 
door into my room click shut behind me, neatly locking me 
out. The neighboring room had a similar balcony and I 
could see that the door was open into its room. There 
seemed little alternative, so once again utilizing my rock 
climbing experience, I was soon on the adjacent balcony. 
Stepping into the room I surprised two very middle-
eastern-looking gents in their underwear (it was fiercely 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
202 
hot) who, as I gesticulated, roared with laughter as I 
proceeded out and into the hall to return to my own room. 
 
 
A meeting in China 
 
Rarely were we allowed to sleep, and by the 
penultimate banquet in the Great Hall of the People we 
were in a state of utter exhaustion. On our way out of 
China, however, I was finally able to square accounts with 
the tank driver in Canton. This time, as we sat down to our 
final banquet, I noted with relief that my glass had been 
filled with innocuous looking red wine. But aside from that, 
I was ravenous. I had learned that at these banquets, 
etiquette required that one place the food on one’s 
companion’s plate, never on one’s own. He, in turn, did 
likewise. It was rude to decline an offering. As I chatted 
with my tank driver, I became aware that he was slowing 
down. I, on the other hand, was still famished. With 
unswerving determination I continued to feed him until he 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
203 
was finally forced to gesture “no more.” As we staggered 
out into the moonlight, he put his great arm around my 
shoulders, indicating that the score had been evened and I 
had regained his respect. 
When we arrived back in Hong Kong, waiting at the 
train station was the woman with whom I was destined to 
share the rest of my life, Laura Gould. She had been 
teaching computer science to humanities students at U.C. 
Berkeley and had received Berkeley’s Distinguished 
Teaching award. We had met earlier that year at a follow-on 
workshop to the one where I had originally proposed the 
China trip. The two of us spent a short holiday on Japan’s 
northernmost island, Hokaido, recovering from the stress of 
the visit to China, and then headed back to the U.S. We 
stopped briefly in San Francisco where we visited a place 
that was later to become home territory for both of us. 
George Pake, the former Provost of Washington University, 
had been hired by Xerox to put together a research center in 
Palo Alto and a group of very bright computer scientists 
had been assembled in what was bemusedly referred to 
then as Pake’s PARC—the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center. 
In addition to George, I knew a fair number of the people 
who had gathered there and we spent an hour or so sitting 
around in the bean bags that would become emblematic of 
PARC, discussing the trip I’d just been on. 
Eventually Wes and I wrote a report of our trip for 
Science and Mary Allen wrote a feature cover-article for the 
Washington University magazine. (see Bibliography) 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
204 
Chapter 17 
 
 
Pluribus struts its stuff 
 
he adventure in China, together with the short 
vacation in Japan, had taken just over a month and now, 
back once more at BBN, we settled into our new life 
together. Laura shortly commenced working in the speech-
understanding group at BBN, and I picked up the threads 
of the multiprocessor design. We had assembled a powerful 
team of designers, including many who had worked on the 
earlier IMPs. Before we could design couplers to 
interconnect the machines, however, we needed to 
understand the SUE in great detail, and here we 
encountered the first of what would turn into a succession 
of problems with Lockheed. Over the ensuing months we 
came to realize that Lockheed had not fully understood the 
implications of the structure that they had devised, and 
certainly had no inkling that anyone would ever try to do 
with it what we proceeded to try to do—although it was 
within the advertised capabilities. They were unused to 
customers who had read their specifications carefully and 
expected their machines to meet those specs. In holding 
their feet to the fire, I fear I was not always kind or patient. 
On the other hand, they deserved all that they received, and 
not a few Lockheed heads rolled in the course of our 
interactions. We were ultimately forced to help them 
redesign two critical integrated circuits in order that the 
machine would work as promised. After endless phone 
calls and far too many trips back and forth across the 
T
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
205 
country, we were able to assemble working multiprocessor 
hardware. 
In the meantime the software team had been preparing 
a version of the IMP program that would be structured to 
work on this new kind of multiple machine. In addition to 
the regular IMP job of transporting and routing messages in 
the network, there were tasks associated with doling out the 
work among the processors and keeping track of which 
machines were healthy. The individual machines watched 
over one another for possible misbehavior and periodically 
tested one another. If a member machine or other element 
appeared to be causing trouble or otherwise misbehaving, a 
vote could be taken to excise the errant piece from the 
system. The individual machines could also reload and 
restart one another if trouble occurred. And finally, they 
watched for, and brought on board, new members as new 
machines were plugged in and powered up. 
As the reliability features of the program began 
working, the overall machine started to take on the feel of a 
gyroscope, manifesting something resembling a will of its 
own. Our goal was to make it impossible (i.e., 
extraordinarily unlikely) for any single failure (short of a 
total power failure) to damage the overall machine’s 
functioning for more than a brief period. Turning off or 
removing one machine had no effect—the overall system 
continued to perform the network job. The day came when 
we demonstrated the machine to some visitors and 
challenged them to see if they could break it by pulling out 
cards, throwing switches, etc. (One thing at a time of 
course.) One of the men bent down and, with a knowing 
smile, threw the main power switch on one of the racks 
(which simultaneously shut off several machines). As there 
were other racks containing duplicate pieces of hardware, 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
206 
the system kept right on running. Peeved by his failure, he 
reached down again and this time turned the switch on and 
off repeatedly as fast as he could, then went to the next rack 
and did the same thing and on to the next, and so on. At 
this, the system paused, causing him to smile triumphantly. 
But after a few seconds, to his astonishment (and our 
delight), it resumed operating. 
 
 
 
The Pluribus Team42 
 
                                                 
42 Left to right, Front row: Tony Michel, Marty Thrope, Bob Bressler, Dave 
Francis; standing at left: David Katsuki, Dick Garber, Ben Barker (inside 
rack); standing at right: Mike Kraley, Steve Jeske, Will Crowther; above; 
Frank Heart, Severo Ornstein 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
207 
It was now time to name the machine. I had learned 
years before that the two most important features of any 
computer were its color and its name. We all agreed on a 
pleasing sort of pale blue for the color, but the name proved 
more difficult. Several names were proposed and after a 
number of straw votes we finally settled on the name 
Pluribus. This was a double pun. Not only did it evoke the 
“e pluribus unum” (from many, one) of the dollar bill, but it 
also spoke to the fact that the machine consisted of multiple 
busses. A “bus” is a sort of machine backbone consisting of 
a common set of wires and a discipline for using them by 
means of which the various parts of the machine 
communicate with one another. In this case, where there 
were multiple machines, there were multiple backbones, all 
interconnected by our specially designed bus-couplers. 
While we were working on the design of the Pluribus, 
another multiple machine called C.mmp was being built at 
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) in Pittsburgh. Their 
goal was fundamentally the same as ours—high speed. But 
while we needed more speed to handle multiple high-speed 
network lines, the CMU group was interested in the speed 
in order to facilitate Time Sharing. The overhead of 
switching attention among multiple users ate up machine 
cycles, and of course the faster the machine, the more users 
could be accommodated. Hence speed was doubly 
important. The problems of sharing a multiprocessor (i.e., 
multiple computers joined together) among multiple users 
(with varying demands) was indeed daunting. 
It 
is 
somewhat 
unfortunate 
that 
the 
term 
“multiprocessing” was already being employed by the 
Time Sharing community to describe what happens when a 
computer is used to perform multiple jobs at more or less the 
same time—by chopping the jobs up into little pieces and 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
208 
processing the pieces in rapid succession. Single computers 
have been doing multiple jobs “at once” for many years; 
you don’t need more than one processor to do that. Now, 
however, we began using the term “multiprocessor” to 
mean multiple actual hardware processors working 
together on a job—any job, including possibly a 
multiprocessing job. With a multiprocessor you get truly 
parallel operation, in which multiple, independent tasks are 
actually executed simultaneously. This is very different from 
the illusion of simultaneity that is created when multiple 
jobs are handled piecemeal in rapid succession by a single 
processor. 
In fact, both the Time Sharing application which the 
CMU people were trying to fit onto their multiprocessor, 
and the IMP job, which we were trying to fit onto ours, are 
multiprocessing jobs—that is, numerous and somewhat 
unpredictable tasks must be handled without dropping 
anything on the floor. There was friendly competition 
between the two groups, and we met jointly from time to 
time to share experiences and views, and to poke gently at 
one another. 
They felt that the machine we were designing was 
applicable only to the sort of specialized job that the IMPs 
performed, where the program was broken into sub-pieces 
(tasks) when it was being written. With Time Sharing, who 
could tell what kind of program some user at a terminal 
might suddenly launch? How could it be broken up into 
pieces that could be handled simultaneously? So they 
argued that there was no way to fit Time Sharing, with its 
inherent unpredictability, onto such a machine. 
The IMP, on the other hand, faced real-time deadlines 
that Time Sharing did not. Yes, it would be nice if Time 
Sharing systems ran fast, so that users wouldn’t be annoyed 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
209 
by slow response, but if the IMP failed to keep up with the 
passing of messages, the result was catastrophic failure 
rather than mere annoyance. Each group thought that the 
other was a bit wrong-headed, and we were proceeding 
down our independent paths when a call from the outside 
world came in from a country I’d visited before and had 
loved, Chile. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
210 
Chapter 18 
 
 
Chile revisited; changes at BBN; I head for 
PARC 
 
t seemed that the Chileans wanted to learn about 
networking. They weren’t the only ones. We’d traveled to a 
number of foreign lands by this time, spreading the word 
about the usefulness of networks. News of the ARPANET 
had spread and there were commercial applications for 
special networks waiting to be built in many places. So 
Laura and I and Alex McKenzie climbed onto a plane and 
headed for Chile. 
Chile had changed in a major way since I’d been there 
before. My first visit preceded the days of Salvador Allende, 
an era when things were relatively peaceful if somewhat 
disorderly. By this time Allende had come and gone, 
Pinochet was in power, and there was an abundance of 
“law and order.” The streets were patrolled by armed 
guards, and a strict curfew was in place. Despite this, we 
encountered the same wonderful Chilean hospitality I 
remembered, although the midnight curfew conflicted with 
the custom of 11 P.M. dinners and people rushed to return 
home promptly after eating. We were told that violators 
could be shot on sight and if one didn’t make it home in 
time, one spent the night wherever one happened to be 
when the curfew hour arrived. 
Our lectures were more or less routine descriptions of 
the network we had built, together with the reasoning 
behind major decisions. We were speaking to a collection of 
I
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
211 
higher-ups 
from 
the 
communications 
and 
banking 
industries. We kept asking who our hosts were and got 
evasive replies, indicating that it was some branch of 
government we clearly didn’t understand. The day finally 
came when we were to meet our host face to face and it was 
an evening I won’t soon forget. We were taken to the top 
floor of a downtown hotel and as we stepped from the 
elevator we left the world of Chile and entered the world of 
USA circa 1950. The contrast with the street below was 
staggering. A band was playing, the lights were dimmed, 
people were swaying in a slow dance. We were ushered to a 
table where we were greeted by our host—a military man 
replete with the classic dark glasses, speaking impeccable 
English with no trace of an accent. It turned out he was a 
product of the U.S. Air Force Academy in Colorado and 
over dinner he explained to us how little the people of Chile 
understood what they needed. When I finally got back to 
the hotel, I felt I needed a bath. 
The extreme discrepancy in wealth was both apparent 
and appalling. By now we in the U.S. are experiencing some 
of the same thing, although the process of wealth 
concentration hasn’t yet proceeded as far as it had in Chile 
at that time, and of course the overall abundance is much 
greater here than there. Nonetheless, memories of what we 
witnessed there cause me to be concerned about the extent 
to which we are redistributing wealth in our own country 
and to wonder what will become of us if we continue in the 
directions we’ve been going. When I first went to Chile in 
1966, I returned to a United States in which a homeless 
person was a rare sight. Today it has become all too 
commonplace. 
But at that time other things were beginning to bother 
me. BBN had changed in the eight years I’d been there. The 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
212 
company had grown enormously and changed character. 
Concern about the bottom line was replacing the earlier 
focus on interesting research. The ARPANET was turned 
over from Arpa to the Defense Communications Agency, 
which was interested in its utility, not in research. At the 
same time there was increasing emphasis on building 
systems for the military, some of which involved classified 
work. By this stage in my life I didn’t want to have a thing 
to do with classified work and I began to think about 
leaving. To my everlasting regret I made a false start, and 
ultimately took over a year to make a final decision to 
depart. Despite this, when we left BBN threw us a truly 
grand and heartwarming party. I gave away snow tires, 
snow shovels, windshield ice-chippers, and all such wintry 
paraphernalia. We were heading for a place where it 
seemed unlikely they would be needed. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
213 
Chapter 19 
 
 
A place of character(s); I love my Alto; the 
imprint of Engelbart; Thacker’s decision; the 
importance of tools; an unfortunate erasure; 
Bob Taylor—missionary; el Dorado 
 
fter many years I was finally returning to El Dorado. By 
this time (early 1976), Silicon Valley was in full swing and a 
large number of our friends and colleagues (including 
many from BBN) had already found their way to Xerox 
PARC, which was rapidly becoming a leading center (in 
fact the leading center) of computer research in the U.S. I 
had decided to follow this migration. Although it was part 
of an enormous corporation, PARC had by then acquired a 
far more academic feel than BBN. The place had a decided 
“religion,” but researchers were encouraged to pursue their 
own interests and projects. Furthermore, the religion was 
one that I could happily sign on to. It emphasized personal 
machines, tied together in a local network based on the 
Ethernet that had been developed at PARC. There were 
shared facilities, notably a laser printer and large file 
storage, but the structure allowed most of a researcher’s 
work to be done on his or her personal machine, and 
relegated sharing to those things where the economics 
required it but where contention would be minimal. This 
seemed an eminently sensible solution that has indeed 
become widespread as the years have passed. 
As at BBN, there were two computer labs at PARC with 
related interests but somewhat different character. I found 
A 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
214 
my way into the Computer Science Lab, then headed by 
Jerry Elkind (my former boss from the BBN TENEX 
interlude), later to be headed by Bob Taylor. Laura joined 
the System Science Lab down the hall where Alan Kay held 
court. As at BBN, we were fortunate to be able to work 
together in the same place but on different projects. The 
mirror in the bathroom where we took our morning shower 
was covered with traces of the diagrams we sketched on its 
misted surface as we discussed our work with one another. 
 
 
Bob Taylor 
 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
215 
PARC, at least the computer labs, had a very special 
character that was set in part by the lab leadership and in 
part by the nature of the virtuoso researchers assembled 
there. When Taylor became head of the Computer Science 
Lab, I never knew his door to be closed. He always 
welcomed visits by any and all members of the lab and was 
happy to discuss just about any topic. But while he insisted 
on complete openness between people on anything related 
to the lab, he also insisted that people’s personal lives were 
strictly their own business. At one level there was great 
informality and individual freedom with a total absence of 
the usual structures for keeping employees in line. People 
came and went as they pleased; it was simply taken for 
granted that everyone would pull his or her share. (One of 
the PARC people later went to work for a while at Xerox 
headquarters in Connecticut and was appalled when 
suddenly the lights went off at something like ten o’clock at 
night. It was simply assumed that by then everyone would 
have gone home. Not so at PARC, where people could be 
found working away at every hour of the night.) On the 
other hand, there was a feeling of cohesion and esprit de 
corps, of everyone pulling together in the same general 
direction, and diversions were definitely not encouraged, 
especially when they ran counter to the group ethos and 
overall direction. 
Bean-bag “chairs,” which filled the offices and 
conference rooms, came to symbolize the informality of the 
place. They represented one of many devices for 
encouraging casual contact and interchange between 
researchers. A weekly gathering of the Computer Science 
Lab, known as Dealer, in which one or more individuals 
stood up and presented some new research findings or 
questions, was a free-for-all of ideas. People often 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
216 
volunteered to be the speaker at these gatherings, knowing 
that plenty of slings and arrows would be forthcoming—as 
well as cheers, laughter, and applause when deserved. And 
those who were too shy to volunteer were eventually 
volunteered. Everyone who wasn’t in the middle of some 
compelling experiment attended Dealers. They were 
chaired by Bob Taylor in a ritualistic manner, pipe and Dr. 
Pepper in hand—directly beneath a sizeable “No Smoking” 
sign. (Almost everyone else in the lab had given up 
smoking by that time.) 
In addition, speakers would occasionally come from 
outside of the lab and when they did so, many came with 
justifiable trepidation. The reputation of PARC for 
unflinching outspokenness (some said arrogance) had 
spread to the outside world and intimidated many. We 
showed little mercy to one another and came to accept a 
level of forthrightness that could stun an outsider. One day, 
as he was beginning his presentation and looking down on 
this unusual audience slouching comfortably in their bean-
bags, a somewhat nervous speaker, looking up at the No 
Smoking sign, asked tentatively, “If I smoke in here, will I 
be stoned?” Instantly came the reply, “Depends on what 
you’re smoking.” Another poor chap was attempting to 
make an improbable case, and his audience were beginning 
to fidget. Suddenly, from the back of the room, came a 
clarion voice. “Bullshit!” it said. The speaker staggered as 
though shot. The ensuing discussion left him bereft of both 
argument and topic. To someone with fragile nerves, 
unused to this level of candor, such a stroke could be 
unmanning and left some speakers badly-shaken. 
Potential new researchers were invited for a visit and 
circulated around the lab, chatting with various members 
who expressed interest in their specialty. The prospect 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
217 
would then make a presentation to the lab of some piece of 
current work as part of the interview process. For many this 
was a daunting experience, although of course, some 
relished this kind of spontaneous give and take. (I’m one of 
the few people who endured this process twice, having 
declined the resulting offer the first time around.) After the 
interviewee had departed, Taylor would call together the 
senior members of the lab to discuss everyone’s views. 
From the many such discussions in which I participated, 
my favorite comment came from Jim Morris who possessed 
an unusually dry sense of humor. We had been 
interviewing a very tall fellow, taller than any member of 
the lab. Others had been chewing over his presentation, his 
competence, and likely contributions to the lab. When it 
came Morris’ turn to comment, he said simply, “Seems 
pretty bright, for such a big guy.” 
The computer that existed at PARC when I arrived 
early in 1976 was the Alto. I believe PARC was the first 
place where every researcher was provided with a personal 
machine as a standard piece of office equipment. The day I 
arrived, one was wheeled into my new office. The Alto had 
been designed by Chuck Thacker and Ed McCreight, based 
on a description in an earlier memo by Thacker. Butler 
Lampson, Bob Sproull and others had written the software, 
including the operating system, the compiler, and some of 
the early applications. The philosophy underlying the Alto 
depended heavily on work done earlier by Doug Engelbart, 
at SRI. 
In the late 1960s, Doug, one of the truly great 
innovators of the modern computer era, was experimenting 
with new ways for users to interact with a computer via 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
218 
displays.43  I visited his laboratory when one of the early 
ARPANET IMPs was being installed there and had seen his 
revolutionary system in operation. That system formed an 
absolutely critical step in the development of today’s 
graphical user interface. Doug foresaw the very sorts of use 
we all experience today, but the inexpensive chip 
technology, upon which such use is dependent, was simply 
unavailable in the 1960s. Instead his system was based on a 
Time Shared computer (an SDS 940). In the computer room 
down the hall, each user’s work was displayed on a small, 
individual, vector-type CRT (See Appendix II). Mounted in 
front of each CRT was a television camera whose video 
signal was piped to a television monitor at the user’s station 
(think desk, although these users were often gathered in 
beanbags). Mixed into each user’s video image was a 
cursor, controlled by the user’s mouse, that allowed items 
on the screen to be pointed at. Doug had designed the 
mouse for precisely this purpose, and although today he is 
finally being recognized as having “invented the mouse,” 
his contribution is far broader, and encompasses the basic 
concept of direct user control through an interactive 
display. His prototype system on the Time Shared machine 
using primitive television techniques was cumbersome by 
today’s standards, but it pointed the way to modern usage. 
In 1968 he gave a historic public demonstration of his work 
that blew the minds of all who were present. Alan Kay, who 
                                                 
43  Earlier machines, such as the SAGE machines, TX-2, and the LINC, had 
displays and input devices that were used to interact with programs, but 
Doug extended and generalized this use so broadly that it led to a 
qualitative shift in the way users thought of interacting with their 
programs and data. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
219 
was there, describes Doug as “dealing lightning with both 
hands.” 
The next steps took place at PARC just a few years 
afterward. In Engelbart’s system, the image produced by 
the computer consisted of line segments. This limited the 
kinds of pictures that could be presented. Television was 
used only in a passive sense, to transport the images from 
the computer room to the user’s monitor. The PARC 
researchers decided instead to create television images 
directly from the computer—images in which every point 
of the television scan was individually specified by a bit in 
memory. This meant that for the first time arbitrary pictures 
could be generated at television rate and resolution. 
A preliminary system was built that included an 
expensive external memory for holding the bits of the 
image. A short while later, in designing the Alto (which was 
to be a personal computer and thus needed to be 
comparatively inexpensive), Chuck Thacker decided to 
dedicate a significant segment of each computer’s main 
memory to holding the bit-for-bit image of the display 
screen. Having the bit-map directly in the main memory, as 
opposed to an external memory, allowed manipulation by 
programs at a level of intimacy (and thus speed) never 
before possible. The cost and availability of integrated 
circuit memories at that time brought this scheme barely 
within reason, and the decision by Thacker to dedicate 
memory in this seemingly profligate fashion was an act of 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
220 
considerable daring.44 The payoff, however, was enormous. 
By facilitating the graphical user interface (as it has come to 
be called) it opened the door to a fundamental change in the 
way people interacted with computers. Today, of course, 
displays are based on many different kinds of underlying 
technology, but the basic notion of a bit-map, contained in 
the computer’s main memory, which the user references by 
means of a mouse of some sort, has remained the canonical 
“user interface” everyone today takes for granted. 
In many ways the Alto was also a descendant of the 
LINC, but of course in much more modern dress—so much 
so that the quantitative changes resulted in qualitatively 
different user capabilities. By today’s standards the Alto 
was big, (the size of a hotel-room refrigerator), clunky, 
expensive, slow, and had limited storage. Nonetheless, 
functionally it embodied virtually all of the features to 
which the world has since become accustomed. 
Another change manifested in the Alto was the 
disappearance of the console that, in one form or another, 
had graced the façade of earlier machines and provided the 
principal user access. What permitted the lights and 
switches to disappear was the development of a thing 
called a PROM. ROM stands for read-only-memory, and the 
P stands for the fact that, with special equipment, you could 
initialize (Program) the ROM with whatever you wanted 
before you put it into the computer. Once in place, 
however, the contents of the PROM could not be changed. 
                                                 
44 Thacker says, “The use of main memory resulted from my 
internalization of the truth of Moore's law—semiconductor memory was 
barely cheap enough to do it at all, but would get much cheaper very 
quickly.” 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
221 
When programs fail to function properly, they rarely just 
cease operating: often they wreak havoc inside the memory, 
altering its contents. A PROM could provide a safe haven 
for bootstrap programs that, following a crash, could bring 
in a small debugging program to peer around inside the 
rest of the machine after the running program had gone 
aground. It could then report what it saw, on a printer or a 
screen, or on whatever other handy output device the 
machine might have. A different piece of bootstrap 
program could then reload the repaired version of the 
program for another run at the wall. Thus the need for the 
switches and lights, that had previously been used to 
explore and modify the machines innards, simply went 
away and was replaced by a program in a secure part of the 
memory—the PROM. 
The bit-map display screen and the disappearance of 
the console had many practical consequences. For example, 
together they meant that debugging, heretofore a frightfully 
cumbersome process, was dramatically speeded up. But 
they also had profound philosophical implications. Note 
that when access was provided by switches and lights, the 
term “user” implied someone who was going to tinker 
directly with the machine. Now a “user” could be someone 
who interacted only with functioning programs that 
provided one or more applications such as a text editor or a 
graphics program having nothing whatsoever to do with 
the machine’s innards. To the user, therefore, the Alto 
presented much the same façade as do the machines of 
today. 
The final novel element in the PARC scene which tied 
everything together was the Ethernet. Not only were all the 
individual researchers’ Altos interconnected, but special 
servers for printing and for large-scale file-storage were also 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
222 
connected to the Ethernet. The Ethernet owes a substantial 
debt to Norm Abramson as mentioned earlier. Bob 
Metcalfe, who together with Dave Boggs developed the 
Ethernet at PARC (and later went on to found 3Com), had 
discussed the Aloha Network in his PhD thesis and he 
exploited the basic scheme (with many important 
refinements) in producing the original Ethernet at PARC. 
All of these elements had come into existence at PARC 
by the mid-1970s and numerous experimental software 
applications, forerunners of many of today’s most common 
user programs, were rapidly proliferating. “Windows” (the 
technique whereby rectangles of visual material could be 
overlain on the screen) were already being developed and 
demonstrated about the time I arrived. (Many years later 
Microsoft acknowledged the importance of this idea by 
adopting the name for its revised operating system). A text 
editor called BRAVO, very similar to Microsoft WORD 
(from which WORD, in fact, derives, having been rewritten 
at Microsoft by Charles Simonyi, Bravo’s implementor at 
PARC) was in place and was already being upgraded. Most 
of the refinements that have taken place since are too 
complex to describe here and, although they underlie the 
ease with which today’s users accomplish many of their 
tasks, they do not fundamentally change the user’s 
perception of the machine. 
In almost every technological field, the development of 
tools has proven critical. In no field has this been more true 
than with computers. Here tools have been required to 
build other tools and gradually a giant pyramid of such 
tools came into being, with each layer dependent on the one 
below it. Computers themselves quickly became a principal 
tool for building further computers. And if the tools for 
building the machines themselves formed a pyramid, the 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
223 
programming tools for creating software systems constitute 
a veritable Mt. Everest. As a consequence of this pyramid of 
tools, the race, particularly in the software field, has often 
gone to those who first understood the need and went to 
work building the underlying tools. The people at PARC 
understood this situation better than almost any other 
group and this, more than anything else (other than 
perhaps the driving force of a few insightful individuals), 
led to their preeminence in the field. Of course, like 
anything else, it could be carried too far—and sometimes 
was. 
So much for an introduction to the PARC scene as it 
existed when I arrived. Because I hadn’t come with a 
particular project of my own in mind, my initiation took the 
form of working on a project that was already under way. 
The Computer Science Lab had earlier designed and put 
together a laser printer. It was a giant affair and consisted of 
a number of elements that filled an entire room. It was 
connected, via an Alto (which formed one of the elements), 
to the Ethernet so that its use could be shared by anyone 
with a computer connected to the Ethernet. Having 
successfully built this monster, people had then set about 
making something smaller and better integrated. In another 
PARC lab, Gary Starkweather tore apart one of Xerox’s 
standard copiers and installed a laser mechanism in it for 
writing a scanned image onto the drum. Meanwhile Bob 
Sproull and Butler Lampson in the Computer Science Lab 
set about identifying parts of the image conversion job 
previously handled by hardware that could be turned over 
to software (and microcode), thus reducing dramatically the 
quantity of specialized hardware required. This process of 
distillation and reassignment was pretty well completed by 
the time I arrived and it had become obvious what 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
224 
functions 
would 
be 
needed 
in 
the 
much-reduced, 
specialized hardware for the next generation. I was to 
design that hardware. This was something of a challenge as 
it had been some time since I’d actually done any design 
myself and instead had been supervising a team of 
designers at BBN. New, more sophisticated chips had come 
into being, and furthermore the design process at PARC 
employed new and unfamiliar design tools. So there was a 
lot to learn in a hurry. 
One of the people who had worked on the design was 
Bob Sproull, whom I’d previously encountered at various 
places along the way (Harvard, the Stanford Artificial 
Intelligence Lab, etc.) Bob was leaving shortly to lecture in 
India and just before he left he spent a day imparting all of 
the information I would presumably need to proceed. Bob 
moves very fast, and as he sped along in his explanation, I 
was hanging on by the fingernails. At that point I hadn’t the 
vaguest notion how a laser printer might work. Thankfully 
Bob made squiggles on the white board as he spoke and I 
knew that I’d be studying that white board carefully for 
some days to come. 
Next morning I arrived in my office to find it being 
rearranged as I’d requested. This involved shifting the 
precious white board a foot or so to the left, and to my 
horror I saw a workman bellying up to the shifted board as 
he screwed it down in its new location. In the process, he 
had removed a sizable portion of its contents onto the front 
of his overalls. I was to spend the next week scrutinizing 
that white board with the squinting eye of an archaeologist, 
attempting to induce it to release its secrets. Eventually, 
with the help of others, I came to understand what was 
needed and in due course the hardware was built. Bob 
returned in time to help with the debugging and to write 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
225 
the necessary program to make the whole shebang go. 
Shortly we had a much more compact printing facility 
called a Dover. It was then duplicated and soon became the 
workhorse printer, not only for PARC, but for a number of 
other computer science labs around the country as well. 
Some of the same logic that drove that printer now resides, 
in far more compressed form, in the tiny commercial laser 
printer that sits on my desk here at home. 
Many of the programs that came out of PARC arose 
because the person devising them wanted such a tool. 
Chuck Thacker, as a hardware designer, envisioned a 
graphic logic-design system that would permit the 
automatic production of wire-lists directly from logic 
drawings, previously a terribly error-prone manual process. 
The front-end of such a system would be a program that 
permitted one to construct and manipulate screen-based 
logic drawings, so Thacker wrote such a program and 
modestly called it Simple Illustrator (SIL) because it was 
useful for making all sorts of drawings as well as logic 
diagrams. The mouse at PARC had three buttons and 
Thacker used these in conjunction with various keyboard 
keys to provide the necessary array of graphic functions. 
Most programmers would have used the keyboard keys 
mnemonically, but Thacker, realizing that the right hand 
was occupied driving the mouse, chose to use keys in the 
lower left side of the keyboard in such a way that the 
necessary combinations lay conveniently under the left 
hand. I have noted with pleasure that this piece of 
cleverness, obvious perhaps, but only once you think of it, 
has found its way into the conventions for standard 
functions (such as Cut, Copy, Paste, and Undo) on the 
Apple Macontish. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
226 
Although the Alto was a wonderful computer, the 
usual thing had happened: Ambition had already outrun 
current capability and a new, more powerful machine was 
needed for the software research proceeding in the lab. 
Thacker and Lampson had all but completed the design of a 
couple of prospective machines, and a new arm of Xerox, 
which was trying to find ways to utilize ideas from PARC 
and bring them to market, was supposed to build a number 
of these research-prototype machines. But by the early 
spring of 1977 it had become clear that this was not going to 
happen and that if the machines were going to exist, our 
own lab would have to find ways to finish off the designs 
and build them. The hardware people, including me, balked 
at this idea. We didn’t want to take on the chore of building 
a machine that had already been designed; we wanted to do 
more innovative work of our own. At this point, enter the 
arch persuader, Bob Taylor. But before I continue with the 
story, I must pause to say a few words about Bob himself. 
When I had arrived at PARC, Jerry Elkind had been 
director of PARC’s Computer Science Laboratory. By this 
time, however, Jerry had gone on to other matters and 
Taylor had taken over as director. Managing a bunch of 
prima donna computer scientists, most of whom had 
several outstanding alternative job offers at any given time 
and all of whom had specialties he couldn’t possibly hope 
to understand, was a job that only a Texan would 
undertake—and Bob qualified. He has been described as an 
administrator with no particular technical ability, but vision 
and dedication were seldom so felicitously combined. I 
think of his intuition as something like an itch on the back: 
You can’t scratch it yourself and can only direct someone 
else to the right general area. But when they finally light on 
the right spot, you certainly know it. I think that’s how Bob 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
227 
directed research. Although he was not an engineer, he had 
a truly extraordinary sense of what was important and 
what was needed. In this he no doubt adopted much of 
J.C.R. Licklider’s philosophy, but he believed in it to the 
bottom of his soul. No doubt his zeal at times verged on 
mania (as viewed by some who stood in his way), but I 
think the importance of this zeal, and the vision that 
underlay it, has often been underestimated. His technical 
betters at PARC repeatedly bowed to his judgment, and, 
following his lead, deployed their skills to the best of their 
abilities in pursuit of his vision. In many ways the Alto was 
the culmination of a sizeable piece of that vision. 
Bob’s managerial style consisted in gathering together 
the brightest researchers he could find and giving them all 
the support and encouragement he could muster, with little 
direct interference. In addition to the regular staff members, 
he attracted to the lab a variety of associates from 
universities who were given part-time appointments. One 
of the more colorful (and brightest) of these was Bill Gosper 
from MIT. Bob’s complacency was tested one day when a 
young associate of Gosper’s showed up in the lab wearing a 
long, brightly-colored African dress. Nothing unusual 
about that, except that the associate was male. Bob didn’t 
say anything, but I suspected that his Texas background 
was a bit stressed. More to the point, I can imagine that he 
was also thinking, “if some Xerox executive comes by 
today, I’m going to have a problem.” Sometime later Bob, 
Ed Fredkin (visiting from MIT), and I were deep in 
discussion in my office when the young fellow happened 
by the door. Fredkin immediately leapt up to give him an 
enthusiastic greeting. Clearly he was well known and 
highly regarded at MIT. In fact a year or two later he 
showed up in my office, this time wearing a three piece suit 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
228 
and looking extremely successful. He had started his own 
company and it wouldn’t surprise me if today he is a very 
wealthy man. 
The disagreement within the lab about whether and 
how to proceed with the building of an altogether new 
computer was grist for Taylor’s mill; you could almost see 
him rubbing his hands in glee. He arranged for a series of 
lab-wide meetings to discuss what to do. I felt rather like a 
condemned prisoner sitting down with a group of 
executioners to discuss the forthcoming beheading. Over 
the course of very few meetings the size of the steam-roller 
became evident: It was made clear that we could be either 
the lubricant or the sand in the wheels of progress—it was 
entirely up to us. Laura and I took a long backpack trip at 
that point, in the course of which the reality of the situation 
became apparent to me. We actually had no choice. Unless 
we wanted to leave PARC (which one of the group actually 
chose to do), we were in for it. 
I was asked to head the project to build the larger of the 
two machines, the Dorado, and acquiesced only under the 
condition that it be a joint partnership with Ed McCreight, 
whom I’d identified as one of the brightest, if not the 
brightest, person around. One of us had to know what he 
was doing, and Ed, in addition to being brilliant, was 
someone I knew I could work with comfortably—anyone 
could. Of course Butler, who understood the design better 
than anyone else, would also be on hand to help bail when 
the water started to rise around our necks. But there had to 
be some quid pro quo and I laid down other demands as 
well: I asked for and got a sizeable crew of people and then 
specified a schedule that I believed in, which everyone else 
thought absurdly pessimistic. Butler took me aside and told 
me that if people had any idea how hard such projects were 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
229 
going to be, they would never have the courage to 
undertake them in the first place. I took this under 
advisement, but decided that there was a downside to over-
optimism in which morale went through the floor as 
schedules started to slip. With this bunch, there was no 
question of people not working hard, regardless of official 
schedules. As Taylor himself had wisely observed, the far 
bigger problem was to keep people from burning 
themselves to a cinder. His technique had been to hire 
highly motivated people and thereafter frequently tell them, 
“You look tired, better go home and get some rest.” I stuck 
with my prediction; others could believe what they liked. 
Not surprisingly, it turned out to be both a lot of hard 
work and a lot of fun. It took us just about the two years I’d 
predicted to get a prototype working. Half way along, as 
spirits were flagging a bit, we took the entire group for a 
several-day retreat at a posh resort in Yosemite Valley 
during which we reviewed where we stood and what 
remained to be done. It was a welcome breather. It had been 
such a struggle that when the machine finally began 
working, some worried that it might never be possible to 
build the multiple copies to populate the lab as planned. 
Once again our faithful technicians were to surprise us and 
in the fullness of time working machines began to roll off of 
a 
mini-production-line 
(affectionately 
dubbed 
“The 
Garage” by Thacker) under their ministrations. 
The Dorado was a much more powerful machine—
faster, more capacious memory, disk, etc.—than the Alto 
and, of course, had a very different bottom-level internal 
structure. But from the user’s point of view it did not 
appear significantly different from the Alto—just a lot 
faster. However, it was physically much bigger and it 
quickly became clear that, unlike the Alto, having one of 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
230 
those in your office with you would be intolerable. It was 
big and noisy and generated a lot of heat, requiring serious 
air conditioning. So we (reluctantly) retreated to the old-
fashioned idea of a machine room in which rack mounted 
machines could live and make all the noise and heat they 
wanted. Nonetheless, they were personal computers, with a 
cable connecting the screen, keyboard, and mouse in each 
office with the user’s own machine in a rack, roaring away 
downstairs. From the user’s point of view, things had 
gotten quieter, office space had been freed up, and, most 
importantly, things happened in a fraction of the time they 
had previously taken. The Altos had had removable disks 
about 15” in diameter, weighing perhaps five pounds, and 
containing about the same amount of data as fit on a 
diskette circa 1990. These had been replaced in the Dorado 
by enormous drives (think fork-lift) whose platters held the 
unbelievable quantity of eighty megabytes per machine—
and later the even more unbelievable quantity of three 
hundred megabytes each. Many times more capacious disk 
drives now fit comfortably in a tiny laptop. Back then it 
took two strong men to lift one, and a fork-lift was 
employed to put the drives in and out of the machines—a 
mere twenty years ago. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
231 
Chapter 20 
 
 
Music, music, music; bright students; 
Mockingbird 
 
y the beginning of 1980 I was at last coming somewhat 
free of the Dorado project and was looking forward to 
revisiting my old interest in developing a computer-aid to 
notating music. I began poring over piano scores trying to 
understand the rules that governed standard music 
notation. What I really wanted was a music typewriter in 
which the computer would sense what was played on a 
(piano-like) keyboard and would produce a score directly 
from that. I was pretty sure that composers would relish 
such a thing, but I also knew that it was considered bad 
form to “compose at the piano.” I decided to inquire of 
several prominent composers—Leonard Bernstein, Aaron 
Copland, Samuel Barber, and Virgil Thomson as it turned 
out—just how they went about the process of writing 
music. Almost all of them said “Well, yes, I use the piano 
because I happen to be a skilled keyboard player—but no 
one else does.” I knew what to make of that. But of course 
no matter how much I waved my hands, trying to describe 
what I had in mind, none of them could possibly have any 
image of what I might be talking about. I doubt very much 
that at that point any of them had ever seen a computer 
screen, much less a mouse, in action. 
I decided to consult existing computer-music experts 
and arranged to give a talk at IRCAM, a computer music 
research center in Paris. But I came away feeling that most 
B
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
232 
of my audience were surprisingly naive, not so much about 
computers but about music. I tested the waters at a few 
other places where computers and music were being joined, 
but found little sympathy for, or understanding of, what I 
was up to. The only person who showed any enthusiasm 
for what I was proposing was Don Knuth at Stanford. It 
seemed clear: I would have to proceed on my own and trust 
that if I succeeded, the results would speak for themselves. 
It would, of course, not be difficult for a computer to 
sense the note-strokes, that is to determine what notes were 
being played and at what times. That kind of information 
had long ago been recorded on piano rolls, and of course 
we could get the same kind of information into a computer. 
But piano roll “notation” could not be read in any useful 
way by human beings. Instead, for human consumption, 
music (particularly the timing) is represented symbolically. 
Furthermore, in addition to the noteheads, scores include a 
great deal of clarifying notational information that exposes 
the internal structure of the music and suggests roughly 
how it should be played. This symbolic representation, 
which has evolved over the centuries as music itself has 
evolved, is essential in enabling humans to read and play, 
music at reasonable speeds. 
So the question was how to transform raw note-strokes 
into the symbolic form in which music is normally 
represented in scores. The more scores I studied, the more 
doubtful I became that it would be possible for a program 
to infer the symbolic information directly from the raw 
note-strokes. I had seen far too many people come a cropper 
working on precisely this sort of artificial intelligence job, 
and as a pragmatist, intent on demonstrating a working 
tool, I was determined not to fall into that trap. I concluded 
that any attempt to do the transformation automatically 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
233 
would, at best, be imperfect and would therefore require 
user tools that could redo any part of the job to repair 
mistakes. So why not start by building those tools? They 
would enable a person to do the complete job, and later on 
any parts of it that turned out to be susceptible to 
automation, could be automated. This sort of amanuensis 
approach to problems that require human intervention, in 
which the computer acts as a sort of scribe/assistant, had 
been promoted almost a generation earlier by J.C.R. 
Licklider. It seemed to fit this problem well. 
Gradually I worked out a scheme in which the user and 
the computer in a kind of partnership could work over the 
note-strokes, gradually massaging them into something that 
resembled a score. I knew I could connect a keyboard to a 
Dorado in such a way that the program could measure the 
note-strokes, but beyond that lay a sizeable programming 
job with which I knew I would need help. 
Like several other Silicon Valley companies, Xerox had 
an arrangement with MIT whereby each year a few selected 
students would spend the summer working under the 
direction of a senior researcher on some mutually 
interesting 
project—an 
apprentice 
arrangement 
that 
benefited everyone involved. They came for three 
successive summers, and in their third year they chose and 
pursued a project that would constitute the topic for a 
master’s thesis. 
In the late 1970s I was one of those who helped to 
choose the students, and a great pleasure it was. PARC had 
an excellent reputation so we had the cream of the crop 
from which to choose. But each year the choice became 
more difficult as the students seemed to get brighter and 
brighter. Having eliminated anyone who didn’t have 
straight As, we were still confronted by tough choices. We 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
234 
gave them exercises to work out while we stood by and 
observed how they approached problems. Most were 
imperturbable and exhibited frightening competence. They 
were also surprisingly personable, belying the typical MIT 
nerd image. The first year I deliberately chose a fellow by 
the name of John Maxwell III who seemed so bright and 
creative that I wondered if perhaps he would turn out to be 
a bit eccentric. (I needn’t have worried—John has today 
become one of PARC’s leading researchers.) In his first year 
I was pleased to find that John chose to work in Alan Kay’s 
group where unconventionality was not only tolerated but 
cherished. Toward the end of his second year, about the 
time that I was mulling over my music notating ideas, I 
learned that John had expressed interest in working on 
some sort of music project for his thesis. Within days we 
began working together in a partnership that was to prove 
wonderfully productive. 
The system we designed was one in which the user was 
provided 
with 
powerful 
tools 
for 
superimposing 
information about musical structures (measure lines, 
chording, note durations, note groupings, etc.) onto the raw 
note-strokes. Once that was done, the program could then 
utilize this information in making a reasonable guess about 
further refining the symbolic representation—which could, 
in turn, be further adjusted and corrected by the user. 
Simple synthesizer keyboards were already available, 
and although MIDI (the now standard musical instrument-
to-computer interface) hadn’t yet been devised, it was 
simple enough to connect a keyboard to a Dorado in such a 
way that all note-strokes could be measured in great detail 
and the instrument’s sounding apparatus operated by a 
program. By the time that was done, John had some 
elementary software ready to try out. In addition to 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
235 
deciding on the underlying data formats (which would 
determine what kinds of user features would be practical), 
we had discussed which features to include initially and as 
John worked away, I stood back and cheered. Every few 
days more features came alive, and then we would discuss 
what to do next. Over the course of the summer of 1980 I 
saw my dream of over two decades gradually become a 
reality as John built one of the first applications on the 
Dorado utilizing its new operating system. He dubbed his 
program “Mockingbird,” and it was a triumph. It was 
enabled not only by John’s extraordinary cleverness, but 
also by the Dorado that was far more powerful (especially 
in its graphics capabilities) than anything previously 
available. In the fall, we gave an enthusiastically-received, 
PARC-wide lecture demonstration. Among other things it 
showed off the Dorado itself for the first time. A few 
months later, after finishing a few more features, we made a 
demonstration videotape. 
Today Mockingbird is recognized as a pioneering 
classic. Although modern personal computers are far more 
powerful than the Dorado, some of the fundamental ideas 
embodied in Mockingbird have yet to be adopted in the 
many commercial music software products that have 
appeared on the market in recent years. Part of the reason 
for this is that most of these products are designed to cater 
to a marketplace in which many of the complex features of 
classical music are irrelevant. We, on the other hand, were 
working towards a tool that we felt would be useful to the 
next Beethoven when he comes along. 
 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
236 
 
John, Severo, and Mockingbird 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
237 
Chapter 21 
 
 
The beginning of the end; CPSR and 
nuclear wars; clerical errors and the end of an 
era 
 
n truth, my story is drawing to a close. In some ways 
it was over by the time I’d arrived at PARC. Except for the 
explosion of the Internet, the world into which I then 
stepped, though confined within PARC’s computer labs, 
was 
already 
surprisingly 
little 
different 
from 
the 
computerized world we all inhabit today.45 Indeed there are 
some important technical differences that make today’s 
computers more accessible and usable, but the Altos that 
were then spreading throughout PARC were—with the 
exception of size, cost, and speed—very little different in 
principal and mode of use from today’s personal 
computers. I had seen it all begin with the LINC and had 
followed the development (albeit with some side trips) 
through to the point where large commercial interests 
would now grab the ideas and run with them, smoothing 
the rough edges, making the devices smaller, cheaper, and 
faster, but adding very little that was fundamentally new. 
Proliferating applications seemed to be where the future 
lay. 
                                                 
45 Granted, we had to share access to printing and large file storage 
facilities which today sit respectively on my desk and inside my computer. 
I
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
238 
In 1980 Ronald Reagan was elected president, and 
within a short time I began to fear for my life. I had been 
concerned for many years about the threat posed to future 
generations by the growing stockpile of nuclear weapons, 
but here was a president who didn’t appear to have 
sufficient comprehension of the implications of these 
weapons. The Soviet leadership seemed equally unaware 
and blasé, and it began to appear entirely possible that a 
serious nuclear blunder might be committed by one side or 
the other. The threat seemed to be moving inexorably closer 
in time. 
In October of 1981, in response to what seemed like 
increasingly irresponsible statements by then Secretary of 
Defense, Alexander Haig, I sent an email message to the 
PARC 
community, 
expressing 
my 
concerns 
and 
announcing the formation of a new net discussion group. 
Not surprisingly, there was immediate response. A 
vigorous discussion ensued that ended the following year 
in the formation of an organization that came to be known 
as Computer Professionals For Social Responsibility 
(CPSR). Over the next few years Laura and I would be 
preoccupied with building and running that organization 
and attempting to put it on a stable financial footing.  
Although we are no longer directly involved, it is still alive 
and well today, over twenty years later. 
When Ronald Reagan made his famous Star Wars 
speech, 
some 
computer 
scientists 
climbed 
on 
the 
bandwagon where money would be plentiful and where 
there would be challenging engineering problems. Others, 
looking at both the technical problems and the threat posed 
by an increased arms race, decided that the whole 
enterprise was a dangerous and provocative undertaking. 
The Strategic Defense Initiative was the subject of intense 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
239 
debate within the computer science community and sadly 
even caused rifts between colleagues. Public debates, many 
arranged by CPSR, raised the issue to national prominence 
and pitted scholars and scientists against powerful forces 
with vested interests. There were many detailed arguments 
having to do with the need for such rapid response that one 
was forced to rely on extremely complex and therefore 
untrustworthy computer systems for launch on warning. 
Several of us wrote a book Computers In Battle—Will They 
Work? I like to think that our small organization contributed 
to limiting the extent of the project, although probably the 
cost and repeated experimental failures have proved far 
more effective than our meager efforts. Unfortunately, like 
so many defense programs, once begun, Star Wars seems 
likely to continue indefinitely. It has great appeal for those 
legislators who hope for technological solutions to 
problems, and it is lucrative for the participants. These two 
factors seem sufficient to guarantee it perpetuity, and 
indeed, as I write this a new president, George Bush, is 
pressing forward with development of such a system, 
ignoring the advice of scientists and concerns about 
violating the international Anti Ballistic Missile treaty. 
In the summer of 1982, as Laura and I were preparing 
to depart for a climbing trip in the remote mountains of 
British Columbia, I got a call from the personnel office at 
PARC. They announced that through a clerical error 
(blunders everywhere) I had been overlooked in an offer of 
early retirement, but that in fact I qualified—and did I wish 
to take it? Good Lord, I said, how would I know? I 
explained that the car was packed, that we were planning to 
leave immediately for a month’s vacation, and that I 
couldn’t possibly answer such a question on the spot. Since 
the oversight had been theirs, I was allowed to postpone the 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
240 
decision, and as we drove away I said to Laura “Guess 
what?” 
As we drove north we discussed the situation. The 
years in which I had been able to make a significant 
contribution were nearing their end. Many of the big 
questions about machine architecture had been explored 
and the whole computer field seemed to be maturing to the 
point where commercial exploitation, which had never 
much interested me, would increasingly dominate the 
scene. We had been fortunate to ride the crest of a wave of 
exploration and innovation for nearly thirty years, an 
unbelievably exciting period. Surely it was a good time to 
“leave ‘em laughing.” In fact, we had intended to retire 
within the next few years in any case. We wanted time to 
explore the world’s mountains before we were too decrepit 
to do so. We weren’t sure whether we could afford 
retirement at that juncture—I was only 51—but decided 
that we could probably manage it if we sold our house in 
the bloated Silicon Valley market. So from a dusty phone 
booth beside the road in the middle of nowhere in British 
Columbia, we called a startled California real-estate agent 
and told her that the key was under the mat, could she 
please try to sell our house while we were gone. Then we 
climbed onto a helicopter and proceeded to forget the rest 
of the world while we enjoyed mountain climbing for the 
next month. 
When we returned home we found that there were 
interested potential buyers for our house, so I called the 
personnel office to inquire when I finally had to make a 
decision about retiring. An embarrassed pause ensued, after 
which I was told that another mistake had been made, that I 
actually hadn’t been eligible after all! But, as I explained 
shortly thereafter to George Pake, in the course of the 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
241 
month away, my mind had, in fact, decided to retire. After a 
brief negotiation it was agreed that I would remain for one 
more year and then take early retirement. 
When I told Bob Taylor what had happened, after 
exploding all over the personnel department, he said 
simply “What will you do?” He, who had such fierce 
dedication to a mission, could not comprehend that, despite 
my apparent enthusiasm, I’d been merely dabbling in the 
computer field and had numerous other interests and 
concerns46.  For me the years working with computers and 
computer design had been a delightful game that brought 
me in contact with many extremely bright people. I’d 
played the game with great energy, and even at times with 
considerable conviction, but there were many other things 
that I found equally compelling. By then I was deeply 
involved in the struggle to combat what I saw as various 
forms of nuclear lunacy, and I’d always wanted to be able 
to dedicate more time to musical endeavors. 
At the same time a more local war was shaping up. For 
many years there had been friction between Bob Taylor and 
his boss, George Pake, the director of PARC. Bob’s 
missionary zeal rendered him all but unmanageable. 
Furthermore, he had a large, gifted, and dedicated 
following within his laboratory that gave him tremendous 
leverage with any superior who might have serious 
disagreements with him. After years of struggling with Bob, 
with whom he naturally didn’t always agree, George 
moved on and away to become director of research for all of 
                                                 
46 Taylor himself retired a good many years afterwards and has since been 
awarded the National Medal of Technology for his many contributions to 
computer science. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
242 
Xerox. A new director, Bill Spencer, was put in place at 
PARC and, discovering Bob’s intransigence, he almost 
immediately made the fatal mistake of trying to force Bob to 
“behave.” Bob promptly resigned. Spencer may have been 
somewhat startled by that, but he had no way of 
anticipating the revolt and mass exodus that would ensue. 
Some of the rest of us, however, foreseeing this likely 
eventuality, decided to pay a visit to the president and 
chairman of the board of Xerox in order to voice our 
concerns and plead for their intervention—alas to no avail. 
The die was cast and as we predicted, within a very few 
months the lab began to empty as, one after another, people 
joined Taylor in forming a new Systems Research Center for 
DEC in downtown Palo Alto. Within a year most of the 
senior members and many of the junior members of the 
Computer Science Lab, arguably the best computer lab in 
the world at the time, had disappeared from Xerox. 
It was the end of an era and seemed a terrible waste at 
the time. In retrospect, however, perhaps it was fitting. 
PARC had made truly extraordinary contributions to the 
computer field during the 1970s, an act that would have 
been nearly impossible to follow. Since I was on a 
retirement track, I stayed on through most of the good-bye 
parties until the time came for my own departure. Although 
I’d decided to retire, I nonetheless toyed briefly with the 
idea of joining my chums in their new digs, but ultimately 
decided it was time for a new and different life, pursuing 
other, long-postponed interests. 
A bright note was struck by the fact that almost exactly 
the day I officially retired, the 25th anniversary celebration 
of the birth of the LINC took place in Washington—the 
LINC, which had been so much the crucible in which I was 
truly formed as a computer scientist. Laura and I attended 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
243 
the celebration where we were delighted by a talk given by 
Alan Kay and bored stiff by a speech given by Margaret 
Heckler, the then secretary of Health, Education, and 
Welfare. which was sponsoring the celebration and 
belatedly trying to claim its share of the credit for what had 
happened. Most of all I was thrilled to re-encounter 
numerous old LINC friends whom I hadn’t seen in many 
years. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
244 
Chapter 22 
 
 
A review of the bidding 
 
here is considerable debate about who “invented” 
the personal computer, and when. There is no simple 
answer to such a question and the definition of the term 
itself has evolved over time. Lots of people contributed 
ideas over many years as increasingly close approximations 
were constructed, eventually culminating in the machines 
we know today. Those who receive most of the publicity are 
those who made such machines widely available and made 
the most money. And indeed if by “personal” we mean that 
most people can own one, then certainly general availability 
and affordability are important features. As a final exercise, 
let me trace the story backward in time, pointing out what I 
see as the principal links in the chain of dependencies on 
which present personal machines rest. 
What ultimately made it possible to sell computers at a 
price most people could afford were developments in 
integrated circuits, in particular the development of the 
microcomputer chip in the late 1960s. Until then the 
minimum cost of anything that one could call a computer 
was several tens of thousands of dollars—way beyond the 
reach of most individuals. Computers were also physically 
big, needed air conditioning, and often required the 
ministrations of technicians. The advent of the Intel 8080 
chip provided, for the first time, a core computer building 
block that was affordable. Other, more advanced chips 
followed in rapid succession. 
T
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
245 
Almost as soon as these chips appeared, hackers 
commenced using them to begin putting together things 
that were certainly personal and certainly computers, but 
bore no resemblance to what we today call a personal 
computer. Little machines, most notably the Altair, 
consumed the attention of hackers, but they were strictly 
playthings for nerds and most people would have had no 
interest in such gadgets. Nonetheless by the early 1970s, 
some of the hackers, Steve Jobs among them, were able to 
start selling small, relatively inexpensive computers that 
could sit comfortably on a desk. 
But 
interacting 
with 
these 
early 
small, 
really 
inexpensive machines was still extremely arcane and 
cumbersome. Before personal computers could spread 
beyond nerdville, they had to become both more usable by, 
and more useful to, ordinary people. That required 
standing on the shoulders of those who had pioneered user 
accessibility and user applications. By the mid 1970s, PARC 
had developed and propagated the Alto within its walls. All 
of the important functional and user features of today’s 
personal computer were manifested in that machine. Xerox, 
however, failed to take advantage of what its researchers 
had done. The reasons they so profoundly dropped the ball 
are explored in the books Fumbling the Future and (more 
recently and more thoroughly) Dealers of Lightning. [See 
Bibliography]. Whatever the reasons, they certainly missed 
the boat, and one day Steve Jobs found his way inside 
Xerox PARC where he saw what was missing in Apple’s 
early machines. He shortly hired a key Alto software 
developer (Larry Tesler) and quickly adopted the PARC 
concepts into his machines, whereupon Apple was up, up 
and away, heading fast towards the Macintosh. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
246 
But where had the PARC ideas come from? The 
researchers there had helped to define what such a thing as 
a personal computer might be. It was a matter of defining 
the capabilities and method of use that would make a 
computer broadly useful and appealing. Initially these 
researchers had to work with the relatively big, expensive, 
clunky components that were available to them, foreseeing 
that the parts would eventually become sufficiently small, 
cheap, and fast that computers could become accessible to 
everyone. The researchers not only brought together ideas 
from many sources, they also made enormous contributions 
themselves. Probably the two most important of these were 
the decision to embed the screen image in the computer’s 
main memory and the development of local area 
networking. Capitalizing on these key architectural 
features, they proceeded to implement a graphical user 
interface and to develop prototype versions of numerous 
applications that would surge through the personal 
computer markets over years to come. 
But many of the ideas of interactive use through mouse 
and screen that came out of PARC and that we all 
experience today, were refinements of concepts and 
techniques pioneered by Douglas Engelbart at SRI in the 
1960s. Lacking any such personal machine as an ALTO, 
Engelbart and his associates had developed their ideas 
using a specially doctored-up Time Sharing system. In 1968 
Engelbart gave the historic demonstration of his work that 
permanently altered the minds of his contemporaries and 
laid the foundation for much of the ensuing work at PARC. 
During the mid-1960s, although some of the smaller 
machines were shrinking in size, their cost, for most people, 
remained out of reach and Time Shared use of giant 
machines dominated the research scene. These machines 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
247 
allowed a limited amount of interactive use through non-
display terminals, but their more important contributions 
consisted in the exploration of memory management 
schemes and multiprocessing. We have to go back all the 
way to 1962 to discover the earliest machine that was 
designed specifically for individual use—the LINC. 
Although he clearly believed that computers would one 
day become small, cheap and fast, I doubt that Wes Clark, 
or anyone else at that time, envisioned today’s personal 
computers with any precision. In 1962, a personal computer 
meant something that an individual researcher (not a 
homebody) controlled and could casually turn on and off 
like other pieces of lab equipment. It also had to be within 
plausible reach of a typical lab manager’s budget which, at 
the time, meant on the order of $25,000. While he was at it, 
Clark threw into the mix a collection of features that would 
make machines useful far beyond the medical research 
community for which the LINC was originally conceived. 
The display screen and control knobs were primitive 
instances of today’s screen and mouse that clearly 
suggested interactive use. LINC tapes were the original 
forerunners of today’s diskettes, floppies, etc., upon which 
personal computers still depend. All in all it was to prove a 
stunningly prophetic design, but despite its seminal rôle, 
only a handful of people today have ever heard of the 
LINC. 
And of course the LINC did not come totally out of thin 
air either. Its predecessors were TX-0, TX-2, and Whirlwind 
which, despite their enormous size and cost, could arguably 
be dubbed “personal” computers. Unlike most other 
machines of the day, that were either doing batch-
processing or, later, Time Sharing, TX-2, when I knew it, 
was used for long periods by individual programmers. This 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
248 
was at Wes Clark’s insistence, and only over his dead body 
(i.e., after he left Lincoln) was TX-2 outfitted with a Time 
Sharing system. 
To me, these then seem the major steps in the long 
process that has led to today’s personal computer. You will 
note that although PCs, or derivatives (clones) thereof, now 
dominate the personal computer field in terms of numbers, 
in this review I have altogether failed to mention IBM. As 
happened on so many previous occasions, they were 
practically the last to “get it.” Personal computers were 
fundamentally anathema to IBM thinking, so it is hardly 
surprising that IBM climbed onto the personal computer 
bandwagon late in the game. The initial success of PC’s was 
due not to any significant conceptual contribution, but 
rather to IBM’s giant size which swamped everyone else 
once they entered the market. But it was only with 
considerable reluctance, and the assistance of Microsoft, 
that a semi-reasonable user-interface eventually come to 
inhabit PCs. Their later profusion arose from the fact that 
the PC was made an open system for software developers 
and of course from the numerous clones that have arisen. 
Finally, to complete the circle, it’s been suggested that IBM 
was rescued from the dustbin of history only by the 
millions of dollars of government money that poured into 
their coffers from Air Force contracts associated with SAGE 
in the 1950s. Sic transit, and all that. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
249 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
250 
Epilogue 
 
 
n the summer of 1999 Laura got a call announcing 
that the following year there was to be a mathematics 
conference in Berkeley honoring her father, her mother, and 
her grandfather, all of whom were number theorists 
associated with the University of California at Berkeley. 
Many years ago, in searching for ever larger prime 
numbers, her father, D.H. Lehmer, constructed a number of 
devices known as “sieves” whose purpose was to 
mechanize the search by using techniques well known to 
mathematicians for bypassing factorable numbers. Today 
such algorithms are either programmed for fast digital 
computers or built using electronic devices, but prior to 
ENIAC there were no electronic devices available for such 
computation. Instead these early sieves were semi-
mechanical devices made out of gears, bicycle chains, 
“electric eyes” and other unlikely, Rube Goldbergian 
paraphernalia. One machine that used strips of movie film 
punched with a conductor’s punch (for those who 
remember trains and trolleys), spools from sewing thread, 
etc., had to be lubricated with baby powder and thus 
became known as the “Babychine.” These ingenious 
machines bear a superficial resemblance to some of 
Babbage’s early attempts to build a mechanical computer, 
and indeed these were computers, albeit of a rather 
specialized sort. 
Today they reside in the Computer Museum History 
Center collection at Moffett Field in Mountain View, 
California. Thinking that it would be nice to have these 
machines present at the forthcoming conference, and even 
I
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
251 
operating if they could be resuscitated, we visited the 
History Center, together with Wes Clark who happened to 
be in California at the time. At present the History Center is 
more like a warehouse where things are lined up in “visible 
storage,” awaiting funding for a more gracious setting. As 
we walked down the aisles, past dusty pieces of ENIAC, old 
SAGE machines, ancient CDC, IBM, and GE machines, we 
were struck by the enormous cleverness and the variety of 
ideas that were tried and later abandoned as the technology 
marched forward, obsoleting one after another of these 
conceptions. And yet, here, like the Neanderthals, were the 
manifest steps that had been necessary for that march to 
proceed. 
The sieves had been set out for our inspection and we 
considered how they might be safely transported the fifty 
odd miles to Berkeley for the conference. One in particular, 
built with a large number of heavy steel gears, was encased 
in a metal box held together with nuts and bolts that looked 
as though they might have been useful in constructing the 
Golden Gate bridge. That one apparently weighs nearly a 
ton and gave us considerable pause. But others, the 
Babychine and the bicycle chain machine (which had been 
previously replicated by a graduate student for a master’s 
thesis), appeared to present no problem. 
Along one aisle we came upon a “classic” LINC, sitting 
patiently beside less familiar neighbors. Perhaps because of 
its physical size, or perhaps just because of its age, it was 
not located, as it should have been, together with later 
personal computers—an Altair, an Atari, an Alto—and we 
pointed this discrepancy out to our hosts. This brought 
home yet once again the need for reminding people of the 
historic significance of the LINC as the earliest computer 
designed explicitly for individual use and embodying 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
252 
primitive versions of most of the features that make today’s 
personal machines so useful. 
Seeing the Alto reminded me that many years ago I’d 
been responsible for sending one from Xerox-PARC to be 
placed on display in the Boston Computer Museum (now 
absorbed into the Science Museum). As the machine was 
strictly for display and didn’t have to work, I’d unearthed a 
problematic chassis and told the technicians to stuff it full of 
boards that they’d been unable to repair. There were plenty 
of those and they’d filled it up indiscriminately, putting 
memory boards and CPU boards and whatever they had 
into random card slots. We’d bundled the whole thing up 
and shipped it off to Boston. 
About two years afterward I got a call from someone 
who announced that he was trying to get the machine 
running (!) and did I have any drawings that I could give 
him? I couldn’t help laughing at the image of the poor guy 
struggling to comprehend a machine thus thrown together 
from stray broken parts, and I finally managed to persuade 
him that it was a futile effort. Since then a working Alto has 
apparently found its way into the Computer History Center 
as Altos have taken their place alongside earlier computers 
as memorabilia. 
In 1980, while John Maxwell was putting the finishing 
touches on Mockingbird, Laura and I trekked around the 
Annapurna range in Nepal—a 250-mile circuit that includes 
the traverse of a pass nearly 18,000 feet high. Toward the 
end of the trip, near the village of Ghorapani, lies Poon Hill, 
so named because, at that time at least, it belonged to a 
Major Poon of the Nepalese army. On top of the hill the 
Major had erected a most remarkable structure, a whimsical 
wooden tower boasting two rickety stairways—one 
presumably for up, and the other for down. From this tower 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
253 
the view to the north includes some of the highest and best-
known Himalayan peaks, among them, the Annapurnas, 
Dhaulagiri, and Machupuchare. Turning to the south, you 
look down toward India over the plains of southern Nepal 
where lesser mountain ranges disappear into the distance. 
Five years later, building our home in the hills above 
the Pacific, we decided to call the place Poon Hill in honor 
of the view which faintly resembles that to the south from 
Poon Hill in Nepal. Later, in printing my father’s music, I 
used the imprimatur Poon Hill Press. A couple of years ago 
one of our friends, wondering where the name Poon Hill 
might have come from, searched the web and found 
references to Nepal. Thinking these irrelevant, he then tried 
Poon Hill minus Nepal—whereupon his screen filled with 
the titles of music I’d published that were listed at the 
American Music Center’s web site. 
I have not yet built my own a web site, and the older I 
get, the less I rush to embrace the latest technological 
fashions. Next week an old college friend of mine and I will 
set out to climb a mountain in the heart of the Sierras. It has 
been suggested that it might be prudent to take along a cell-
phone, just in case. But I can’t imagine doing such a thing—
a large part of the purpose would be lost. Today’s 
generation is accustomed to being “connected” at a level 
that is foreign to us old-timers. As always, something is 
gained—and something is lost. 
After I retired in 1983, we pulled the plug—
disconnected from the network and remained in electronic 
darkness for nearly a decade, during which time the 
ARPANET metamorphosed into the Internet. Meanwhile 
my son David, who years before had dropped out of high-
school, was becoming a rising computer jock. Eventually he 
persuaded me that getting reconnected was in order, but by 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
254 
then I had little idea how to go about it. He must have had 
one of the more gratifying days a son can experience when 
he appeared one afternoon with a modem under his arm. 
Within a couple of hours he had me on-line and had given 
me an intensive course in networking. After giving me one 
final now-let-us-review-what-we-have-learned lecture, he 
shot off to his next appointment, leaving me feeling that the 
baton had been securely passed. 
Reflecting on the preceding decades, I have come to 
realize what a remarkable time it was. When we retired, we 
wondered what it would be like to be no longer working. 
That was nearly twenty years ago, during which time I’ve 
learned that the enemy is within; that all that scurrying 
about was in the nature of the beast and that retirement 
could only alter its directions, not diminish its intensity. 
 
________________________ 
 
Now that I’ve come to the end, I can see that, after all, I 
have failed to achieve the principal thing I set out to do—to 
bring you, the reader, inside of the process so that you 
could feel what it was actually like. It was an impossible 
goal, of course. One wishes so deeply to communicate at 
that level—to share the actual experiences that have moved 
one throughout life. But in the end all one can do is to 
describe the externals without really penetrating to the 
heart of the matter. 
It is particularly difficult when one is describing a 
process that is, by its nature, largely unfamiliar to most 
people, where often the most dramatic moments are utterly 
internal and not manifested in any external way 
whatsoever. Sitting in a chair, chewing on a pencil, mulling 
over a problem, suddenly there it comes, the insight you 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
255 
have been waiting for that solves today’s problem so 
elegantly. It’s the experience of the beauty and the 
excitement of such moments as well as the gradual 
unveiling of where it might all be leading that one wishes to 
convey and to share—the feeling of exhilaration as one 
achieves understanding, comes over the next ridge on the 
way to the summit. But analogies never really capture the 
flavor or the feeling that comes with a particular experience. 
These 
misgivings 
notwithstanding, 
perhaps 
by 
describing some of my own experiences and reactions, I 
have been able to convey some of the differences between 
the styles and motivations that existed earlier and those that 
obtain today. And I hope that in the process I have 
managed to transmit a whiff of the flavor of discovery and 
revelation during those now bygone years and to provide 
some new insights into the origins of the surprising little 
devices that we have come to take so much for granted and 
that have so dramatically altered the lives of us all. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
256 
Appendix I 
 
The Synchronizer Problem 
 
 
Most computers are “synchronous” devices, that is they 
operate based on a clock that ticks regularly. Changes take 
place in the state of the machine only at clock ticks. What 
happens on a given tick depends on the state of the machine 
produced by the previous tick. At each tick, information 
about the changes that are produced must percolate 
everywhere throughout the machine before the next tick 
comes along—otherwise outdated or changing information 
could produce incorrect behavior. The maximum clock rate 
is thus dependent on the nature of the circuits, the wire 
lengths, etc., that is, all of the things that determine how fast 
signals travel around inside the machine. 
But what about signals that come into the machine from 
outside devices (such as disks, mice, printers, modems, etc.) 
that operate at their own times, quite independent of the 
machine’s clock? Consider, for example, a disk feeding data 
into a computer’s memory. The data comes off the disk at 
times that depend on the spinning of the disk, unrelated to 
the timing of the computer’s clock. Suppose a new piece of 
data has just arrived and is ready to be read into the 
memory. Several different parts of the machine need to 
participate in taking in the datum—the next instruction 
must be delayed, memory pointers must be reset, etc. If the 
disk simply holds up its hand at an arbitrary time with 
respect to the computer’s clock and says “Datum 
Available,” then, if the hand happens to go up at about the 
same time as the clock ticks, some parts of the machine may 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
257 
see the signal and start to process the datum, while other 
parts of the machine may not notice and may blandly 
proceed with the next instruction. Chaos will result. 
This much was well understood and to deal with it a 
“synchronizer” was normally employed. On each clock tick, 
the signal that says “Datum Available” would be sampled. 
If it was found to be on, then a “Datum Ready” signal could 
be turned on. Because “Datum Available” is sampled at only 
one place in the machine, it would either turn on the “Datum 
Ready” signal or, if it just missed it on one tick, it would 
turn it on at the next tick. Because it comes on only at a 
clock tick and not at some random time, it will have settled 
down and be stable (either on or off) by the time of the 
ensuing clock tick. It can thus be used throughout the 
machine to bring about the processing of the datum. 
This standard solution appeared to work and had been 
used for many years. But it depended on the tacit 
assumption that the device that stored the “Datum Ready” 
signal would either be On or Off at a given clock tick 
(depending on whether the “Datum Available” signal had 
been noticed or not on the previous clock tick.) It was 
generally believed that the devices used to store such 
signals (flip-flops) switched between their two states in a 
short, specifiable time—far shorter than the interval 
between successive clock ticks. What we found was that 
under certain circumstances that switching time could not 
be depended upon. In particular, if a flip-flop was activated 
by a marginal signal (such as occurred for example when 
the “Datum Available” signal happened to turn on just as 
the clock was ticking), then rather than turning over crisply 
in the usual way, the flip-flop might stall in an in-between 
state for much longer times than the specifications 
indicated—in fact, theoretically, for arbitrarily long times! 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
258 
These special circumstances were statistically very rare, 
happening only when the coincidence of signals was 
extremely unfortunate. But we were able to demonstrate 
that once in a great while, the “Datum Ready” signal, 
supposedly rock-solid by the time of the next clock tick, 
could itself still be wavering in indecision and could thus 
produce erroneous behavior. 
This was shocking news and meant that most systems 
had a vulnerability that had hitherto been unrecognized. As 
the speed of machines (their clock and data rates) had 
increased, the problem started to show up with increasing 
frequency. We suspected that many unexplained computer 
failures of the sort that are never traced but that don’t 
appear to re-occur after the machine is restarted, were cause 
by synchronizer failures. As recorded above, I encountered 
precisely this situation when working on the beginnings of 
the ARPANET. 
It is interesting to note that when we first discussed this 
failure mode, there were a number of serious computer 
scientists (some from the sacrosanct halls of MIT) who 
argued that it simply could not happen. Those of us who 
had observed it, not only knew that it could, but understood 
that under the right circumstances it was inevitable. It was 
shocking to find so much resistance among supposed 
scientists. 
Mackie describes the scene as follows: 
“Tom and I made it our mission in life to convince the 
world that there was a real problem here, and spent the 
better part of a year taking on any comer who claimed he 
could produce a glitch-free circuit that could resolve the 
arrival order of two asynchronous signals unambiguously 
(without using a “Trinary Flop-flop,” as we called the 
concoction).  We referred to such designs, publicly, as 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
259 
“move-the-glitch” circuits. In private we disdainfully 
referred to them as “perpetual motion machines.”  In every 
case we were able to determine to where, in the design, the 
ingenious designer had moved the glitch.  In each case, the 
glitch persisted, and the presenter was brought into 
alignment with this new “correct” view of the universe. Our 
fervor approached that of religious zealots. It was our 
mission to stamp out anti-glitch apostasy wherever we 
could find it. 
“You might recall an ally we had in this effort.  I’m sure 
you met him.  He was a truly mad Englishman (I believe he 
worked for Motorola, but I could be mistaken) whose name 
now entirely escapes me. Tom and I met him at a 
conference in Chicago.  He had written a paper on how this 
“arbitration” problem, which is inherent in all digital 
computers, would eventually doom the design of truly 
large scale machines, as the error rate caused by these 
random events would become so high that it would 
eventually become intolerable. His article saw no solution 
to the problem. We convinced him that there was indeed 
light at the end of the tunnel. 
“Hence the second paper which dealt with the solution 
to the problem, the building of what we called, at that time, 
an “Interlock.” It showed how using one or more boxes 
containing a simple tri-state flip flop (“Zero,” “Wait,” and 
“One” states), one could build a system that would arbitrate 
the arrivals of any number of asynchronous signals with 
non-ambiguous outcomes. 
“I remember an embarrassing incident surrounding the 
first demonstration of the Trinary Flip flop Interlock.  
Charlie had invited those of us who had been doing some 
of this ‘moonlighting’ (we did this in addition to our 
daytime work of building macromodules) research to 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
260 
present it to the entire team. So on this particular day I 
made a demonstration of my Trinary Flip-Flop Interlock 
design with no small amount of hubris.  But for some 
reason it wouldn’t work properly.  I stared at it, but I 
couldn’t figure out what was wrong. Then Mish, who had 
been watching intently, pointed out that I had wired it up in 
reverse, and by simply swapping the connections 
everything would work properly. The connections were 
reversed and everything did indeed work as advertised.  I 
felt both humbled and pleased at the same time.  I’ve 
certainly never lost my admiration for Mish who was able 
to smoke that one out so nimbly. The true industrial-
strength Synchronizer that is in use today was, of course, 
eventually designed and built by Charlie Molnar.” 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
261 
Appendix II 
 
The Bit-Map Display 
 
 
The basic device used in most computer display 
systems for many years has been the cathode ray tube 
(CRT)—the same basic device that underlies your television 
set47.  Here, roughly, is how a CRT works. At the rear of the 
tube sits an electron gun capable of firing a stream of 
electrons toward the front face of the tube (the face being 
the part you look at). The back surface of the front face is 
coated with a material that glows briefly when electrons 
strike it. By controlling the aiming of the gun while turning 
the electron stream on and off, one can paint a picture on 
the front of the tube. Depending on the particular kind of 
coating used, an illuminated point will glow for a shorter or 
longer time after being irradiated. The faster an image 
fades, the easier it is to present rapidly changing images (as 
in television), but the more frequently the points need to be 
re-illuminated in order to avoid flicker, or even fading, of 
the image. 
These basic facilities have been used in a wide variety 
of ways over the years. In one method, the gun is used as a 
graffiti painter uses a spray can. The beam is turned on and 
                                                 
47 In recent years various alternative display technologies are used, 
particularly in situations where size and weight are critical (as in laptops 
and other portable devices). However many CRT-based displays still 
occupy desks and counters around the world and no doubt will for some 
years to come. 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
262 
off and it is moved about, just as the graffiti painter turns 
the spray on and off with the finger-tip while continuously 
redirecting it. This produces a series of illuminated lines 
against an otherwise unlit background. Of course the 
picture must be displayed repeatedly or it will shortly fade 
from view. If a more slowly fading coating is used, then 
problems will occur in depicting changing images. 
However, the principal problem with this scheme is that the 
computations of aiming directions for many kinds of 
images are extremely complex, and thus most systems that 
have used this technique have been limited to handling 
segments of straight lines, for which the computation is 
relatively straightforward. Many early display systems, 
including the SAGE consoles, used this sort of “vector” 
display—sometimes in conjunction with character-forming 
masks. 
In an alternative usage, an image is created by 
displaying a sequence of dots to be brightened, each of 
whose X and Y screen coordinates can be held in a table in 
the computer’s memory or provided by specialized 
instructions. Whirlwind, TX-2, and the LINC all utilized this 
basic “point” display technique (with various frills). Only 
the points to be illuminated needed to be addressed; the 
remainder of the screen remained dark. 
Today computer screens present an image the way 
television does, by repeated scanning of the entire screen 
while the electron beam is brightened or dimmed as the 
scanning proceeds. To understand the scanning process, 
consider how you read a book. Unless you are a speed 
reader, you start at the upper left-hand corner of the page 
and scan the first line, left to right. You then reposition your 
eyes to the left end of the next line down, which you again 
scan from left to right, etc., on down the page. That, in 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
263 
essence, is how a television screen works. The gun is aimed 
at the upper left corner, and then sweeps rightward across 
the top of the screen. As it sweeps, the beam is brightened 
or dimmed so as to “paint” the topmost line of the desired 
image. When the gun gets to the end of the first line, the 
beam is turned off while the gun is repositioned to the left 
end of the next line down, whence it again sweeps 
rightward, painting the image’s second line as it goes. This 
process continues until the entire screen has been painted 
by a succession of horizontal lines, at which point the beam 
is turned off, the gun is repositioned to the upper left 
corner, and the entire process repeats—over and over again. 
This process is called refreshing the display, because the 
screen quickly goes blank if the process stops. It all happens 
at unimaginable speed: The entire screen is painted in this 
way several tens of times each second. At such speed, a human 
is unable to follow the detail of the process, and instead sees 
the picture in its entirety. If the picture changes on 
successive repaintings, we see movement, just as we do in a 
movie made by rapidly projecting a sequence of still 
pictures. All such devices rely on the perceptual limitations 
of our human visual system. 
For normal television, the intensity of the beam, as it 
paints successive lines, is supplied by a television camera 
simultaneously scanning a live image (or by a previously 
recorded signal of that sort). In a modern computer screen, 
the bits representing the image are stored in the computer’s 
memory where it can be readily manipulated by programs 
and whence it is repeatedly used for refreshing the display 
as described above. It takes a lot of memory to store an 
entire screen image—there are many, many pixels (picture 
elements), each of which occupies a bit in the memory (or 
several bits for gray scale or color). For many years the cost 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
264 
of memory was far too great to allow such extravagance. It 
was only when the cost of memory began to fall that this 
sort of use became economically feasible. 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
265 
Bibliography 
 
 
1. W. A. Clark and C. E. Molnar, A Description of the LINC, 
Ch. 2, Computers in Biomedical Research, R.W. Stacy and 
B. D. Waxman (eds) Academic Press, New York, N.Y., 
1965. 
 
2. Mary Allen Clark, China Diary, Washington University 
Magazine, Fall 1972 
 
3. S.M. Ornstein et al, Computing in China: A Travel Report, 
Science, Vol., 182, 1973. 
 
4. Kent C. Redmond and Thomas M. Smith, Project 
Whirlwind; The History of a Pioneer Computer, Digital 
Press, 1980 
 
5. S.M. Ornstein and J.T. Maxwell III, Mockingbird: A 
Composer’s Amanuensis, Byte Magazine 9-1, 1984. 
 
6. W. A. Clark, The LINC Was Early and Small, in A History 
of Personal Workstations, Adele Goldberg ed. ACM Press, 
1986. 
 
7. S. M. Ornstein, Computers in Battle: A Human Overview, 
Ch 1, Computers In Battle—Will They Work?, D. Bellin 
and G. Chapman (eds).,Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 
New York, N.Y., 1987. 
 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
266 
8. K. Hafner and M. Lyon, Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The 
Origins of the Internet, Simon and Schuster, New York, 
N.Y., 1996. 
 
9. S. Sellager, Nerds 2.0.1: A Brief History of the Internet, TV 
Books, New York, N.Y., 1998. 
 
10. S. McCartney, ENIAC: The Triumphs and Tragedies of the 
World’s First Computer, Walker and Co. New York, N.Y., 
1999. 
 
11. M. Hiltzik, Dealers of Lightning, Harper Collins, New 
York, N.Y., 1999 
 
12. J. Naughton, A Brief History of the Future: The Origins of 
the Internet, Overlook Press, NY, 2000. 
 
13. Leo Beranek, Roots of the Internet, A Personal History, The 
Massachusetts Historical Review, Volume 2, 2000 
 
14. M. Mitchell Waldrop, The Dream Machine, Viking Press, 
2001 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
267 
 
INDEX 
 
a-Linc, 106, 108, 110, 113 
Abramson, Norm, 188, 222 
address, 6 
AFIPS, 194 
air defense, 18, 22-24, 26, 36, 51 
 
Air Force, 18-19, 23, 26, 48, 51, 57, 61, 104, 107, 211, 248 
Aloha Network, 188-189, 222 
Alto, 213, 217, 219, 220-221, 223, 226-227, 229-230, 237, 245, 
251-252 
AN/FSQ-7, 36 
analog, 3, 65, 103, 107, 111, 128, 143 
Anderson, Harlan, 107 
Anné, Antharvedi, 154 
ARPA, 156-159, 161, 166, 167-169, 177 
ARPANET, 9, 53, 156, 165-166, 177, 179, 184-185, 210, 212, 
218, 253, 258 
Assembler (assembly program), 2, 37-39, 110, 118, 123-124 
ASW, 70 
asynchronous, 137-139, 258-259 
Babbage, Charles, 10 
Barber, Samuel, 231 
 
Barker, Ben, 170-174, 178, 181-182, 206 
Barnaby, John, 164-165 
Barta Building, 8, 19, 25 
batch processing, 39, 42, 92-93, 100 
BBN, 95, 156-157, 159-161, 165, 167-172, 174-175, 177-180, 
182-183, 186, 190, 204, 210- 214, 224 
Bernstein, Leonard, 231 
Best, Dick, 64, 107 
binary instructions, 39 
Bobrow, Danny, 160, 169 
Boggs, David, 189, 222 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
268 
bootstrap, 3-5, 221 
BRAVO, 222 
Briscoe, Howard  (Howie), 1-5, 7, 9, 14, 17, 20, 22, 24, 54, 63 
Burchfiel, Jerry, 161 
Bush, Vannevar, 34 
C.mmp, 207 
CADET, 62 
Cape Canaveral, 57- 59, 61 
Cape Cod system, 17, 19, 25 
Cape Kennedy, 57 
Cerf, Vint, 177 
CHASM, 152, 154 
Cheatham, Tom, 195-196, 198 
Chomsky, Noam, 52, 53, 90 
Clark, Wesley (Wes), xxi, 6, 35, 64, 79-80, 82-83, 89, 92, 96, 
102-109, 112-113, 119, 122, 124-126, 133-138, 140-141, 146, 
148, 153, 156, 166, 198-200, 203, 247-248, 251 
CODABO, 81 
coding sheets, 37-38 
Communications Biophysics Lab, 102, 120 
compiler, 44-45, 110, 217 
console, 19-20, 37, 39, 81-82, 84, 89, 220-221, 262 
Copland, Aaron, 231 
Corbato, Fernando, 95 
core memory, 8-9, 14, 19-20, 25, 79, 125 
Cosell, Bernie, 169 
Cox, Jerry, 125, 133, 145 
CPSR, 237-239 
Crocker, Steve, 177 
Crosstelling, 23, 26 
Crowther, Will, 52, 54, 168-170, 206 
CRT, 89, 218, 261 
David, Ed, 197 
Davies, Donald, 184 
debug (debugging), 37, 40-43, 82, 87, 110, 117, 124, 126, 128-
129, 182-183, 221, 224 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
269 
Digital Equipment Corp. (DEC), 36, 63, 67, 95, 107, 113, 127-
128, 141, 156, 161, 242 
Direction Center, 20, 23-24, 27, 36 
Dorado, 213, 228-231, 233- 235 
Dover, 225 
drum memory, 6, 33 
dump, 40 
Earnest, Les, xxi 
Eckert, J. Presper, 11-12, 14-15 
EDSAC, 3, 5, 14 
EDVAC, 14 
electrostatic storage tube, 8 
Elkind, Jerry, 157, 160-161, 214, 226 
Engelbart, Doug, 213, 217, 219, 246 
ENIAC, 2-3, 10-12, 250-251 
Ethernet, 188-189, 213, 221-223 
Farley, Belmont, 6-7 
Feuerzeig, Wally, 159 
Fiala, Ed, 160 
 
flip-flop, 8-9, 257, 259-260 
flow diagrams, 38 
Forgie, Jim, 64, 65 
Forrester, Jay, 8, 79, 124 
FORTRAN, 44-45 
Frankovich, John, 64-65, 88 
Fredkin, Ed, 95, 227 
FX-1, 87-90, 123 
GAG, 2 
Gates, Bill, xii 
Giant Brain, xiv, 15 
glitch, 140, 173, 258-259 
Goldring, Sidney, 142, 144 
Gosper, Bill, 227 
Gould, Laura, xviii, xxi, 164, 203-204, 210, 214, 228, 238-240, 
242, 250, 252 
Haig, Alexander, 238 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
270 
Hanscom, 48, 104 
Heart, Frank (Frank), 52-53, 58, 63, 67-68, 79-80, 154, 157, 
159, 165, 167, 169, 172, 175-176, 178-179, 184, 186, 190, 206 
Heckler, Margaret, 243 
Holt, Anatol, 198 
Honeywell, 171-173 
IBM, 13, 19-20, 26, 29, 35-36, 39, 41, 44, 62, 81, 85-86, 90, 92, 
159, 248, 251 
IBM 704, 52 
IBM 709, 59, 69, 91 
ILLIAC III, 138 
ILLIAC IV, 190 
IMP, 167-168, 171, 175-177, 179-181, 183, 190, 204-205, 208-
209, 218 
Internet, 83, 165-166, 177, 183, 185-186, 237, 253 
IPTO, 47, 139, 157-158, 166, 168 
Ishihara, Jiro  (Ish), 24-25 
Jobs, Steve, xii, 245 
Kahn, Bob, 158, 168, 177 
Kay, Alan, 214, 218, 234, 243 
Kennedy, Ted, 170 
Knuth, Don, 232 
Kuo Mo Ro, 199 
Lampson, Butler, 217, 223, 228 
Laynor, John, 88 
Lehmer, D.H., 10, 39, 250 
Lewis, Howard, 121, 143 
Lewontin, Richard, 74 
Licklider, J.C.R., 156-158, 186, 227, 233 
Lin, Chi Sun, 90-91 
LINC, xvi, 102, 109, 112-114, 116-119, 122-124, 128-129, 141-
149, 151, 153-154, 218, 220, 237, 242-243, 247, 251, 262 
LINC-8, 141 
Lincoln Laboratory (Lincoln Lab, Lincoln) 17-20, 22, 26, 32-
33, 35-36, 38, 48-49, 51-54, 63-64, 67, 85, 87, 92, 95, 102, 107, 
 111-116, 124, 128, 139, 168, 248 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
271 
line-printer, 40 
Littlefield, Warren (Mackie), 138, 140, 152, 258 
machine-independence, 45 
Macromodule, 135-136, 152-154, 155, 157, 259 
main memory, 6, 8, 13, 191, 219-220, 246 
marginal-checking, 9, 35 
Mauchly, John, 11-12 
Maxwell, John, 234-236, 252 
McCarthy, John, 95 
McCreight, Ed, 217, 228 
McKenzie, Alex, 171, 179-180, 210 
Memory Test Computer (MTC), 8, 25, 65, 85, 95-96 
Metcalfe, Bob, 189, 222 
Michel, Tony, 183, 206 
Microsoft, 222, 248 
Middle Ages, xiv-xv, 28, 34, 37, 41 
Millstone, 54 
MIT, xii, 1-2, 6, 8, 14, 17-20, 25, 51, 53, 64, 79, 83, 95-96, 98, 
101-102, 116, 131-132, 135, 138, 146, 156, 159, 162, 169, 227, 
233-234, 258 
MITRE, 47, 51-52 
Mockingbird, 66, 231, 235-236, 252 
Molnar, Charlie (Charlie), xii, 98, 102, 104-105, 107-109, 113-
114, 119-120, 122-123, 125, 127, 133, 135, 138, 140, 146-150, 
154, 259-260 
Moore School, 2, 14 
Morris, Jim, 148, 217 
multiprocessing, 13, 99, 161, 207-208, 247 
Murphy, Dan, 161 
National Academy of Sciences, 102, 113, 197, 199 
National Institutes of Health (NIH), 113, 116-117, 132-135, 
138, 141, 194 
Newman, Bob, 169 
O'Brien, Don, 119, 162 
Olsen, Ken, 64-66, 80, 107 
Operational Specifications, 23 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
272 
operators, 19, 23, 37, 39, 41, 56-57, 62, 82 
Pake, George, 133-134, 203, 240, 241 
Papert, Seymour, 159 
Papian, Bill, 8, 79, 102 
PDP-1, 95, 156 
PDP-10, 161-162 
PDP-12, 141 
PDP-5, 128 
PDP-8, 128, 141 
Perlis, Alan, 139, 194, 198-199 
personal computer, xi, xvi, xxv, 17, 29, 32, 34, 42, 97-100, 
105, 165, 213, 217, 219, 230, 235, 237, 244-248, 251-252 
plug-board, 10-11 
Pluribus, 204, 206-207 
Poon Hill, 252-253 
prime number drop, 131, 133-134 
Project MAC, 116 
punched-card, 38-39, 41, 95 
radar-data, 19, 24, 26 
Rafael, Jack, 102 
random access, 6 
Reagan, Ronald, 238 
real time, 16, 53, 83, 96-97, 103, 144, 159, 161-162, 208 
Roberts, Larry, 83, 158-159, 166, 168, 186 
Rosenblith, Walter, 102 
Ruina, Jack, 157 
SAGE, 20, 22, 24, 26, 35, 218, 248, 251, 262 
SDC, 26 
SDS-940, 161 
security, 22, 24 
Seitz, Chuck, 162 
self-timing, 146 
Selfridge, Oliver, 63 
Shockley, William, 52 
Simon, Bill, 119, 126 
Simon, Herb, 198 
Computing in the Middle Ages 
A View From the Trenches 1955-1983 
273 
Sketchpad, 83 
Soviet Union, 18, 51, 131, 238 
Spencer, Bill, 242 
spooling, 40 
Sproull, Bob, 217, 223, 224 
SRI, 158, 217, 246 
Stanford Research Institute, 158 
Star Wars, 61, 238-239 
Starkweather, Gary, 223 
startup, 30 
Stockebrand, Tom (Stocky), 26, 85, 86, 108, 111, 113-114 
Stucki, Mishell (Mis h), 120-121, 136-137, 152, 260 
sub-sectors, 23 
SUE, 191, 204 
Sutherland, Ivan, 83, 139, 146, 153, 158, 165 
symbolic instructions, 39 
synchronizer problem, 131, 140, 173, 256-258, 260 
Taylor, Bob, 139, 158, 186, 213-217, 226, 228-229, 241-242 
teletype, 95-96, 156, 164, 179 
TENEX, 156, 161-162, 164, 177, 179, 214 
Tesler, Larry, 245 
Thach, Truett, 175 
Thacker, Chuck, 213, 217, 219-220, 225-226, 229 
thin-film memory, 87, 102 
Thomson, Virgil, 231 
time sharing, 97, 99 
Time-Sharing, 93-100, 103, 116, 156-157, 159-162, 164-165, 
178, 181, 207-208, 218, 246-248 
TIP, 183-184 
Tomlinson, Ray, 160, 179 
Townes, Charles, 132 
Tretiak, Dan, 195-196 
Turing, Alan, 34 
TX-0, 80, 95 
TX-1, 80 
 
Severo M. Ornstein 
274 
TX-2, 38, 63-67, 79, 80-90, 95-96, 102, 104, 123-124, 128, 156, 
218, 247-248, 262 
UNIVAC, 15, 38 
Vandenberg, 61 
virtual memory, 13, 99, 161 
von Neumann, John, 11-14, 34 
Walden, Dave, 169, 171, 178 
Waldrop, Mitchell, xi 
Wallops Island, 55 
Watson, Tom, 85 
Weiner, Norbert, 34 
Weizenbaum, Joe, 169 
Welsh, Frazier, 15 
Whirlwind, 2, 4,-5, 7-9, 14, 16-17, 19, 22, 25, 38, 41, 64, 83, 96, 
247, 262 
Wilkes, Mary Allen (Mary Allen), 106, 119-120, 123, 135, 203 
Wilkes, Maurice, 14 
Windows, 222 
WORD, 222 
World War II, 10, 18, 28, 51 
XD-1, 19-20, 22, 26, 36, 83, 85 
Xerox PARC, 133, 160-161, 189, 203, 210, 213, 215-217, 219, 
221-228, 233-235, 237-239, 241-242, 245-246, 252 
516, 171, 173-174 
1401, 62 
1620, 62 
 
 
 
 
About the Author 
 
 
In the late 1950s Severo Ornstein worked at MIT’s 
Lincoln Laboratory, then at the forefront of computer 
research. In 1961-62 he participated in the design of the 
LINC, the world’s first personal computer. He was later 
responsible for the hardware design of the IMP, the 
computer that handled messages for the Arpanet, 
forerunner of the Internet. During the same period he 
taught computer design at Harvard, and in 1972 he 
organized and led the first delegation of computer scientists 
to China. In 1981, together with his wife, Laura Gould, he 
founded Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility 
(CPSR), an organization concerned with the role of 
computers in society. 
