Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer: The Text and Context 
of an Early Computer 
LARRY 
OWENS 
One day in 1942, the Rockefeller Differential Analyzer was dedi- 
cated to winning the war. For the next several years this large mathe- 
matical machine, the centerpiece of MIT's Center of Analysis, labored 
over the calculation of firing tables and the profiles of radar antennas.' 
Weighing almost a hundred tons and comprising some two thousand 
vacuum tubes, several thousand relays, a hundred and fifty 
motors, 
and automated input units, the analyzer was the most important com- 
puter in existence in the United States at the end of the war.2 (See 
fig. 1.) Wartime security prohibited its public announcement until 
DR. OWENS teaches in the Department of History at the University 
of Massachusetts, 
Amherst. Earlier versions of this article were presented at Princeton University, the 
University of Massachusetts, and at the 1983 meeting of the Society for the History of 
Technology in Washington, D.C. For the last presentation, the author won the society's 
Joan Cahalin Robinson Prize. He wishes to thank for their friendly 
and expert assistance 
the archivists of MIT, in particular Helen Samuels and Kathy Marquis; Warren Sea- 
mans, the director of the MIT Museum, and his assistant Michael Yeates; the staff of the 
Rockefeller Archive Center in Tarrytown, New York; and Florence Anderson of the 
Carnegie Corporation of New York. John Servos of Amherst College deserves special 
mention, for he has been unfailing in his encouragement and constructively 
critical in the 
best sense. 
'The first demonstration of the still incomplete analyzer was held on December 13, 
1941. By March 1943, when the staff and facilities of the center had been converted 
entirely to war work, about half of the analyzer was in operation. S. H. Caldwell to 
Warren Weaver, December 14, 1941. The letter is in the Rockefeller Archive Center, in 
RF1.1/224/2/25. See also Caldwell to Bush, April 19, 1943, Bush Papers, Library of 
Congress. 
2The small band of digital pioneers would argue this claim. But ENIAC did not 
become operational until some months after the war, and, while the Harvard-IBM Mark 
I was completed in mid-1944, both it and the Bell relay machine proved significantly 
slower than the analyzer for the computation of trajectories. The development of digital 
computers, especially as logic machines, seems to have been further along in Great 
Britain largely because of Alan Turing. For their history, see H. H. Goldstine, The 
Computer 
from Pascal to von Neumann (Princeton, 1972); Nancy Stern, From ENIAC to 
UNIVAC: An Appraisal of theEckert-Mauchly 
Computers 
(Bedford, Mass., 198 1); N. Metrop- 
? 1986 by the Society for the History of Technology. All rights reserved. 
0040-165X/86/2701-0005$01.00 
63 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
64 
Larry Owens 
@!i ii i i i iBi~ lilli i~ri:iii 
::ii::::iil::ii_::i-i_:i::::l:_:iii 
:I::ii 
i : 
' 
`==='==i 
;,ii-ii:::;:i:::::i:::_ 
= :ii'= 
ii !i 
ii!:=! 
i ! i i i ! ii :ii!I 
............. 
i-:'i::i::;`i:' 
ji~::` ::':: 
:: 
:::i::-::ii-::-:: 
-::r~ii:i:i::i~:_. 
. . . . . . . . . . 
.:ii::"::l:r: 
: iri~~~ji-:j~::::;:lii?-::i:: 
~ 
i-:::::i_::i:;::~......................
::::':;:-:'::?::i~r:i~i:i:_:Sysi 
- - ------------------------------------------- 
------------ 
- - 
---------- 
------------------------;':::' 
':: 
' ::::: 
':':'':':: 
FIG. 1.-The Rockefeller Differential Analyzer. (Courtesy of the MIT Museum.) 
1945, when it was hailed by the press as a great electromechanical brain 
ready to tackle the problems of peace and to advance science by freeing 
it from the pick-and-shovel work of mathematics.3 
The development of the analyzer had occupied Vannevar Bush and 
his colleagues at MIT for almost twenty 
years. In 1927, an early model 
made the front page of the New York Times: "'Thinking Machine' Does 
Higher Mathematics; Solves Equations That Take Humans Months." 
In 1930, the group constructed a model which proved so successful 
that it inspired imitation around the world. In the United States, 
General Electric, Aberdeen Proving Ground, and the universities of 
Pennsylvania, California, and Texas all built analyzers. More were 
constructed abroad, in England at Manchester and Cambridge, and in 
Ireland, Germany, Norway, and Russia.4 Bush's success prompted him 
olis, J. Howlett, and G. Rota, eds., A History 
of Computing 
in the Twentieth 
Century 
(New 
York, 1980); and Paul Ceruzzi, Reckoners: 
The Prehistory 
of the Digital Computer,from 
Relays 
to the Stored Program Concept, 1935-1945 (Westport, Conn., 1983). For Turing and his 
interest in computing machines as a response to the crisis in the foundations of 
mathematics, see William F. Aspray, Jr., "From Mathematical Constructivity 
to Compu- 
ter Science: Alan Turing, John von Neumann, and the Origins of Computer Science in 
Mathematical Logic" (Ph.D. diss., Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison, 1980); and Alan 
Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New York, 1983). 
3See Life, January 14, 1946; also, Popular Science Monthly, 
vol. 148 (1946). 
"For a valuable bibliography of analyzer literature, see the notes to chap. 5 of E. C. 
Berkeley, Giant Brains, or Machines That Think (New York, 1949). 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
65 
to plan an analyzer more capacious, quicker in calculation, and more 
flexible in application, which would establish MIT as an international 
center for the study of machine computation. He persuaded the Rock- 
efeller Foundation in 1935 to finance the new machine, and in 1939 the 
Carnegie Corporation contributed money to help establish and main- 
tain a center to serve as a site for the study of machine analysis. At the 
time, Bush's program seemed an adumbration of future technology. 
Harold Hazen, the head of the Electrical Engineering Department in 
1940 and a long-time colleague, predicted that the analyzer would 
"mark the start of a new era in mechanized calculus," and Karl Comp- 
ton, MIT's president, declared in 1941 that the new machine would be 
"one of the great scientific instruments of modern times."5 
Within five years of its announcement, however, the early enthu- 
siasm which had marked the development of the analyzer had died, 
and the Center of Analysis had collapsed as a vital site for the study of 
computation.6 In the early spring of 1950, Samuel Caldwell, the cen- 
ter's director and another of Bush's close colleagues in the develop- 
ment of the analyzer, came to the home of Warren Weaver to discuss 
the status of the machine and the program it had inspired. Weaver was 
the director of the Natural Sciences Division of the Rockefeller Foun- 
dation and a respected mathematician, and he had been intimately 
involved with the MIT project from its beginnings in the 1930s. The 
long meeting between the two men turned into an autopsy of the 
program begun fifteen years earlier with Rockefeller support. No one 
had expected in 1936, they admitted, that the whole field of"computer 
science" would so quickly overtake Bush's project. But things had 
indeed changed, and Caldwell confessed to Weaver that the analyzer 
was "essentially obsolete" and the whole program had "become a real 
burden on MIT."7 
What happened? Why did a twenty-year 
effort to create a computer 
fail when it did? The reasons, of course, are manifold. In the first place, 
the war released an unprecedented flood of federal money and 
spawned a multitude of laboratories at MIT, disrupting the simpler 
institutional environment in which the analyzer was conceived and 
nurtured. But if the war brought new public monies which over- 
whelmed the older tradition of private philanthropy 
that had sustained 
5MIT President's 
Reports for 1940, p. 101; and 1941, p. 28. 
'The analyzer and machines of a similar type did not, of course, disappear overnight. 
The Rockefeller calculator was not dismantled until 1954 (personal communication 
from Frank Verzuh, June 4, 1982). Descendants of Bush's analyzers still constitute a 
modest weapon in the armory of engineers, as can be surmised by a glance at the current 
texts on library shelves. 
7See Warren Weaver's project diaries for March 17, 1950. The diaries Weaver kept as a 
foundation officer are preserved at the Rockefeller Archive Center. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
66 
Larry Owens 
the analyzer, it also ushered in a variety of computational tasks, in the 
fields of large-volume data analysis and real-time operation, which 
were beyond the capacity of the Rockefeller instrument. The years 
around the war's end were marked by intense competition in computer 
development, and Bush's machine was quickly challenged by more 
capable computers incorporating radically different 
designs-by Eck- 
ert and Mauchly's ENIAC at the University 
of Pennsylvania, and by Jay 
Forrester's Whirlwind at MIT itself.8 
These new computers were elec- 
tronic and digital rather than electromechanical, 
and to them belonged 
the future of computer technology. In brief, the Rockefeller Analyzer 
succumbed to technical obsolescence. 
But are these suggestions of failure the most interesting 
features of 
this twenty-year 
project? In our rush to write the history of the most 
glamorous of modern technologies, we must be careful lest we find in 
older artifacts 
only anticipations of future developments, and overlook 
dimensions of meaning that open windows on the past. Warren 
Weaver indicated this extra dimension in the case of the analyzer when 
he remarked in a letter to Caldwell some days after their postmortem: 
[I]t seems rather a pity not to have around such a place as MIT a 
really impressive Analogue computer; for there is vividness and 
directness of meaning of the electrical and mechanical processes 
involved ... which can hardly fail, I would think, to have a very 
considerable educational value. A Digital Electronic computer is 
bound to be a somewhat abstract affair, in which the actual com- 
putational processes are fairly deeply submerged.' 
Weaver's insight can help us understand that the Rockefeller Analyzer 
was not so much an aborted beginning as the culmination of a series of 
inventions stretching back to Bush's undergraduate years at Tufts 
College. Furthermore, Weaver's reference to its vividness of meaning 
and educational value suggests that Bush's machines could be read as 
weighty "texts" embodying a variety of idioms-technical, intellectual, 
and ethical-ingredient in the culture of engineering in which he came 
of age. In the context of the early 20th-century 
engineering school, the 
analyzers were not only tools but paradigms, and they taught 
mathematics and method and modeled the character of engineering. 
In the decade following the First World War, electrical engineers 
came up against severe mathematical difficulties 
in their studies of 
8See Nancy Stern (n. 2 above) on ENIAC; for Whirlwind, see Kent Redmond and 
Thomas Smith, Project Whirlwind, 
the History 
of a Pioneer Computer 
(Bedford, Mass., 1980). 
'Weaver to Caldwell, March 27, 1950, in RF1.1/224/2/26. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
67 
vacuum tubes, telephone lines, and especially long-distance power 
transmission lines. Given the large financial risks which accompanied 
the construction of power networks, 
it was imperative that engineers be 
able to predict the operating characteristics of proposed systems.'" 
Consequently, between 1920 and 1925 the Research Laboratory of 
MIT's Electrical Engineering Department undertook a major assault 
on the mathematical problems involved in the study of long-distance 
lines. The attack was two-pronged and dealt, on the one hand, with the 
construction of artificial lines designed to reproduce on a laboratory 
scale the behavior of power networks, and, on the other, with the 
search for methods to handle the refractory 
equations generated by 
these networks." 
Much of the mathematics of long-distance lines had been developed 
by General Electric's Charles Steinmetz and the Bell Telephone en- 
gineer John Carson, but, while the derivation of the appropriate equa- 
tions proved to be relatively 
straightforward, 
their solution was not. Of 
particular importance to MIT engineers worried about the stability 
of 
lines was the equation derived by Carson: 
I = A(t)(E)sinO + Epcos(pt + 0) fcospA - (8) d8 
+ Epsin(pt + 0) fsinpG A(8)d8, 
where I is the entering current, and Esin(pt + 0) the voltage suddenly 
applied to the sending end of an initially unenergized transmission 
line. Normal procedure for the solution of this equation involved, first, 
the calculation of the products under the integral signs from tables of 
functions and their plotting by hand in graphic form, then the deter- 
mination of the areas under the curves (and thus the integrals) with the 
use of an Amsler planimeter, and finally the necessary multiplication 
and addition of curves to give, in graphic form, I versus t.'2 
'0The concern with such problems is obvious in the pages of the Journal of the American 
Institute 
of Electrical Engineers. In general, see Thomas Hughes, Networks 
of Power: Elec- 
trification 
in Western 
Society, 
1880-1930 (Baltimore, 1983). In particular, see for example 
V. Bush and R. D. Booth, "Power System Transients," Journal of the American 
Institute 
of 
Electrical Engineers 44 (1925): 229-240. 
"See the MIT President's 
Reports for the period; also, Herbert R. Stewart, "A New 
Recording Product Integraph and Multiplier," MIT master's thesis, 1925; and Karl 
Wildes and Nilo Lindgren, A Century 
of Electrical 
Engineering 
and Computer 
Science at MIT, 
1882-1982 (Cambridge, Mass., 1985). 
"2Stewart; 
John Carson, "A Mathematical Discussion of the Building-up of Sinusoidal 
Currents in Loaded Lines . .." (New York, 1925); C. P. Steinmetz, Theory 
and Calculation 
of Transient 
Electric Phenomena and Oscillations 
(New York, 1911). 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
68 
Larry Owens 
Early in 1925 Bush suggested to his graduate student Herbert Ste- 
wart that he devise a machine to facilitate the recording of the areas 
needed for the calculation of the Carson equation. In the course of his 
work, Stewart apparently discovered the series of papers that William 
and James Thomson had published in 1876 describing the disc-globe- 
and-cylinder integrator and its application to harmonic analysis. Wil- 
liam Thomson explained the use of the integrator for calculating the 
integral 
f 
oxf(x) 
(x)dx. 
Stewart was properly intrigued, for the general form of the Carson 
equation was of the same type: 
y(t) = F1 (t) ff() 
(8)d8. 
However, since this use of the Thomson integrator required knowl- 
edge of the integral 
fnf(x)dx, 
Stewart dismissed the device as unsuitable for his project, feeling that 
f(x) might not, in the general case, be easily integrated. His dismissal of 
the Thomson integrator is ironic, for he might have found in the 
Thomson papers (which had been collected as Appendix B' in Thom- 
son and Tait's 1879 Treatise 
on Natural Philosophy) 
the essential insights 
that Bush would bring to fruition in the development of the mechani- 
cal integrator for which he had set Stewart searching.'" 
"'During 1924-25, the development of the Product Integraph was the majority activity 
in the Research Division of the Electrical Engineering Department. For a description of 
the first Product Integraph, see V. Bush, F. D. Gage, and H. R. Stewart, "A Continuous 
Recording Integraph,"Journal of the Franklin Institute 
212 (1927): 63-84. My account of 
the origins of the integraph is based on materials in the MIT Archives and on discussions 
with Karl Wildes, April 12 and 13, 1984. It might be that Stewart never closely studied the 
Thomson papers. When Bush first suggested the project, he directed Stewart to Fred 
Dellenbaugh's 1921 master's thesis as a fairly complete collection of "mechanical calculat- 
ing contrivances which had been developed in the past" and in which he would have 
found a condensed description and diagrams of the Thomson integrator emphasizing its 
use in harmonic analysis, that is, with equations of the form 
ff(x)g(x)dx. 
Stewart to Bush, May 4, 1926, Hazen Papers, MIT Archives; Frederick Dellenbaugh, 
"Harmonic Analysis, a Critical Compendium of Methods and Devices for the Analysis of 
Complex Alternating Current Waves with Suggestions for Improvements and Discus- 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
69 
A colleague, F. D. Gage, suggested that Stewart interpret the equa- 
tion electrically rather than mechanically. He then realized that the 
integration of the functional product could be performed with an 
ordinary watt-hour meter. Stewart intended to read the meter at 
appropriate time intervals, but Bush recommended linking the meter 
to a pen driven by a servomotor that would permit the integral's 
continuous recording. To generate the second-level product, Stewart 
turned again to the watt-hour meter until Bush pointed out that it 
could be accomplished more simply by an elementary mechanical 
linkage. Stewart received his master's degree in September 1925 for his 
work on this first Product Integraph. 
Two more Bush students became involved with the Product Inte- 
graph. King Gould used the machine to study the temperature gra- 
dient along the heated filament of a vacuum tube.l" Harold Hazen 
began the study of vacuum-tube circuits and soon realized that he 
could treat more complicated circuits if he had two levels of integration 
with which to work instead of one. He sketched out a second element 
for the integraph employing a wheel-and-disc integrator (a close 
cousin of the Thomson device), and showed his idea to Bush, who 
quickly recognized the generality of his innovation and generated a 
twenty-page memo outlining a new machine.'" (See fig. 2.) After all, 
although first-order differential equations were encountered fre- 
quently in science, "it was once said that physics revolved about the 
second-order differential equation, and while recent developments 
have somewhat obscured this importance there is still much of physics 
thus described."'6 Under Bush's guidance, Hazen built a two-element 
sion of the Requirements of Such Devices," MIT master's thesis, 1921. E. C. Berkeley and 
L. Wainwright, 
in Computers, 
Their Operation 
and Application 
(New York, 1956), claim that 
Wainwright invented a "virtual prototype of the differential analyzer" in 1923 and 
communicated it to Bush in 1924. They cite his response to a later query: "I have become 
quite familiar with the literature of this subject, and as far as I know you [Wainwright] 
were the first person after Kelvin to proceed in study along these lines and the first 
to suggest a machine elaborated in detail for the handling of ballistic equations," 
pp. 114-15. Obviously, the analyzers incorporated the work of many people. As will 
become clear, however, their deeper origins lie not with Wainwright, Kelvin, Bush's 
colleagues, or even with Bush himself. They reflect a common universe of technical 
discourse that reaches back to the turn of the century and beyond. 
'4V. Bush and K. Gould, "Temperature Distribution along a Filament," Physical 
Review 
29 (1927): 337-45. 
'5Wildes (n. 13 above); Gordon Brown, "Eloge: Harold Locke Hazen, 1901-1980," 
Annals of the History 
of Computing 
3 (1981): 4-12; the sketch and Bush's memo are in the 
Hazen Papers, MIT Archives. 
'6V. Bush and H. L. Hazen, "Integraph Solution of Differential Equations,"Journal 
of 
the Franklin Institute 
204 (1927): 577. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
70 
Larry Owens 
X?Ioe.-.s,- ..-- 
.Pr,;, 
l 
s?,, 
,tr. 
I !C~~~"" 
FIG. 2.-The sketch by Harold Hazen of a second integrating 
element. (Hazen Papers, 
MIT Archives; facsimile by author.) 
machine capable of solving most second-order equations to an accu- 
racy of several percent (fig. 3). In May 1928 the Franklin Institute 
awarded Bush its Levy Medal for his work on mechanical computation, 
with honorable mentions to Stewart, Gage, and Hazen. 
The new model Product Integraph was applied to the study of 
vacuum-tube circuits, transmission lines, mechanical oscillations in 
synchronous motors, and electron orbitals."7 
Yet despite its successful 
applications, no one was satisfied with the new integraph. A hybrid 
machine that employed both an electrical and a mechanical device to 
perform the same function of integration, it suffered from the limita- 
tions of the former while failing to maximize the advantages of the 
latter. The watt-hour meter was physically more complex and in- 
herently less precise in its operation than a well-engineered mechanical 
integrator. Moreover, the meter was a more complex logical device in 
that it integrated the product of two functions, while the mechanical 
integrator, 
as will be seen, simply integratedf(x)dx. 
The combination of 
mathematical elegance and mechanical simplicity appealed to Bush, 
and by the fall of 1928 he had secured funds from the administration 
at 
MIT to build a new machine that would take advantage of the simple 
virtues of the wheel-and-disc integrator.'8 
"'For a list of topics, see n. 6 in V. Bush, "The Differential Analyzer," Journal of the 
Franklin Institute 
212 (1931): 447-88. 
"8Wildes (n. 13 above). 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
71 
iii'iiiiiii~i 
i iii 
iiiiii~iiiii~ii 
:iicl~':'i'l 
-:i _ : i~i~i':i~i~P:: 
:~1~ 
6~S~B~P~~ 
a i~~i~i~iC'$ii::ii 
:::i:::iiii::::::i~::::::-:::::-: 
. II 
II 
I I II 
II 
X.:::::i:l 
mom 
,: 
::::: 
, 
?4:. 
FIG. 3.-(top) The revised Product Integraph with Bush at the near end and, leading 
away, F. G. Kear, Harold Hazen, and F. D. Gage; (bottom) Bush seated at the output end 
of the integraph with the disc integrator in front of him and the watt-hour meter, seen 
from the rear, to its right. (Courtesy of the MIT Museum.) 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
72 
Larry Owens 
The Differential Analyzer fulfilled Bush's expectations.'9 The new 
machine consisted of a long table-like framework 
crisscrossed by inter- 
connectible shafts (fig. 4). Along one side were arrayed a series of 
drawing boards and along the other six disc integrators. Pens on some 
of the boards were driven by shafts so as to trace out curves on properly 
positioned graph paper. Other boards were designed to permit an 
operator, who could cause a pen to follow a curve positioned on a 
board, to give to a particular shaft any desired rotation. In essence, the 
analyzer was a device cleverly contrived to convert the rotations of 
shafts one into another in a variety of ways. By associating the change 
of variables in an equation with the rotations of shafts, and by em- 
ploying an assortment of gearings, the operator could cause the calcu- 
lator to add, subtract, multiply, divide, and integrate. 
i:: 
iiii; 
....................... 
............. 
FIG. 4.-The 1931 Differential Analyzer. Sam Caldwell can be seen at the left. (Cour- 
tesy of the MIT Museum.) 
'"Waldo Lyon, a departmental colleague, contributed the new name, apparently in 
response to the following: "We need some new names! The so-called product integraph 
was much more than an integraph. It was a machine for solving differential 
equations.... 
In token of appreciation to one who suggests a name which is accepted, the following 
procedure is proposed: The new machine will be set up to solve a differential 
equation, 
and the recording pencil will in this manner be caused to draw on the recording platen 
the name of the successful contestant. This will be accompanied by all due and proper 
ceremony," MIT Archives, AC 13, Box 3, Folder 69. Dugald Jackson informs us that the 
Differential Analyzer cost MIT approximately $25,000. Jackson to Jackson, Jr., March 
17, 1932. Jackson Papers, MIT Archives, Box 3, Folder 185. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
73 
The disc integrator, the heart of the analyzer and the means by 
which it performed the operation of integration, is a variable friction- 
gear that consists of a disc resting on a wheel at a variable distance from 
its center (fig. 5a). The geometry of the integrator forces its constituent 
shafts to turn in accordance with the relationship 
The precision of the disc integrator depends on eliminating slippage 
between the wheel and the disc when the wheel turns under load. In 
the Product Integraph Bush had reduced the load carried by the wheel 
shaft by the use of a servomotor which followed its rotations. In the 
Differential Analyzer, he accomplished the same end and continued 
his replacement of electrical by mechanical elements by incorporating 
another Hazen idea-the torque amplifier designed by C. W. Nieman 
of the Bethlehem Steel Corporation.20 
This was a purely mechanical 
device for the amplification of motion that depended on the winch 
principle (fig. 5b). By its use Bush was able to eliminate most of the 
torque load carried by the wheel shaft of the integrator and to supply 
the power needed to drive his calculating engine. 
The use of the analyzer can be illustrated by an example based on 
one of Bush's own. Consider the equation of a falling body when the 
gravitational force g varies with the distance x: 
d2x 
dx 
2 + k- + g(x) = 0, 
dt2 
dt 
or, 
dx 
-"k-+ 
g(x) dt. 
dt 
dt 
In Bush's words, 
A bus shaft is assigned to each significant 
quantity appearing in the 
equation. The several relations existing between these are then set 
up by means of connections to the operating units: a functional 
relationship by connecting the two corresponding shafts to an 
input table, a sum by placing an adder in position, an integral 
relationship by an integrator, 
and so on. When all the relationships 
which are involved have been thus represented a final connection 
is made which represents the equality expressed in the equation. 
In the example above this connection is through an integrating 
20Brown (n. 15 above); C. W. Nieman, "Torque Amplifier," American Machinist 66 
(1927): 895-97. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
74 
Larry Owens 
y 
fx 
y = f(x)dx y = (x)dx 
x 
a) 
The Disc Integrator 
OUrUT ARM 
TINPUT 
sA 
INPUT ARMI 
b) 
The Torque Amplifier 
FIG. 5.-A schematic diagram of the disc integrator and the torque amplifier. 
unit .... When this has been done the machine is locked, and the 
rotation of the independent-variable shaft will drive everything 
else, thus forcing the machine to move in accordance with the 
expressed relationship . . . 21 
A diagram of the analyzer connected to solve the equation of the 
falling body is shown in figure 6. The horizontal lines represent bus 
shafts, K and I multiplying 
and adding gears, and the integrators are 
represented by the indicated symbol. The terms of the equation associ- 
ated with the rotations of particular bus shafts are noted at the side of 
the diagram. G(x) would have been plotted earlier and an operator 
stationed at the input table to keep the pointer p on the curve as the 
2'"The Differential Analyzer" (n. 17 above), p. 459. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
75 
g(x) 
INPUT TABLE 
p 
INDEPENDENT 
.+ 
)Ux(t) 
dx dt 
---t k(d) 
g(x) 
___-(k- 
-k g(x)) 
x(t) 
dx 
+ g(x))dt 
OUTPUT 
TABLE 
FIG. 6.-A diagram of the Differential Analyzer set up to solve the falling-body 
equation. 
analyzer worked through the equation. The function x(t), which ex- 
presses distance with respect to time, would be traced automatically on 
the output table. (See fig. 7.) 
The Differential Analyzer did more, obviously, than compute x(t). 
Through his elaboration of the mathematical possibilities inherent in 
the disc integrator and by the elimination of extraneous nonmechani- 
cal elements, Bush invented an elegant, dynamical, mechanical model 
of the differential equation. Articulated in a particular pattern, its 
shafts, gearboxes, integrators, 
pens, and drawing boards set in motion, 
the Differential Analyzer did not so much compute as kinetically act 
out the mathematical equation. 
Between 1926 and 1935 the development and application of the 
analyzers generated four bachelors' theses, twenty-eight masters' 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
76 
Larry Owens 
.......... 
.................. 
.................. 
............ 
. . . . . . . .. 
.............. 
N 
O 
FIG. 7.-Bush and Caldwell standing at the output board of the Differential 
Analyzer 
inspecting a family of curves produced during the solution of an equation. (Courtesy of 
the MIT Museum.) 
theses, and four doctoral dissertations.22 
Among the students who 
worked on the analyzer project were a number destined to become 
influential figures at MIT-Harold 
Hazen, Sam Caldwell, Gordon 
Brown, and Harold Edgerton. Most of the problems studied with the 
help of the analyzers were drawn from the field of electrical engineer- 
ing-but not all. By 1935 applications reflected the frontiers of scien- 
tific investigation and included studies in atomic physics, astrophysics, 
cosmic rays, and seismology. As early as 1932 Bush's colleague in the 
Physics Department, Philip Morse, used the analyzer to help thread his 
way through the computational thicket created by the quantum revolu- 
tion of the 1920s.23 The Englishman Douglas Hartree, a pioneer in the 
development of wave mechanics, visited Bush during the summer of 
1933 to become familiar with the analyzer and used it for his calcula- 
tion of the atomic field of mercury. Back at the University 
of Manches- 
22See the "List of Problems Studied with the Aid of the Differential 
Analyzer," attached 
to material sent by Bush to Warren Weaver, April 22, 1935, RF1.1/224/2/22. 
23p. M. Morse and W. P. Allis, "The Effect of Exchange on the Scattering of Slow 
Electrons from Atoms," Physical Review 44 (1933): 269. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
77 
ter, he constructed several analyzers modeled on the MIT machine, 
one of them from standard Meccano parts for a cost of some twenty 
pounds." 
Experience, mathematical skill, and sometimes days were required 
to translate difficult 
problems into forms that could be attacked by the 
calculator and then to connect the machine to perform the desired 
calculations. When Lemaitre and Vallarta calculated the trajectories of 
cosmic rays under the influence of the earth's magnetic field, it took 
five staff members and eighteen students thirty weeks to obtain the 
solutions.21 (See fig. 8.) Nevertheless, the analyzer found an eager 
audience of scientists and engineers frustrated by impossibly difficult 
calculations. For these, the not-inconsiderable 
labors involved in work 
with the analyzer were inconveniences to be born lightly. 
Success prompted Bush to plan yet another analyzer, one more 
precise in its calculations, convenient to operate, and with a larger 
universe of mathematical possibilities. The opportunity to pursue his 
plan presented itself in the person of Warren Weaver, who in the 
F-i- 
. , ',: - 
-I 
II" 
'i -' ' 
:,',' 
-.1 
I 
I 
L 
_ 
I 
I - 
?I 
'I- -" 
I I I I I 
na ~ ~ I 
II 
I 
I 
I AI ~ 
1? 
;~:??u?'r'.., 
,.. 
, 
II 
II..... 
.,,, 
,??rv.,,' 
I 
F 
I. 
It./ 
i 
_ 
i... 
i 
1 
! 
1 
_ 
:: 
4r. 
' 
'j~t?,?I: 
i~~~Ir 
I 
III 
I 
1 
_~~~ 
~~ 
_ 
 
i 
, 
ii 
'Ir 
FIG. 8.-Diagram of the Differential Analyzer set up to solve the Vallarta-Lemaitre 
cosmic ray problem. (Bush to Weaver, April 15, 1933, Rockefeller Archives.) 
24D. R. Hartree, "Approximate Wave Functions and Atomic Field for Mercury," 
Physical 
Review 46 (1934): 738-43; also the Hartree citations in the Berkeley bibliography 
(n. 4 above). 
25See George Gray's draft, "A Roomful of Brains," returned by Caldwell to Weaver, 
December 17, 1937, in RF 1 .1/224/2/23. 
For the study, see Vallarta and Lemaitre, "On the 
Geomagnetic Analysis of Cosmic Radiation," Physical Review 49 (1936): 719-26. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
78 
Larry Owens 
autumn of 1931 had become the director of the Natural Sciences 
Division of the Rockefeller Foundation. Weaver had first heard of the 
analyzer at a meeting in Paris with Sven Rosseland in 1932. Making 
plans for his new Institute of Theoretical Physics at the University of 
Oslo, Rosseland was interested in acquiring an analyzer with Rockefel- 
ler money to facilitate astrophysical calculations.26 
Weaver visited Bush 
in November to see the machine for himself, and he was "very much 
impressed." An applied mathematician, Weaver was undoubtedly in- 
trigued by the analyzer's practical applications as well as Bush's claim 
that a machine only twice as big could solve the three-body problem.27 
He came away from this first meeting with the feeling that it was "a 
matter of first-rate 
scientific importance for the Foundation to aid in 
disseminating knowledge concerning this new and extremely effective 
scientific device."2s 
Always ready to seize the moment, Bush began an active campaign to 
persuade Weaver that the analyzer project deserved large-scale sup- 
port. "To dream in rather a definite way" was characteristic 
of Bush, 
and he made a point of keeping Weaver up-to-date on the progress of 
the three-body problem.29 He shared as well his ideas concerning an 
improved computer, and reported that it was "going to become possi- 
ble to produce something quite startling." Foremost was the possibility 
of enabling the analyzer to switch rapidly from one problem to another 
in the manner of the automatic telephone exchange.30 He also shared 
with Weaver the prospect of unwelcome competition. The interest of 
men like Hartree and Rosseland provoked Bush to write that "with all 
modesty, I think that this radical development should be in my own 
hands," and foundation support would assure that. "It is rather hard 
... to appreciate the extent of the struggle which is necessary to over- 
come even simple mechanical difficulties 
in a device of this sort."3" 
The Depression discouraged the foundation from responding to 
Bush's overtures until the spring of 1935, when it awarded MIT a 
preliminary grant of $10,000 to complete the study of the improved 
analyzer.32 
Within the year Bush reported that the new machine was 
easily in reach and would incorporate three improvements: the auto- 
26"Memorandum of Professor L. R. Jones' talk with Professor Sven Rosseland, Paris, 
July 6, 1932," in RF1.1/767D/2/19. 
27Weaver's diaries, November 21, 1932. 
28Weaver to Lauder Jones, December 6, 1932, in RF1.1/767D/2/19. 
29Bush to Weaver, January 6, 1933, RF1.1/767D/2/20; the phrase is Bush's. 
30Bush to Weaver, April 15, 1933, in RFl.1/767D/2/20. 
31Bush to Weaver, July 7, 1933, in RF1.1/224/2/22. 
32See the grant history in the Rockefeller files on the MIT Differential Analyzer 
Project. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
79 
matic electrical interconnection 
of machine elements, increased preci- 
sion in the working of the integrators, 
and a "function unit" designed 
to translate digitally coded mathematical functions into continuous 
electrical signals. The new machine seemed just over the horizon and 
he looked forward to the time when the institute, as he wrote to 
Weaver, would "become a center of analysis of a certain important 
type, to which research workers everywhere will turn for their solu- 
tions of their equations."33 In March 1936 the foundation awarded 
MIT $85,000 for three years to build the Rockefeller Differential 
Analyzer. 
The next few years were enthusiastic but frustrating. 
Bush's enthu- 
siasm for invention was contagious, and the crew working on the new 
machine thoroughly enjoyed its work under him.34 
Yet his predictions 
proved overly optimistic. More precise integrators were developed 
with little difficulty, 
as were the servomechanisms needed to create the 
electrical connections between elements. But other problems with 
which the group had less experience proved more difficult. 
The func- 
tion unit, as it turned out, was not complete even by the end of the war. 
The most frustrating 
problem involved automatic control. Intended to 
work on multiple problems simultaneously, 
the analyzer needed to be 
able to assign computing elements to different problems quickly, 
efficiently, 
and automatically, even as one problem finished and 
another began. The matter introduced "extraordinarily 
complicated 
difficulties" 
into the design of the machine.35 In essence, the earlier 
devices had been dedicated machines, assembled anew each time an 
equation was to be solved. The automatic control of the new machine 
posed, in fact, a software problem, and it is not surprising that Bush 
and his team should have found it unsettling. Moreover, Bush had 
been MIT's vice-president 
and dean of engineering since 1932, and his 
duties were attracting 
more of his energies. In Bush's absence responsi- 
bility for the project fell on the shoulders of Sam Caldwell. Still, the 
3"Bush to Weaver, March 17, 1936, in RF1.1/224/2/23. 
"""To V. Bush, GREETINGS! 'To Doc' would perhaps be a better salutation for this 
note of farewell and Godspeed, for among ourselves we have always called you Doc as the 
title most appropriately expressing the affection and respect we have felt in working with 
you. 
"We would not have you leave without saying that it has been fun to build a Differential 
Analyzer with you. We think that you will agree that it has been fun, but we are not going 
to ask you to agree with some other feelings of ours, for of those we are betterjudges than 
you. We know, for example, the many ways in which we have felt your influence: in your 
generous praise for our successes, in your sympathetic analyses of our failures, in the 
enlivening breezes you have brought to our developmental doldrums .... The Differen- 
tial Analyzer Staff." In RF1.1/224/2. 
35Weaver diaries, January 10, 1939. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
80 
Larry Owens 
project was in good hands and Weaver felt that "things were going 
exceptionally well."36 When Bush announced he would leave MIT to 
become president of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, the proj- 
ect was dealt a serious blow. 
Before he left for Washington, however, he brought to fruition his 
plans for a center of analysis. Along with James Conant, Frank Jewett, 
and Irvin Stewart, Bush was a member of the National Research 
Council's Committee on Scientific 
Aids to Learning. In February, Bush 
had received from Stewart a letter suggesting the publication of a 
catalog of important scientific instruments available to investigators. 
He informed Stewart of MIT's work on machine analysis, writing: 
There should be created in this country a center of mechanical 
analysis amply manned and equipped for such work, to turn out 
tables and solve actual problems for research workers everywhere. 
We have the ambition to create such a center .... To do this we will 
need support, but I can think of no place where support could be 
given to a program that would have more general benefit upon 
research programs in almost every branch of science throughout 
the country.37 
The committee (which apparently received a portion of its funds 
from the Carnegie Corporation) submitted a proposal to the corpora- 
tion on Bush's behalf. His maneuvers were successful and in January 
1939 the corporation awarded MIT $45,000 for two years to establish a 
Center of Analysis with Sam Caldwell as its director. The center would 
house and coordinate the battery of computational devices developed 
at MIT over the years, with its centerpiece being the new Rockefeller 
Analyzer, undoubtedly the largest aid to learning the committee ever 
supported. The center was to provide assistance with problems of 
computation and foster research into computational and analytical 
tools.31 
With Bush gone and development plaguing the engineers, progress 
on the new calculator slowed. While the older Differential Analyzer 
carried the growing load of the center's computations, Caldwell and his 
staff found the time to pursue other projects. In fact, by February 1941 
work on a Rapid Arithmetical Computing Machine had come to 
occupy the major part of the center's research.39 
Bush had initiated 
36Ibid. 
17Bush to Stewart, February 28, 1938, in the file on the "Support of a Center of Analysis 
at MIT" in the records of the Carnegie Corporation of New York. 
"Bush to Stewart, June 13, 1938; Stewart to Frederick Keppel, July 15, 1938, both in 
the Carnegie Corporation files. 
"Samuel Caldwell, "Report on Center of Analysis,July 
1, 1939-February 1, 1941," in 
the Carnegie Corporation files. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
81 
study of an arithmetical machine at the end of 1936 in conjunction with 
cryptographic work for the government. Unlike the analyzers, this 
device was meant to deal with large volumes of arithmetic calculations 
at high speed. The design of the computer included a keyboard for 
entering data, an input unit for inserting numbers at appropriate 
moments in the process of computation, a control unit to coordinate 
machine operations automatically, an output unit, a storage unit for 
holding numbers temporarily 
during computation, and the computing 
unit. Bush attacked the problem of the high-speed computing element 
first with the help of a grant from the National Cash Register Com- 
pany. By the fall of 1939, Bush, Sam Caldwell, Mark Radford, and 
others had devised a number of high-speed devices including vacuum- 
tube counting rings and a matrix switch that would utilize, in one of its 
forms, the magnetic properties of molybdenum or chrome permalloy 
rings.40 
(See fig. 9.) 
By the time the first demonstration of the Rockefeller Analyzer was 
held on December 13, 1941, the project was two and a half years 
behind schedule. Convinced that Caldwell's staff was being distracted 
by other work and facing the imminent cessation of outside financing 
for the center, Karl Compton delivered an ultimatum: Make the ana- 
lyzer self-supporting by October or the institute would suspend the 
project.4' The president's concerns were undoubtedly aggravated by 
outside events. Six days before Caldwell's demonstration, 
the Japanese 
had bombed Pearl Harbor. 
When Caldwell returned to peacetime work at the end of the war, he 
faced the challenge of revitalizing the center's programs. Given the 
transformations 
wrought at MIT by the war, this proved an impossible 
task. In the first instance, the war accelerated a generational change in 
the institute's staff. With both Caldwell and Hazen preoccupied with 
the affairs of the National Defense Research Committee, supervision 
of the center fell to Richard Taylor, the young assistant who had 
worked on the function unit and automatic control. When Caldwell 
'0W. H. Radford, "Research on A RAPID COMPUTING MACHINE," October 1939; 
copy from Perry Crawford, May 1982. Bush informed Weaver in October 1938 that 
equipment for carrying out arithmetical calculations at "almost unbelievably high rates" 
had already been constructed by the government and by the National Cash Register 
Company. Weaver diaries, October 28, 1938. 
?"Weaver diaries, March 12, 1942; Caldwell to Weaver, March 13, 1942; Karl Compton 
to Weaver, March 14, 1942. In the event MIT, encouraged by Weaver's offer of another 
$25,000, did not terminate the project. The letters are in RF1.1/224/2. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
82 
Larry Owens 
P/an of Addinhy 1a//ri'x Jw/c/ch 
(A) 
CirtCils 
cencct 
to sourc 
of 
d ifil. 
(B) Circui/s are Con/rolled by corrcrpondingly 
nvrnbcred 
s5aeo 
ofa posti;onal 
counlin7 
rfin 
(C) Circuils connec/ 
/o inpu/ circui/s ofriny. 
"o 
AT o- 
Cr 
o 
' 
A.,0, 
o 
-\ 
, 
c, 
\ 
\4 
\ 
\N\ 
C1\ 
%0 
\ A\ * 
\ 
\to 
Aj 0- \-- 
At o- -' 
\I 
\ ' 
\o 
\, 
\o 
\ \C 
\ 
C \ 
\ 
C-1 
A 
m 
, 
a 
J4 
A 
4 
B 
4 
6 
4 
\to 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
' 
- -C, 
\, 
\\ 
\ 
'7~ 
FIG. 9.--Diagram of the matrix switch for the Rapid Arithmetical Computing 
Machine. (From the report prepared by W. H. Radford, "Research on A RAPID 
COMPUTING MACHINE," October 1939; courtesy of Perry Crawford.) 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
83 
tried to regain control after the war, he found that Taylor enjoyed 
running the center and felt he ought to go on doing so.42 
These shifts in personal relationships were complemented by institu- 
tional changes. After the war, when Caldwell found his colleague 
Gordon Brown promoted "over his head," he began to doubt the 
extent of administrative support for the center.43 
Be that as it may, 
Brown's success certainly had cause. He had served as the wartime 
director of the Servomechanisms Laboratory established in 1940 as an 
outgrowth of a training program for naval fire control officers. By the 
war's end the laboratory had a staff of almost a hundred and had 
developed considerable expertise in the field of fire control systems. 
Since these involved computing devices, the lab inevitably encroached 
on territory 
once occupied solely by the center and the Differential 
Analyzer. The Servomechanisms Lab is only one example of the mas- 
sive institutional adjustments provoked at MIT by the war's demand 
for mission-oriented research and the consequent influx of federal 
defense money.44 
Nevertheless, Caldwell worked hard to reinvigorate the Center of 
Analysis. His strategy was to turn, once again, to the Rockefeller 
Foundation. Spurred on by developments in digital computing at the 
University of Pennsylvania and at the Institute for Advanced Study in 
Princeton, Caldwell created a plan designed to reassert MIT's lead- 
ership in the field of computing. Aware that the center was no longer 
the sole repository of necessary skills, he proposed cooperation be- 
tween the center, the Mathematics Department, and the Research 
Laboratory of Electronics established at the end of the war with the 
dissolution of the Radiation Lab. The center would be responsible for 
the design and construction 
of a new computer, the research lab for the 
basic electronic components, and the math department for the applied 
mathematics that was assuming greater importance in the design and 
construction of computers. In short order Rockefeller awarded Cald- 
well and the institute $100,000 to study computer design and the 
possibilities of the new electronic machines.45 
Within these revised plans for the center, it is clear that Caldwell 
intended the Rockefeller Analyzer to play a continuing role. Indeed, in 
their 1945 account of the new machine, he and Bush had promised a 
series of future publications detailing innovations for which the pres- 
'2Weaver's diaries, April 11, 1946. 
'3Ibid. 
"4John Burchard, Q.E.D., M.I.T. in World War II (New York, 1948); Redmond and 
Smith (n. 8 above). 
45Excerpt, Caldwell to Weaver, January 16, 1946; grant history, both in RF1.1/224/ 
4/31. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
84 
Larry Owens 
ent issue had lacked space. But for Taylor, the center and the science of 
computing had outgrown their dependence on mechanical analysis, 
despite Hazen's 1941 claim that the analyzer marked the start of a new 
era in mechanized calculus. As Taylor ironically noted in a memoran- 
dum outlining the new program, one of the analyzer's drawbacks 
reflected the sophisticated mathematics with which it dealt. Well-suited 
to differential equations, the analyzer bumbled arithmetic. Further- 
more, the mechanical inertia of its operating parts limited its speed and 
accuracy." 
As it turned out, Caldwell's cooperative program failed to material- 
ize. The Research Laboratory had its hands full with contract work 
funded by the military, and the mathematician central to Caldwell's 
plan, Norbert Wiener, proved a reluctant and irascible partner.47 
For 
Warren Weaver, who appreciated the need for first-rate 
mathematical 
help if MIT was to compete with such high-powered teams as John von 
Neumann, RCA, and the Institute for Advanced Study, the "time for 
mathematical thinking [was] fast slipping away."48 
Yet Caldwell's center 
would probably have been in trouble in any event. No longer occupy- 
ing a privileged position in the study of computing, and with govern- 
ment support readily and generally available at other sites, the center 
could make only a token contribution to the vigorous and competitive 
boom in postwar computing. Not only was it ill-prepared to compete 
with ENIAC and the Princeton IAS computer, but it faced a fatal 
challenge within MIT itself. 
In the winter of 1944, the institute and the navy had agreed to 
develop an Airplane Stability and Control Analyzer to serve as a 
universal flight simulator for the design of military aircraft. The mis- 
sion fell within the province of the Servomechanisms Lab, and Gordon 
Brown assigned the project to Jay Forrester, a young research assistant 
from Nebraska. The original plans called for a cockpit with flight 
controls, an engineering station, and computing equipment. Forrester 
had first intended to use an analyzer as the computing element but 
soon realized, as had Taylor, that the mechanical principle of Bush's 
computer severely restricted its speed. The allure of computer build- 
ing soon swept away the other elements of the plan, and Forrester and 
his team in the Servomechanisms Lab set out to develop a reliable, 
ultra-high-speed machine capable of operating in real time. The fund- 
46Richard Taylor, "Memorandum, Electronic Calculating Machine, 4/9/46," 
in RF1.1/ 
224/4/31. 
47"Division 14, NDRC, MIT Research Laboratory in Electronics: Interim Progress 
Report, 3/15/46," in RF1.1/224/4/31; Weaver to Hazen, March 4, 1947; Hazen to 
Weaver, March 12, 1947; both in RF1.1/224/4/32. 
"8Weaver to Hazen, March 4, 1947, in RF1.1/224/4/32. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
85 
ing provided by the navy was generous. Whereas the Rockefeller 
Foundation had granted the Center of Analysis $100,000 for its com- 
puter study, in 1945-46 alone the navy alloted Forrester $875,000. In 
1949 Forrester was spending the navy's money at the rate of $100,000 a 
month. By 1951 he had succeeded in constructing 
Whirlwind, the first 
real-time electronic digital computer.49 
The Whirlwind project accentuated the inadequacies of the Center 
of Analysis and of the Differential 
Analyzer as significant 
influences in 
the study of computing. In the spring of 1946, only halfway through 
the center's two-year study, Compton returned to the foundation the 
$50,000 which the institute had so far spent. The Whirlwind project, 
he said, was fulfilling 
the objectives of the Rockefeller grant with such 
"vigor" and on such a substantially 
larger scale that the expenditure of 
foundation money for the same purpose was not only unjustified but 
"foolish."50 
How does one tell the story of a machine? On what categories should 
the analysis rest, within what interpretive framework should one 
search for the meaning of engineering artifacts? 
However the historian 
chooses to answer these questions, utility must certainly play a role. 
Bush's analyzers were successful, to a large extent, because they were 
able to alleviate computational frustrations 
within electrical engineer- 
ing and in scientific fields where theoretical advances had surpassed 
the stratagems of applied mathematicians. When faster machines 
based on a radically different technology became available after the 
war, in part as a consequence of new sources of funding, those who 
needed machine aids in computation could turn elsewhere. But there 
are other categories than utility, 
or, maybe, broader sorts of utility 
than 
so far invoked in our account. As John Kasson has shown us in Amusing 
the Million and Civilizing the Machine, machines exist not only as tools, 
but also as symbols. Bush's analyzers did indeed do more than simply 
compute x(t). To flesh out our story of this particular machine, we must 
discover what this something else was. 
Weaver was right when he reminded Caldwell that the analyzer had 
"a very considerable educational value." In 1928 Bush had attempted 
to justify the expense of the Product Integraph in the course of an 
article for the Tech Engineering 
News. The integraph, he said, enabled 
its users to cope with difficult mathematical equations. But it also 
provided "the man who studies it a grasp of the innate meaning of the 
49Redmond and Smith (n. 8 above). 
50Compton to Weaver, June 26, 1947, in RF1.1/224/4/32. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
86 
Larry Owens 
differential equation." For this man "one part at least of formal 
mathematics will become a live thing.""' Years later, Bush recounted an 
anecdote that made the same point. When the army wanted to build 
their own machine at the Aberdeen Proving Ground, he lent them a 
mechanic who had been hired as an inexperienced draftsman to help 
with the construction of the MIT calculator. The army wanted to pay 
the man machinist's wages; Bush insisted he be hired as a consultant 
with appropriate pay: 
I never consciously taught this man any part of the subject of 
differential 
equations; but in building that machine, managing it, 
he learned what differential 
equations were himself. He got to the 
point where when some professor was using the machine and got 
stuck ... he could discuss the problem with the user and very often 
find out what was wrong. It was very interesting to discuss this 
subject with him because he had learned the calculus in mechani- 
cal terms--a strange approach, and yet he understood it. That is, 
he did not understand it in any formal sense, but he understood 
the fundamentals; he had it under his skin.52 
Studying the analyzers might help get the calculus under one's skin; 
but it taught something more as well. Continuing his justification 
of the 
integraph for his Tech audience of 1928, Bush struggled to put into 
words other tacit qualities expressed by the calculator: 
Before a man can build with his hands a seaworthy boat he must 
patiently learn to saw to a line and plane to an accurate surface .... 
The study of engineering mathematics becomes soul-satisfying 
only when one begins to grasp the power that lies in the ability to 
think straight in the midst of complexity, and visualizes the rela- 
tionship between such reasoning and that engineering accom- 
plishment which is useful and admirable, seaworthy and a thing of 
beauty.53 
"To think straight in the midst of complexity." For young engineers 
coming of age in the glory years of Herbert Hoover, this was not the 
least of the lessons taught by the Differential 
Analyzer. Bush's expecta- 
tions were not his alone. They were, in fact, constitutive 
of the early 
20th-century culture of engineering. 
5`V. Bush, "Mechanical Solutions of Engineering Problems," Tech Engineering 
News, 
vol. 9 (1928). 
52V. Bush, Pieces of the Action (New York, 1970), p. 262. 
53Bush, "Mechanical Solutions." 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
87 
The intellectual and ethical idioms embedded in the analyzers arose 
out of the classrooms, laboratories, and shops of the turn-of-the- 
century engineering school. Especially in the matter of mathematical 
pedagogy and in notions of graphic language do we discover prece- 
dents for Bush's claims regarding his computers. The historian can 
insinuate himself into the somewhat alien frame of mind of that early 
environment by listening in on a conversation which took place at 
Tufts College between Samuel Earle and a student just a few years 
before Bush arrived as an undergraduate in 1909. Earle had been 
entrusted with the daunting task of teaching English composition to 
engineers, a new project at the time, and had established the practice of 
meeting his students in the shop or drafting room to discuss their 
writing exercises. One day he found himself having difficulty 
explain- 
ing to a student how his essay, in its attempt to portray the character of 
a man, had failed to convey any but his most superficial qualities. The 
drawing instructor, who had overheard the conversation, at some 
point interrupted with the question, "How about the dotted line?" The 
student, Earle tells us, saw the point at once.54 Familiar with the use of 
dotted lines in mechanical drawings to depict invisible features and 
catalyzed by the remark of his drawing teacher, Earle's student was 
able to apply his knowledge of a more familiar language to one less 
familiar. 
This anecdote suggests that the artifacts 
of engineering, particularly 
in the context of the school, can be interpreted as exercises in language. 
It suggests also that in the particular context of the turn-of-the-century 
engineering school the student was expected to move with facility 
between a number of different 
language communities serving as trans- 
lator and interpreter; that the primary language on which the others, 
such as physics and mathematics, depended derived from the visual, 
tangible elements of the shop and laboratory. In such a setting the 
Graphic Language was a fundamental skill for the student engineer. 
Gardner Anthony, for many years the dean of engineering at Tufts 
College, was an acknowledged master of mechanical drawing and 
graphics in the engineering curriculum. In 1922 in a small book with a 
long title, An Introduction 
to the Graphic Language; the Vocabulary, 
Gram- 
matical Construction, 
Idiomatic Use, and Historical 
Development 
with Special 
Reference 
to the Reading of Drawings, Anthony summarized ideas he had 
been developing for over three decades and which formed the basis for 
the course he taught at Tufts. Drawing, he felt, was a universal lan- 
51Samuel Earle, "English in the Engineering School at Tufts College," Proceedings 
of the 
Society 
for the Promotion 
of Engineering 
Education 19 (1911): 44. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
88 
Larry Owens 
guage and possessed, like other languages, its own vocabulary, 
orthography, grammar, and literature. He first introduced his stu- 
dents to the vocabulary and idioms of simple pictorial graphics, con- 
tinued to the more complex grammatical conventions of perspective 
drawing and descriptive geometry, and concluded his course with the 
topic of penmanship. 
Anthony meant by penmanship not simply lettering, but the whole 
range of techniques by which ideas were transcribed from mind to 
paper with the help of such instruments as pencils, triangles, 
T-squares, compasses, graph paper, and drafting boards. Orthogra- 
phy, in fact, was an exercise in writing straight and in thinking straight. 
In the Graphic Language Anthony and fellow engineering educators 
found what they believed was "an exceptional cultural subject for 
strengthening 
the power and habit of exact thinking, 
that most difficult 
of all habits to fix, and for training the constructive 
imagination ... to 
visualize quickly and accurately ...." "[I]t is the power and habit of 
observing accurately that marks one of the fundamental differences 
between the incapable man and the man of power." Ultimately draw- 
ing would promote not only clear thinking, but with the constructive 
power it evoked it would also become "drawing in relation to life."55 
When Bush claimed that the study of the Differential Analyzer, con- 
structed from the material of the shop, laboratory, and drafting room, 
promoted the ability to think straight in the midst of complexity, 
he was 
echoing the virtues of Gardner Anthony's Graphic Language. 
The penchant of engineers for the graphic idiom pervaded their 
notions of mathematical pedagogy. And here engineers found them- 
selves in a dilemma which reflected the course of development of 
19th-century mathematics. In the United States the community of 
mathematicians had acquired by the end of the century the rudiments 
of professional identity and were becoming noticed for activity 
in pure 
mathematics for the first time by European observers. Ironically, 
however, this maturation of the mathematical community threatened 
the traditional relationship between mathematics and the arts and 
sciences. Consequently, just when numerous recently established tech- 
nical schools were discovering the need to teach their students more 
sophisticated mathematics like the calculus, many mathematicians 
were unable or unwilling to meet their practical demands.6' While the 
55Thomas French, "The Educational Side of Engineering Drawing," ibid., vol. 21 
(1913): 109. 
56For an aging but valuable account of the history of mathematics in the United States, 
see: D. E. Smith and J. Ginsburg, A History 
of Mathematics 
in America before 
1900 (Chicago, 
1934); the articles by Struik, Grabner, and Birkhoff in The Bicentennial 
Tribute 
to American 
Mathematics, 
1776-1976 (Washington, D.C., 1977), ed. J. Dalton Tarwater; A History 
of 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
89 
disciplinary status of mathematics and engineering differed in Europe, 
there too the abstraction of modern mathematics frustrated the needs 
of engineers and experimentalists for adequate analytical tools. 
The years around the turn of the century thus witnessed the growth 
of a movement to reform the teaching of mathematics. The movement 
was largely spearheaded by engineers and first took definite shape in 
Britain with the work of the mechanical engineer and educator John 
Perry. His most important work was done at Finsbury Technical Col- 
lege in London after 1882, when he pioneered a course in practical 
mathematics for engineers that emphasized practical examples, the use 
of graph paper for the presentation of problems (a Perry innovation, 
apparently), and mechanical devices for measurement and computa- 
tion. Contradicting the common opinion that calculus, given its essen- 
tial formal rigor, was not a subject easily taught to engineers, Perry 
insisted that "there is no useful mathematical tool which an engineer 
may not learn to use. A man learns to use the Calculus as he learns to 
use the chisel or the file on actual concrete bits of work, and it is on this 
idea that I act in teaching the use of the Calculus to Engineers.""57 
Perry's efforts helped modernize the teaching of mathematics in Bri- 
tain, and by 1908 an observer could note the growing attention paid to 
mathematics "on its experimental and graphical side ... exemplified by 
the use of drawing-boards, improved mathematical instruments, 
squared-paper," and the provision of mathematical laboratories "well- 
stocked with clay, cardboard, wire, wooden, metal and other models 
Mathematics 
Education in the United States and Canada, the 32nd Yearbook of the National 
Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 1970; and E. H. Moore's presidential address to the 
American Mathematical Society in 1903. For a new look at the way that limited mathe- 
matical training influenced the development of American science, see John Servos, 
"Taking the Measure of Nature: Mathematics and the Education of American Scientists, 
1880-1930," paper read at the 1983 meeting of the History of Science Society in 
Norwalk, Conn. Complaints about the scarcity of mathematicians willing to take an 
interest in applications could be heard as late as 1941: "Though the United States holds a 
position of outstanding leadership in pure mathematics, there is no school which pro- 
vides an adequate mathematical training for the student who wishes to use the subject in 
the field of industrial applications rather than to cultivate it as an end in itself. Both 
science generally, and its industrial application in particular, would be advanced if a 
group of suitable teachers were brought together in an institution 
where there was also a 
strong interest in the basic sciences and in engineering." Thornton Fry, "Industrial 
Mathematics," American 
Mathematical 
Monthly 
48 (1941): 1-39. Most of the mathemati- 
cians working in industry, Fry noted, had been trained as physicists or as electrical or 
mechanical engineers. 
57John Perry, Calculus for Engineers (London, 1897), p. 5. For more on Perry, see 
William Brock and Michael Price, "Squared Paper in the Nineteenth Century: Instru- 
ment of Science and Engineering, and a Symbol of Reform in Mathematical Education," 
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 
vol. 11 (1980). 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
90 
Larry Owens 
and materials, and apparatus for investigation of form, mensuration 
and movement.. ."58 
The "Perry Movement" percolated through the mathematics and 
engineering communities in the United States as well, encouraging the 
revision of curricula and the writing of new texts. The most eloquent 
proponent of practical mathematics in this country was E. H. Moore, 
the chairman of the mathematics department at the University of 
Chicago and a major figure in the American mathematical establish- 
ment. One of the architects of his discipline's new professionalism, 
Moore had nevertheless absorbed the concern of the great German 
mathematician Felix Klein that the increasing abstraction of modern 
mathematics threatened to impoverish the teaching of mathematics 
and its applications to science and engineering. In his presidential 
address to the American Mathematical Society in 1903, Moore pro- 
posed a program designed to revitalize mathematical pedagogy for 
students at all levels. Based on the methods of Perry and incorporating 
the approach of engineering educators, Moore's new curriculum cen- 
tered around "arithmetic computations, mechanical drawing and 
graphical methods generally, in continuous relation with problems of 
physics and chemistry and engineering," and pursued in the 
mathematical laboratory. Educated in this tangible environment, the 
student would acquire "a feeling towards his mathematics extremely 
different from that which is met with only too frequently-a feeling 
that mathematics is indeed itself a fundamental reality of the domain 
of thought, and not merely a matter of symbols and arbitrary 
rules and 
conventions."59 
By 1910 the teaching of mathematics in most engineer- 
ing schools thoroughly reflected the precepts of Anthony, Perry, and 
Moore. Practical mathematics and the Graphic Language com- 
plemented the practical demands of the schools and helped cultivate 
students whose thoughts about the world were composed of the sym- 
bols of shop and laboratory. This was an engineering curriculum which 
separated "the incapable man and the man of power" and discovered 
in the discipline of orthography the habit of thinking straight in the 
midst of complexity. 
The early engineering school, then, was a repository of idioms which 
found expression in the Differential Analyzer. Looking closer, we can 
discover not only the idioms but also the first edition, so to speak, of the 
text that Bush and his colleagues would revise more than once before 
producing the most successful of their editions, the analyzer of 1931. 
58Brock and Price, p. 368. 
59E. H. Moore (n. 56 above). 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
91 
During the course of his lectures on the Graphic Language, Anthony 
dwelt for a while on the vocabulary of topograpical maps, illustrating 
for his students contour lines and profiles of elevation. It is in a setting 
such as this that the young Bush might have been introduced to the 
problems faced by surveyors and the instruments they had at their 
disposal. Profiles were commonly obtained by running levels, and 
required several men, careful fieldwork, and tedious data reduction 
afterward. Bush set himself the task of mechanizing this job as an 
exercise for his master's thesis. His invention was an instrument box 
slung between bicycle wheels; as it was pushed along the path for which 
one desired a profile, a device within the box continuously recorded 
the required elevation onto a revolving drum (figs. 10, 11, and 12). 
"It was quite a gadget," Bush admitted, and it earned him his degree. 
He patented the invention, which he called a Profile Tracer, and 
attempted to interest several companies in its manufacture. However, 
his entrepreneurial attempts flopped and he sagely charged the inven- 
tion to experience. But if this first calculator failed in the commercial 
market, it had a happier future. What Bush had in fact invented was an 
arrangement of gears, shafts, and servo-driven pens which translated 
mechanical motion into graphical mathematics. And the key mecha- 
)/ 
. ::.. : . :::: :::_i:-:: 
B::-i::::: 
:::::'::::-:':-i:::i 
::::::~~~~ 7:: 
:::::::~: 
: :;::::i~::: 
--: 
~:::i 
A 
::::::: 
::::::: 
::::::: 
:_:::__:::~i:L:i:::: 
t.:i::: 
~ 
ii:::::l:::2:: 
(:: 
::-:::::ii~i:ii?~ii"ii-iii~#ii'~i:iii'ii-~~'~i:i 
::#4:: 
6: ::: ::::::i: ~~'/:://l:::::-ii:i: 
:://i~~li:-i( 
w:~: 
::: ii::::~~:'i::'::: ':' ::::::::':::::l:i:2: 
?:::::::: 
::::: 
::::::::::::: 
: ::.::::::::::::??: 
":::::::::::4 
! < 
(1:~i-:::ii:ii: 
??: 
??:: ::::':':': 
FIG. 10.-Bush testing the Profile Tracer near the reservoir at Tufts College. (Cour- 
tesy of the MIT Museum and Charles Eames, Venice, California. The photo is from 
Bush's 1913 master's thesis, "An Automatic Instrument for Recording Terrestrial 
Profiles.") 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
(.. 
2
5-0 #/7 
3
II 
I1 
I 
1 12 I 1 
1 
8l 11II 
gloom 
1 
I 
I 
I---- 
I- 
I 
I~- 
~ 
- 
T- 
.......... 
w 
FIG. 11.-A drawing from Bush's patent application illustrating the inner mec
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
93 
Fcandomj 
Profik 
Io4)le 
over roTlh country 
akCen wtA Profile 
acer 
ro vnceto n , Mass. 
Avg o, I 
7, I 
.Me 8 m;n. 
-ra1'.i 
bewA- 
pasg 
Scale 
tier Ioo'= 
Vertl Io'=I" 
FIG. 12.-A reproduction of a typical tracing found in Bush's master's thesis. 
nism was a disc integrator with which he would "have quite a lot to 
do."60 
In 1919, after a year with General Electric and several more teaching 
at Tufts, Bush joined the staff of MIT's Department of Electrical 
Engineering. In many ways the institute he joined was like the college 
he left. The curriculum stressed mechanical skill, work in shop and 
laboratory, and mathematics and physics couched in the graphic 
idiom. The calculus was introduced to freshmen in a manner which 
6oBush, Pieces of the Action, pp. 155-57; see Bush's master's thesis, "An Automatic 
Instrument for Recording Terrestrial Profiles," Tufts College, January 1913. Bush 
might not have known of the disc integrator when he devised the Profile Tracer. 
However, variable friction gears much like the one he designed for the Profile Tracer 
were well known to engineers. See, e. g., the illustration of the deal-frame in Knight's 
American 
Mechanical Dictionary, 
vol. 1, 1876. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
94 
Larry Owens 
emphasized graphical presentation and intuition over abstract rigor. 
In Joseph Lipka's Mathematical Laboratory, students could hone their 
problem-solving talents with graphical methods and mechanical 
methods of various kinds-slide rules, planimeters, a plethora of 
nomographic charts, and instruments 
for the mechanical integration 
of areas under curves.6' All in all, the program at MIT still carried 
about it "the odor of the shop," a description Calvin Woodward had 
once applied to early electrical engineering.6" 
But in other ways MIT was very different, and a variety of forces 
were converging to transform the environment and enlarge opportu- 
nities when Bush arrived. First, the decade between the Great War and 
the Depression was a bull market for engineering. Enrollment in the 
Electrical Engineering Department almost doubled in this period. 
Furthermore, the decade witnessed the rapid expansion of graduate 
programs, especially in electrical engineering, which had been 
insignificant 
before the war.63 Second, as we have seen, the develop- 
ment of electrical technology and the growing complexity of systems 
and circuits propelled the growth of circuit analysis and the aggressive 
search for methods of solution of mathematical equations beyond the 
scope of formal techniques. Third, the interwar years found corporate 
and philanthropic donors more willing to fund research and develop- 
ment within the university. All of these factors, as well as a diffuse 
public appreciation for the expert skills of the engineer which peaked 
in the 1920s, worked to Bush's advantage at MIT. The Profile Tracer 
might have flopped in the commercial market, but within the bull 
market of the engineering school where inventions, in addition to 
being useful, could be read as books, Bush's mathematical practice 
texts were a great success. 
At this point our story becomes familiar. The technical success of the 
analyzers, the opportunities they provided for graduate research, the 
possibilities of new applications on the frontiers of science, and the 
availability of support from private foundations encouraged Bush to 
produce a bigger and better version of his popular 1931 computer. 
Ringed round by tantalizing problems in atomic structure and cosmic 
radiation, he and his colleagues labored to develop a new machine 
which would in a flash rearrange itself to tackle new and more difficult 
problems. But what is most significant 
about the Rockefeller Differen- 
6'L. M. Passano, Calculus and Graphs (New York, 1921); Joseph Lipka, Graphical and 
Mechanical Computation 
(New York, 1918). 
62C. M. Woodward, "Report of the Committee on Technological Education-the 
Relation of Technical to Liberal Education," in Addresses 
and Proceedings 
of the National 
Educational Association 
(1894), p. 613. 
63See the MIT President's 
Reports for the period. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Vannevar Bush and the Differential 
Analyzer 
95 
tial Analyzer is what remained the same. Electrically or not, automati- 
cally or not, the newest edition of Bush's analyzer still interpreted 
mathematics in terms of mechanical rotations, still depended on ex- 
pertly machined wheel-and-disc integrators, 
and still drew its answers 
as curves. Differential equations and contours of elevation-Bush's 
computers were very much the offspring of the early Profile Tracer. 
How does one tell the story of a machine? If nothing else, the 
evolution of the analyzers teaches us that there is more to machines 
than has met our eyes. Like all expensive investments, 
these machines 
were sensitive to the demands of utility, 
and when Weaver and Cald- 
well admitted in 1950 that the analyzer project had been overtaken by 
the whole new field of computer science, they conceded that such 
demands could be decisive. But Bush's machines inhabited another 
world as well, one where utility had a distinctively 
bookish aspect. 
Here, in the marketplace of the school, the analyzers were exercises in 
the language of early 20th-century engineering. Forged in the 
machine shop, the analyzers spoke the Graphic Language while they 
drew profiles through the landscape of mathematics. The student 
could find in these machine texts a catalog of his technical universe, 
lessons on the nature of mathematics and its instruments, 
and even 
expressions of the ethos which pervaded engineering education. 
Variations on the theme of mechanical analysis, the analyzers em- 
bodied an engineering culture belonging to the first decades of our 
century. When engineers and their new corporate and federal sup- 
porters turned to the problems of computation at the end of the 
Second World War, they discovered the need for new texts in a more 
modern idiom, composed by a younger generation of inventive au- 
thors. 
This content downloaded from 18.7.29.240 on Tue, 26 Nov 2013 15:42:05 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
