Computer Criticism vs. Technocentric Thinking 
By Seymour Papert  
A version of this piece was published as "M.I.T. Media Lab Epistemology and Learning Memo No. 
1" (November 1990). Another version appeared in Educational Researcher (vol. 16, no. I) 
January/February 1987.  
   
 
   
critic (from Greek kritikos able to discern or judge)  
1: one who expresses a reasoned opinion on any matter involving a judgment of its truth value 
or righteousness, an appreciation of its beauty or techniques, or an interpretation... 
2: one given to harsh or captious judgment. 
-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 
...the critic may on occasion be called upon to condemn the second rate and expose the 
fraudulent: though that duty is secondary to the duty of discriminating praise of what is 
praiseworthy. 
-T.S. Eliot 
In the beginning, criticism is simple. Do I like it? My judgment is personal and intuitive. I 
answer to myself alone, and consider only the immediate object of my attention. Soon, however, 
something more is needed; taste must be justified. Others challenge our opinions and counter 
with their own, and even personal development eventually requires us to grapple with our 
reasons.  
The LOGO community faces the challenge of finding a voice for public dialogue. Where do we 
look? There is no shortage of models. The education establishment offers the notion of 
evaluation. Educational psychologists offer the notion of controlled experiment. The computer 
magazines have developed the idiom of product review. Philosophical tradition suggests inquiry 
into the essential nature of computation.  
Each of these has intellectual value in its proper place. I shall argue that this proper place is a 
conservative context where change is small, slow, and superficial. The crucial experiment, to 
take one example, is based on a concept of changing a single factor in a complex situation 
while keeping everything else the same. I shall argue that this is radically incompatible with the 
enterprise of rebuilding an education system in which nothing shall be the same.  
I would like to propose a very different model for thinking about the dialogue between LOGO 
and the world. This model is a department of thought that adopts the adjective "critical" in 
Webster's first sense. I am proposing a genre of writing one could call "computer criticism" by 
analogy with such disciplines as literary criticism and social criticism. The name does not imply 
that such writing would condemn computers any more than literary criticism condemns 
literature or social criticism condemns society. The purpose of computer criticism is not to 
condemn but to understand, to explicate, to place in perspective. Of course, understanding 
does not exclude harsh (perhaps even captious) judgment. The result of understanding may 
well be to debunk. But critical judgment may also open our eyes to previously unnoticed virtue. 
And in the end, the critical and the creative processes need each other.  
...the large part of the labor of an author in composing his work is critical labor; the labor of 
sifting, combining, constructing, expunging, correcting, testing; this frightful toil is as much 
critical as creative....  
- T.S. Eliot 
Computer criticism is in its infancy compared with the sister disciplines I imagine it emulating. 
Many would argue that it must always remain at best a lesser sibling since the objects, 
computational ones, on which it brings to bear its critical powers will never, in their opinion, 
have the stature of Shakespeare or the depth and complexity of social structure. I think history 
will gainsay this attitude. The computer is a medium of human expression and if it has not yet 
had its Shakespeares, its Michelangelos or its Einsteins, it will. Besides, the complexity and 
subtlety of the computer presence already make it a challenging topic for critical analysis. We 
have scarcely begun to grasp its human and social implications.  
In this paper, I shall be concerned with issues closer to earth: not with the highest reaches that 
computer criticism may someday attain, but with its daily practice here and now: with how 
people talk about computers when they argue such practical matters as policies for using 
computers in schools or the value of a new piece of software. Within this already restricted 
purpose, I shall concentrate on just one proposition: I believe that computer criticism is blocked 
at a stage that I think is properly called technocentric -- a term that captures an analogy with 
the egocentric stage in Piaget's model of the young child.  
Egocentrism for Piaget does not, of course, mean "selfishness" -- it means that the child has 
difficulty understanding anything independently of the self. Technocentrism refers to the 
tendency to give a similar centrality to a technical object -- for example computers or LOGO. 
This tendency shows up in questions like "what is the effect of the computer on cognitive 
development?" or "does LOGO work?" Of course such questions might be used innocently as 
shorthand for more complex assertions, so the diagnosis of technocentrism must be confirmed 
by careful examination of the arguments in which they are embedded. However, such turns of 
phrase often betray a tendency to think of "computers" and of "LOGO" as agents that act 
directly on thinking and learning; they betray a tendency to reduce what are really the most 
important components of educational situations -- people and cultures -- to a secondary, 
facilitating role (1). The context for human development is always a culture, never an isolated 
technology. In the presence of computers, cultures might change and with them people's ways 
of learning and thinking. But if you want to understand (or influence) the change, you have to 
center your attention on the culture -- not on the computer.  
One might imagine that "technologists" would be most likely to fall into the technocentric trap 
and that "humanists" would have a better understanding of the role of culture in the so called 
"effects of the computer." But things are not so simple. People from the humanities are often 
the most vulnerable to the technocentric trap. Insecurity sometimes makes a technical object 
loom too large in their thinking. Particularly in the case of computers, their intimidation and 
limited technical understanding often blind them to the fact that what they see as a property of 
"the computer" is often a cultural construct.  
I am not talking about simple misunderstandings that could be dispelled by a course on "how 
computers really work." You should rather think of the way sexist or racist stereotypes are 
rooted in, and supported by, the cultures in which we grew up. Computer stereotypes are as 
much cultural constructs as are stereotypes of women or blacks, and will be as hard to extirpate.  
The struggle against sexism went far deeper than correcting erroneous beliefs about women. It 
has led to a re-examination of fundamental assumptions about human nature and about society. 
Combating technocentrism involves more than thinking about technology. It leads to 
fundamental re-examination of assumptions about the area of application of technology with 
which one is concerned: if we are interested in eliminating technocentrism from thinking about 
computers in education, we may find ourselves having to re-examine assumptions about 
education that were made long before the advent of computers. (One could even argue that 
the principal contribution to education made thus far by the computer presence has been to 
force us to think through issues that themselves have nothing to do with computers.)  
   
What LOGO Practitioners Need to Know  
If you ask, "What does a LOGO practitioner need to know?" the answer goes beyond the ability 
to use and teach LOGO. The practitioner needs to be able to talk about LOGO, to criticize it, 
and to discuss other people's criticisms.  
Talking about LOGO has a political side: how do you reply when an administrator says he read 
in Psychology Today that "LOGO doesn't work?" It has a pedagogical side: LOGO is at a stage 
where one very high priority is to talk critically about a first implementation in order to decide 
where to go next.  
And talking about LOGO has a culture-building side. The way a teacher talks to parents about 
LOGO feeds back into the attitudes the child brings to class, and the way the teacher talks in 
class influences the talk about computers in the living room. The popular interest in computers 
gives every teacher the opportunity to influence the development of the "computer culture" not 
only in the school but also in the society at large. Taking that opportunity is part of teaching -- 
or at least of what teaching ought to be. Developing a discourse is at the heart of developing a 
culture, and a more textured and knowledgeable discourse about LOGO contributes to the 
"LOGO culture," the "computer culture," and to the "learning culture" in its broadest sense. It 
sets the cultural context for personal learning.  
Finally, a more self-conscious discourse will help the LOGO community become increasingly self-
critical; not, by any means, to put itself down, but because, like Eliot writing poetry, we need 
well-honed critical thinking to carry out the "frightful toil" of responsible educational creativity. I 
don't think any of us is safe from falling into occasional technocentrisms. What is important is 
having a set of concepts that allow one to correct oneself -- and then having the sense and 
humility to do so.  
   
LOGO Didn't Deliver What It Promised  
The following discussion of a "poor way" to talk about LOGO will sharpen these remarks by 
making my point about the pitfalls of "technocentrism" more concrete.  
The September 1984 issue of Psychology Today featured articles on computers and education. 
In one of these (by James Hassett), we read:  
"In several studies comparing children who learned LOGO with control groups who did not, 
researchers at Bank Street College's Center for Children and Technology have been surprised to 
find that, as Jan Hawkins put it, 'LOGO promises more than it has delivered.' ... Bank Street 
researcher Roy Pea found no evidence of intellectual benefits on two planning tasks designed to 
measure higher levels of thinking skill supposedly produced by LOGO learning." 
It would be frivolous to dwell on what the reference to promises and delivery evokes for me: 
the image of a technological "fix"-- the image of LOGO driving a delivery truck loaded with 
crates of promises. But it is far from frivolous to examine what is presupposed and implied by 
treating "LOGO" as an entity that can "produce" changes in thinking (or anything else!) "Does 
LOGO work?" "Is LOGO good for learning this or that?" All these turns of speech are signs of 
the technocentric stage of computer discourse.  
Consider for a moment some questions that are "obviously" absurd. Does wood produce good 
houses? If I built a house out of wood and it fell down, would this show that wood does not 
produce good houses? Do hammers and saws produce good furniture? These betray 
themselves as technocentric questions by ignoring people and the elements only people can 
introduce: skill, design, aesthetics. Of course these examples are caricatures. In practice, hardly 
anyone carries technocentrism that far. Everyone realizes that it is carpenters who use wood, 
hammers, and saws to produce houses and furniture, and the quality of the product depends 
on the quality of their work. But when it comes to computers and LOGO, critics (and some 
practitioners as well) seem to move into abstractions and ask "Is the computer good for the 
cognitive development of the child?" and even "Does the computer (or LOGO or whatever) 
produce thinking skills?"  
As I already said: such language suggests a diagnosis of technocentrism. To confirm it, one has 
to look more closely at what lies behind the language. This I shall do from several perspectives 
in the following discussion. For the moment I note one. Technocentrism is often supported by a 
certain model of what a "rigorous" experiment in educational psychology consists of. I'll call this 
"the treatment model."  
You take two groups of children. One group, the experimental group, is given a certain 
"treatment." (For example, these students are taught LOGO.) The other group, the control 
group, is not given the treatment. Everything else is kept constant. After a suitable lapse of 
time you come back and apply a test to see whether the particular thinking skill that interests 
you is better developed in the experimental group than in the control group.  
There is nothing wrong in principle with this "treatment" model. Some very good science is 
based on it. It is the standard model for testing medical treatment by drugs -- hence its name -- 
and, indeed, some very good support for LOGO has come from it. For example, Clement and 
Gullo at Kent State University (Clement & Gullo 1984) used it skillfully to show that certain 
cognitive and metacognitive skills developed significantly better in a group of children who 
worked at LOGO than in a control group who worked at computer-assisted instruction (CAI). 
But the use of the model requires care, and technocentrism places unskilled users at risk.  
The risk is greatest in the interpretation of negative results. If you need to know whether drug 
X reduces blood-pressure, you may fairly safely draw a negative conclusion from a "treatment 
model" experiment in which hospitalized patients were given X and no change in blood-pressure 
was observed. On the other hand, you would not deduce that drug Y does not increase fertility 
from the simple fact that hospitalized patients who received it had no babies. You would want 
to know more about other conditions that are known to be necessary. Nor would you deduce 
that ice is a bad material for building dwellings if you heard that I tried to build an igloo in 
Boston in mid-summer and failed. The right environment and, I presume, a high degree of 
special skill are necessary. Such a failed experiment would say much more about me than about 
whether "igloos deliver what they promise."  
It is quite surprising that Hassett thinks that Pea's findings (e.g. Pea & Kurland 1983) say more 
about LOGO than about Pea. The experiment was based on a treatment model with negative 
results: children given LOGO failed to show significant improvement on a particular test for 
cognitive change. Thus we know the experiment is at risk. Enter technocentrism. Pea's negative 
result is moderately compelling if you believe that LOGO is a well defined entity (like drug X) 
that either has an effect or does not have an effect (the technocentric vision). However, the 
finding as stated has no force whatsoever if you see LOGO not as a treatment but as a cultural 
element -- something that can be powerful when it is integrated into a culture but is simply 
isolated technical knowledge when it is not.  
My analysis of Hassett's technocentric language illustrates the value of the idea of 
technocentrism, for it can explain, at least partially, the quite extraordinary fact that Hassett, 
and many others as well, seem willing to make so much of a very slim experiment on the 
effects of learning LOGO. But to pursue the point, I have to develop the contrasting idea of 
LOGO as a cultural element.  
   
An Example of LOGO as a Cultural Building Material  
I choose a simple example of LOGO being used as a "cultural building material" by a teacher 
trying to create a particular educational culture in his science classes at the Computer School, 
an alternative public junior high school in New York City's School District Three. George Franz, 
one of the school's two science teachers, has intellectual roots in the tradition of "open 
education" represented by such people as Lillian Webber (under whom he studied directly) and 
David Hawkins. The spirit of this tradition is captured in a paper by Hawkins (Hawkins 1965), 
marvelously entitled "Messing About In Science," in which he describes how he and Eleanor 
Duckworth introduced children to the study of pendulums by encouraging them to "mess about" 
with pendulums for a number of class hours that would horrify teachers who measure the 
efficiency of education by how quickly students get to "know" the "right" answers. But Hawkins 
was interested in more than right answers. He had realized that the pendulum is a brilliant 
choice of an "object to think with" (to use the language of Mindstorms [Papert 1980]) for 
building a sense of science as inquiry rather than as answers.  
A mechanical (and to my mind trivial) way to meld the computer into Hawkins' kind of learning 
experience would be to provide computer simulations of pendulums. Franz did something much 
more subtle. His idea was to get his classes engaged in "messing about with clocks" by 
challenging them to build devices to measure time more accurately than such spontaneous 
methods as counting "one chimpanzee, two chimpanzees..." The students were encouraged to 
form small teams, each of which would build a clock defined for this purpose as anything that 
could measure time.  
One enabling cultural factor here is that the science room at the Computer School is a good 
"messing place." It is like an old-fashioned science lab in being well stocked with string and 
sealing wax -- and bits of plastic and wire and hamsters and snakes -- as well as being like a 
modern one in being well supplied with computers. So when the students let their imaginations 
go, they find the odds and ends to make many kinds of clocks. One group worked with sand 
running out of a plastic container, several constructed some kind of pendulum device... and 
some made "clocks" in the form of LOGO programs. It is good to contemplate this coexistence 
of clocks made of ancient materials and modern ones: wood and plastic and computers. The 
computer was "just one more material." I think that David Hawkins would have liked what 
happened.  
One does not "need" a computer to mess about with making simple clocks. But the students' 
clock experience was made very much richer by the fact that everyone in the class -- students 
and teachers -- knew enough LOGO and had enough access to computers to make computer 
clocks as well as clocks of sand and wood. Each different material extends the range of what 
the students can do, and the computer does so somewhat more than the others do. For 
example, it gave rise to more concern with calibration and more interest in concepts like 
calibrating by averaging over many cycles. It is more adaptable to using the same principle to 
measure very short intervals (human reaction times, for example) or very long ones. A 
computer clock could be adapted to measure the speed of model cars the students were 
building out of LEGO materials. In short, the presence of this additional material never took 
over the project -- the traditional materials retained their interest but greatly enriched the clock 
culture that grew up in the science room of that school without changing its nature. Since 
everyone knew some LOGO, even those who did not make their own computer clocks could 
understand those made by their classmates.  
If LOGO contributed to the growth of the classroom culture, this clock culture contributed 
simultaneously to LOGO. Several students came to understand technical aspects of LOGO they 
had not learned before. For example, some who had previously resisted using variables asked 
"What was that thing with dots?" when they needed the idea to go from analog to digital clocks. 
I think all of them took another step towards appreciating LOGO and the computer in a way 
that seems to be beyond the comprehension of many educational psychologists: using the 
computer not as a "thing in itself " that may or may not deliver benefits, but as a material that 
can be appropriated to do better whatever you are doing (and which will not do anything if you 
are not!) (2)  
   
Two Educational Cultures  
In school A (which I leave unnamed since I am neither personally in sympathy with its culture 
nor interested here in arguing against it), the students meet LOGO in a computer room 
(misnamed "lab") where each sits down in front of a machine and is taught what the school 
system's educational objectives describe as introductory programming: turtle commands, 
subprocedures, variables, recursion... and so on. The sequence is planned and orderly.  
School A uses LOGO as part of a conservative educational policy. But it is innovative in how it 
does this. One local innovation, typical in spirit and ingenuity of several that have been invented 
or re-invented at this school, is the theory that computers should be so arranged that the 
students sit with their backs to the teacher's station. That way, when the teacher calls for their 
attention, they are forced to turn around -- away from any temptation to see their screen or 
fiddle with their keyboards. School A is innovative, but at a heading of 180 degrees to the kind 
of innovation we saw Mr. Franz making.  
The absurdity of the technocentric question "What is the effect of LOGO?" becomes plain when 
one tries to imagine what is common to these two LOGO experiences. Both involve LOGO, both 
involve computers, and I am sure that one could devise tests to show that they share some 
very generalized educational consequences. That would satisfy the technocentric kind of 
education evaluator. Yet it would be sadly missing the point of LOGO. For the two educational 
enterprises have different goals and have used LOGO for quite different purposes. What is most 
important to each is not shared: they use LOGO not to become more alike, but rather to 
develop their individuality. In the end, each becomes more purely itself and so more distinctly 
different from the other.  
   
The Right To Be Me  
The principle that LOGO can be used by two schools to become more distinctly different has a 
counterpart on the level of the individual. In Mindstorms (Papert 1980) and in the Brookline 
Report (Papert et al. 1979), there are examples of students who use very different styles in 
their work with LOGO. But the idea of students appropriating LOGO in very different ways did 
not mature until we reached a point where children could have sufficient access to computers 
that their individual styles developed in more strikingly divergent ways than was possible in the 
more confined conditions of the early experiments. I became aware of something deeper than 
we had seen in early work while collaborating with Sherry Turkle on observations that are 
reported most "thickly" in her book The Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit (Turkle 
1984).  
It will be recalled that what Pea's experiment failed to find was evidence "on two planning 
tasks" for the thinking skills "supposedly produced by LOGO." Hassett quoted this finding 
without asking who supposes that the thinking skills produced by LOGO would show up 
particularly well on "planning tasks." But the answer to the question he does not ask is easy to 
find: everyone knows that computer programming uses the kind of thinking one needs for 
planning -- precise, abstract, analytic descriptions.  
The point is that this is the way our culture represents programming. But when we studied 
what children do with LOGO, we see a very different picture. Some do indeed fit the cultural 
stereotype. For them, work with LOGO is an occasion for the exercise of planning. But many do 
not. Many find in LOGO their first opportunity to work with mathematical ideas in the kind of 
broad-brush intuitive style that comes naturally to them. They are not led by LOGO into 
conforming to the planning style even more closely than school already tried to make them do. 
On the contrary, in LOGO they find a liberation from a style that distorts their natural way of 
being as surely as forcing left-handed children to use their right hands.  
Pea's criterion for how LOGO is supposed to improve thinking skills implies that we should be 
disappointed to see these students find a different voice (3) for learning. This is a good 
example of the conservatism inherent in traditional experimental methodology.  
   
Do Not Ask What LOGO Can Do To People, But What People Can Do With 
LOGO  
These two questions lead to quite different models for how to do research. Technocentric 
thinking favors the "treatment" methodology. This is appropriate for investigating the effect of a 
drug. And if you read Inhelder and Piaget on formal stage thinking, or if you were taught "the 
scientific method" at school, you probably know that the way to do an experiment is to change 
one variable at a time while keeping all other things the same.  
This works well for certain kinds of school science experiments, such as finding out how a 
pendulum's weight, length, and amplitude affect its period. But does it work for education? How 
do you apply this methodology if you are Geraldine Kozberg of the St. Paul Public Schools and 
want to use LOGO as an instrument for change?  
Ms. Kozberg's initial interest in LOGO came from an intuition that introducing LOGO into the 
schools could be used as an occasion to bring about other changes -- not only in the way 
teachers did their work in the classroom but also in the relationship of the community to the 
school. The initial excitement about computers in the classroom could be used to bring parents 
to workshops; discussions would start off dealing with computers, but then move on to 
education as a collaborative endeavor.  
This is the methodology of an educational activist. Instead of introducing LOGO and keeping 
down other change (which appears to the activist as subverting the very thing one is hoping to 
do), here one introduces LOGO and then works as hard as possible to make all other things as 
different as possible (which can appear to experimentalists as subverting as science).  
The Computer School in New York's District Three (Upper West Side including West Harlem) 
gives us another example. This alternative public school is attended by about 150 students, 
many of whom come from severely disadvantaged backgrounds; during the school year, the 
computer presence grew in numbers from about 20 to 60 machines. The school's policy is that 
all students learn LOGO and the use of a word processor, but beyond this, the teachers adapt 
their styles of work very differently. Some have looked for ways to adapt method and content in 
their subject areas to take advantage of the computers. Others believe that advantages will 
come less directly and more gradually.  
This is not a controlled experiment on "the effects" of LOGO. It is an attempt to create a 
working educational environment in which 60 computers and LOGO are important elements -- 
but so are nine teachers with nine personal approaches to education who are trying very hard 
by all possible means to make the school system a success.  
The methodological issue comes into clear focus when we look at successes in areas having the 
least direct connection with "computer work." For example, the Computer School was 
significantly ahead of other schools with children from similar backgrounds on reading and 
attendance scores.  
Psychologists trained in the "treatment" methodology have been taught to ask questions like: 
"How can we measure the extent to which LOGO contributed to these scores?" These 
psychologists repine for controlled experiments that will distinguish between the contributions 
of each of many possible factors. What experiment would tell us whether factors such as the 
teachers' enthusiasm (or attention from visitors, or the students' sense of getting something 
special) contributed to the high scores? But there is no need to wait for experiments: of course 
such factors play a significant role.  
This does not mean that the computers were not important; rather, it reminds us that the 
importance of each element in a cultural process can show up in many ways. These teachers 
came together in the first place to create a school that would use computers in a LOGO spirit. 
Without the computers, the school would not have existed at all. Discussing, sometimes even 
fighting, about what to do with LOGO created a relationship between the teachers that colored 
the atmosphere of the school. So, I am sure, did the fact that everyone in the school knew that 
student X was, until this year, considered to be "learning disabled" but is now an ace with the 
computer -- this particularly dramatic example of someone who went beyond what seemed 
possible surely contributes to the atmosphere of the school. One could continue almost 
indefinitely to list ways in which the computer presence could be woven into the consciousness 
of the people in the school -- and so make a difference to how students learn and whether they 
want to come to school.  
There is a radical incompatibility between studying phenomena of this sort and using the 
"treatment" method of research. A simple argument for this point is the incredible number of 
experiments one would have to do in order to isolate these factors one by one. But there is a 
deeper argument. Factors of this kind simply don't work one by one; they work as a web of 
mutually supporting, interacting processes. The illusion that more than a tiny fraction of the 
educational benefits could be demonstrated by experiments on the treatment model is simply 
another form of technocratic fallacy.  
Let me express the same idea in a different way. It is a self-defeating parody of scientism to 
suppose that one could keep everything else, including the culture, constant while adding a 
serious computer presence to a learning environment. If the role of the computer is so slight 
that the rest can be kept constant, it will also be too slight for much to come of it. The 
"treatment" methodology leads to a danger that all experiments with computers and learning 
will be seen as failures: either they are trivial because very little happened, or they are 
"unscientific" because something real did happen and too many factors changed at once.  
   
Bank Street vs. Kent State  
My purpose here is not to survey good reports about LOGO. But I shall discuss one. One often 
hears that reports of good LOGO environments are "anecdotal." This word is used as a 
derogatory form of the adjective "ethnographic" and in contrast to a more "scientific method." I 
do not agree with the derogation of the case study approach, but even if one's taste runs to 
methodology which emphasize statistical rigor, there are other studies than those of Pea. For 
example, Clement and Gullo of Kent State University conclude from a careful and statistically 
orthodox study that a group of children who worked with LOGO showed significant 
improvement on a battery of tests designed to measure a range of cognitive skills.  
Pea and Kurland are negative, Clement and Gullo positive about what happens when children 
learn LOGO. One can look at the difference from two sides -- analogous to the supply and 
demand sides of economic theory. The experimenters demand a certain performance from the 
students as a condition for success; and certain educational conditions are supplied to the 
students for the purpose of achieving this performance.  
On the demand side, that is to say on the tests used, the experimenters are fairly explicit about 
their differences. Pea and Kurland approach their experiment with a very specific idea of what 
cognitive effect to look for: they are checking for an improvement in a very, narrow and specific 
form of planning activity, so they use a focused ad hoc test. The Kent State workers approach 
the problem with a relatively open mind about what the cognitive effects of doing LOGO might 
be: they apply a broad spectrum of well-known, standard tests of cognitive function (amongst 
many others: divergence, reflectivity-impulsivity, operational competence, right-left orientation, 
matching familiar figures, and following directions.) Even before one sees the results, it is 
obvious that the Kent State experiment stands a much higher chance of coming out positive as, 
indeed, it does.  
The supply side is more subtle. What are the children given? Stated abstractly, the two studies 
have the same explicit intention: the children are to be given "programming"-- and the purpose 
of the experiments is to see what happens. But there is no such thing as "programming-in-
general." These children are not given "programming." They are given LOGO. But there is no 
such thing as "LOGO-in-general" either. The children encounter LOGO in a particular way, in a 
particular relationship to other people, teachers, peer mentors, and friends. (4) They don't 
encounter a thing, they encounter a culture.  
Both studies are flawed, though to very different extents, by inadequate recognition of the fact 
that what they are looking at, and therefore making discoveries about, is not programming but 
cultures that happen to have in common the presence of a computer and the LOGO language. 
But the flaw is fatal only in the Bank Street case. I would be rather surprised (though pleasantly 
so) if the cognitive changes measured by Clement and Gullo turned out to be repeatable for all 
children in all encounters with LOGO. However, their study has added to the collection of 
serious reports about phenomena occurring in some LOGO environment. Perhaps it will lead to 
recommendations about how to design LOGO environments so that most children would 
experience the developments it reports. I cannot see how anything useful can be derived from 
the Bank Street finding that the children did not meet Pea's criteria of planning.  
   
ExperLOGO: Designing a New LOGO  
In the near future, LOGO practitioners will have a new kind of challenge in choosing among 
varied forms of LOGO. Up to now, the differences among the versions of LOGO available for the 
major educational computers strike many people as being able to choose any color as long as it 
is black. I believe that this is a mistaken view; some of the seemingly very small differences 
between versions can make a difference. But these are inconsequential compared with larger 
choices that will be presented as LOGO implementers take advantage of greater machine power.  
In this context, I do not mean to speculate about what new directions LOGO will or should take. 
There certainly is no single "right direction" -- LOGOs will be varied and flexible. What I want to 
discuss here is how to discuss the choices that will be offered. And, once more, I shall 
concentrate on just one issue: the difference between technocentric thinking and a style of 
computer criticism that has learned to think in terms of cultural phenomena. As I used an article 
in Psychology Today as a springboard for an earlier part of my talk, my springboard here will be 
a product review in InfoWorld of a new version of LOGO for the Macintosh known as 
ExperLOGO.  
This product review (InfoWorld of May 13, 1985) is perfectly technocentric, and I assume that 
its author would take this as praise rather than negative criticism. This is what product reviews 
are. They consist of lists of features and faults of a technical object. Their strength is efficiency 
in passing information when they are written and read within a culture. For example, 
professional programmers looking at LOGO are likely to be interested in such questions as:  
• 
Is it fast? (since LOGO is notoriously slow compared with their languages)  
• 
Does it compile? (since the idea of a LOGO compiler has been around for a while as an 
obvious technical challenge)  
• 
How does it move data? (since LOGO is seen as a language for "toy" programs that may 
use interesting ideas but do not do useful work).  
The review asks questions like these and gives ExperLOGO a decent rating (one excellent, one 
fair, and the rest good on its standard report card). But a very different kind of discussion is 
needed if the purpose is not giving grades but placing the object in a cultural context. This is 
especially important since ExperLOGO is the first serious LOGO (5) to be produced by a team 
which, in my view, has a different set of cultural values from those represented by Standard 
LOGO. The job of serious criticism is to recognize such cultural discrepancies and explore their 
consequences.  
ExperLOGO is, according to the blurb on its packaging,  
"a powerful adaptation of the LOGO computer language ... loaded with innovative features. In 
addition to standard Turtle graphics, ExperLOGO introduces Bunny graphics where bunnies 
frolic on the surfaces of spheres and race through 3-D space. Incidentally, we call them bunnies 
because they move incredibly fast, at speeds up to 100 times that of the turtle in other LOGOs." 
I have a certain family feeling for people who are trying to design an implementation of LOGO 
since I have been involved in designing many. But for readers who have not lived through 
anything like it, I preface my discussion of ExperLOGO by talking a little about the experience of 
designing so complex a system as a programming language. The experience is itself complex; 
both exhilarating and painful. What is exhilarating is inventing the features of a cognitive space 
where people will work, live for a while, and move around. What is painful is choosing among 
them; there is only so much that can be included; most "bright ideas" have to go. The ever 
present question is: "What will we give up?"  
Among the decision rules I personally use for this job, two principles have come to be most 
important: "effects" are in the service of syntonicity, and syntonicity is in the service of 
intellectual depth. To show you how this works, I will use an especially familiar example in 
LOGO: the turtle and the power of the turtle circle.  
Everybody who has worked with LOGO knows the joy a child can get from the surprising 
discovery that turtles can draw circles. For me, the mathematician watching the child, there is 
another joy: anticipation of the development of something that the child cannot yet know. From 
a beginning such as repeat 1000 [fd 1 rt 1], the child will be moving on a significant 
mathematical track -- passing through repeat 360 [fd 1 rt 1 ] -- to a procedure whose input is 
the radius of the circle it will draw. At the mathematical heart of this procedure is the use of a 
variable in the instruction  
repeat 360 [fd :stepsize rt 1]  
and the safe feeling (which we shall see in a moment is undermined by ExperLOGO) that you 
don't have to think about what :stepsize will be. Whatever it is, the turtle will draw a circle.  
What is important here is that the "holding power of the turtle" -- in my view based on the 
user's ability to identify with it physically (everyone, whether child or adult, learns to draw the 
circle by "playing turtle") -- fits so smoothly into the development of powerful mathematical 
ideas. This is my aesthetic. This, for me, is what makes something beautiful. This, for me, is 
what has cultural importance. The designers of ExperLOGO have another aesthetic. Contrasting 
the two provides a lesson in computer criticism.  
What is beautiful for the designers of ExperLOGO is the speed of their bunny. I, too, would like 
speed -- and an ideal implementation of LOGO would allow you to choose between, let's call it a 
hare, that would outstrip even the bunny and, let us say, a tortoise that moves slowly enough 
for you to think about what it is doing as you watch it. But in the real world there is no such 
thing as an "ideal" implementation of a computer language. At the core of the process of design 
is the art of trade-off. If you want more speed, you have to take less of something else. 
Observing what a design team finds worth giving up is a window into its aesthetics and its 
intellectual values.  
The bunny gains speed at the cost of a kind of intellectual power that may be of no 
consequence to a professional programmer working on expert systems, but could be highly 
consequential in shaping a child's computer culture. Since this choice is made consistently in 
ExperLOGO, I could give many examples, but shall select one: the way Bunny commands deal 
with their inputs.  
In standard LOGO, repeat 100 [fd 0.1] has the same effect as fd 10. For me, this is very 
important. When a child is manipulating LOGO, it is important that this child also be able to gain 
a personal sense of manipulating fractions and to follow intuitions of natural expectations -- for 
example, seeing that what is "on the computer" follows the rules of multiplication that apply in 
the world outside the computer. In ExperLOGO, bunny speed was bought (in part) at the cost 
of making fd treat its input as an integer. So, 0.1 is simply treated as 0. repeat 100 [fd 0.1] is 
the same as fd 0. Thus the relationship between LOGO and mathematical intuition is impaired, 
and the passage into mathematics through the turtle circle is impeded. In ExperLOGO, the 
instruction  
repeat 360 [fd :stepsize rt 1]  
will sometimes draw a circle. But if :stepsize happens to be less than one, it will draw nothing.  
What kind of decision did the ExperLOGO team make in choosing speed over mathematical 
transparency? The point is not whether the choice is right or wrong but what it tells us about 
the decider. There is no obligation to be interested in fostering early development of 
mathematical values or nurturing a "mathematical aesthetic" in novice computer users. The 
designers of ExperLOGO have the right to give higher priority to speed. But this is a choice. And 
each choice is a reflection of cultural affiliation.  
For the computer critic, what is at stake goes beyond whether children use ExperLOGO to 
develop programs for turtle circles -- or even whether their LOGO experience undermines their 
sense of mathematical values. Also at stake is the discourse about computing the way teachers, 
parents, and children think and talk about it, the way that talking about computers is integrated 
into talking about other topics such as mathematics. The crux of my own ideas about 
computers and learning is that their deepest role is cultural rather than instrumental. What is 
important about the turtle circle is not that the child drew a circle, or how fast the bunny 
frolicked, but that this way of working into the drawing of circles provides new ways to think 
about circles, and through them, new ways to think about mathematics more generally.  
At the risk of belaboring what will be obvious to those who have grasped the point, I end this 
section by describing two imaginary classrooms. In teacher X's room the culture that has grown 
up around LOGO is more than usually focused on the "spectaculars." X happens not to have 
thought much about LOGO's mathematical values, and has not encouraged the children to 
adopt ways of thinking that might be offended by violating those values. Thus X is creating a 
different culture around LOGO than teacher Y, who has worked at encouraging the children to 
feel continuity between repeat and multiplication and to feel safe with variables by 
understanding stepsize as "just a name."  
   
LOGO: The "Cabbage Patch Kid" of Computation?  
I began by announcing that my intellectual source for this lecture was literary criticism. This 
source might not have been visible throughout, but its influence was there. For the individual 
and historically, literary criticism begins with one person and one poem: with one person's taste 
for a particular piece of writing. Its development is a process of decentering: it rises above the 
individual reader and above the individual work. In its maturity, it never leaves the intimate 
experience of reading the poem, but becomes part of a much larger experience: the individual's 
taste is never purely individual but a reflection of culture, and the poem is not an isolated entity 
but a moment in a literary movement. In a parallel way, I have sought to decenter the 
perception of the LOGO experience. We are not looking at the effect of a technological object 
on an individual child, we are looking at the workings of a cultural process.  
In the previous sections, I talked about microcultures on the level of a school or classroom. I 
would like to conclude by talking about some aspects of LOGO in the larger macroculture, and 
as a first example, I will discuss a relatively superficial cultural process.  
Over the past few years, there has been a change in the media's perspective on computers in 
education. Until sometime in 1984, most writing about computers and children had an upbeat, 
almost "gee-whiz" tone. One could scarcely open a magazine without being reminded that 
journalists had discovered that one of the most photogenic scenes of our age was a child in 
front of a computer screen. The light from the screen catches in the eyes and you get a really 
marvelous effect, just a beautiful picture.  
I have suggested elsewhere that backlash was inherent in this situation: there had to arrive a 
point when no one could stomach the picture one more time nor the euphoric hype that often 
went with it. But since the media must find something to say, the next thing that was 
newsworthy was that computers are bad. Thus followed a spate of such negative articles. This 
shift has little to do with anything new that has been discovered about children and computers. 
We are looking at a pendulum swing. Indeed, we may predict a new phase of euphoria a few 
years down the line.  
One might find it annoying that events of this order affect our "serious" work. But they are part 
of the reality in education. I don't simply mean that the mood of the press influences how easy 
it is to get a budget approved. More importantly, it is part of the social perception of the 
computer. It doesn't merely influence the educational process, it is an essential part of it.  
In Mindstorms, I discussed how the New Math differs on a social dimension from what we are 
trying to do today with LOGO. In my view, one important root of difficulties in mathematics 
education is the social construction of mathematics in our culture as an alienated thing. This 
social construction is a dominant aspect of any non-technocentric view of mathematics 
education. Yet in the discussions that led to the New Math, the focus was not on concepts like 
alienation and culture, but on concepts like logical parity and what was fashionable in the 
mathematics community at the time. The result was an even more alienated form of 
mathematics. I don't say that this was the only reason for the minimal effects of the New Math 
movement it had other flaws as well -- but this one would have been sufficient.  
We are in a very different place today. Using the computer as a carrier of mathematical learning 
means that we can channel the social attitudes surrounding computation to energize the way 
that mathematics and other subjects are learned. Again, I do not say that such social 
phenomena are the whole story. The relationship between the individual and the computer in 
the microculture of the classroom (or other learning environment) is obviously central, but the 
larger social movement is a very significant force. LOGO practitioners must learn to integrate it 
into their thinking.  
The first step is to pay attention to the individual manifestations of cultural movement around 
computers: the pendulum swing of the media attitude, the rise and fall of debates about video 
games, the place of computers in movies and television, and the often more pretentious and 
occasionally more significant discussion in books and professional journals. For example, the 
summer 1984 issue of the Teachers College Record (published by Columbia University) was 
devoted to a "critical look" at computers in education. The message: computers are bad for 
children; LOGO in particular is a serious threat to their mental health.  
A second step is to use the interest they might arouse. One can look at the T.C.R. in many 
ways. One can dismiss it as drivel. One can become angry. One can take it seriously and launch 
a King Canute-like campaign against computers. Or, and this is what I think we ought to do, 
one can treat it as a cultural event to be understood, and perhaps even made the occasion for 
discussion in a school, a P.T.A., or a community. The centerpiece of such a discussion could be 
the view of the computer as a cultural element. Many of the features of the computer that the 
T.C.R. authors found objectionable are not features of the computer but of the ways in which 
computers are constructed, used, and represented.  
For example, Douglas Sloan (then editor of the T.C.R.), in a public debate with me at the 1985 
American Orthopsychiatric meeting, was angry about the difference between color on a 
computer screen and the watercolors used by children in "real painting." He felt that working 
with the computer screen had far worse effects than undermining artistic development: it 
fundamentally changed the child's relationship with reality. We all know that the colors on 
school computers are less than ideal, but why is his reaction so intense? My interpretation of his 
position is that the difference between watercolors that run and shade into one another and 
computer colors as Professor Sloan understood them captures the feature of the computer that 
figures most prominently in a common anti-technological construction. The computer is digital, 
binary, all-or-none; the real world is an ultimately ambiguous continuum. I would share his 
anger if I felt that the minds of children were being molded into inflexible patterns. Indeed, I 
have expressed similar outrage at what I see as the two major influences in this direction in our 
society: school and the misuse of the computer. Nothing is more digital than school math, nor 
more guilty of sensory impoverishment.  
The easy reply to Professor Sloan is to say that we have made LOGO quite explicitly to provide 
a glimpse of how learning need not be "digital." We are entitled to claim some credit for 
warning that school as it is exposes children to the very risks which Professor Sloan fears in the 
context of computer learning. But this reply slips too easily into technocentrism. The challenge 
to school, in its traditional forms, cannot be made by simply dumping computers and computer 
languages, however well designed, into classrooms. The schools will assimilate the computer to 
their traditional culture, and Professor Sloan will be proved right. A more effective answer to 
Professor Sloan would consist of extending computer criticism beyond technocentrism: it would 
call into question social structures and cultures that existed before the computer. By describing 
the beginnings of a new computer culture, it would give us glimpses of possible alternatives. It 
would show, paradoxically, the "humanists" of the Teachers College Record as victims of 
techocentrism no less than the technologists themselves. It would pose sharply the problem of 
education as requiring a new alliance of intellectual trends in which the LOGO community would 
have a proud position.  
   
Footnotes  
1. For example, an article from Psychology Today, cited below, grants that even the best 
software can be ruined by poor teachers. This is technocentrism.  
2. This incident gives a glimpse of a use of LOGO that will become more prominent as the 
computer culture matures. Up to now, one usually sees two kinds of work with LOGO in 
schools: exercises and projects. An exercise is a task set by a teacher or a textbook as a 
teaching strategy; a project is a longer term enterprise, ideally undertaken by a student 
out of personal interest. The initial work with clocks fell into the project category. But 
when the clock programs were adapted to measure the speeds of the model cars, the 
computer was being programmed by the students as a tool that served another task 
rather than as a project in its own right. The students had truly appropriated the 
computer.  
3. I intentionally use the phrase Carol Gilligan invented for a similar phenomenon in the 
area of moral judgment (Gilligan, 1982).  
4. LOGO environments differ in many relevant ways that are not mentioned in the reports 
of either study. I have become impressed with the fact that diagrams on the walls can 
influence what projects the students want to do and how they think about LOGO. 
Several of my colleagues and students have been probing the diversity of factors that 
make a difference. Aaron Falbel has pointed out that it makes a possible important 
difference whether the children see adults programming LOGO for themselves. Do the 
children think of LOGO as a "schoolish" activity for children, or a "real-world" activity for 
grown-ups as well? Steve Ocko and Mitchel Resnick have built microworlds in which the 
active object differs only in appearance: as a turtle, car, an insect, a ferris wheel, etc. 
This allows them to see boys and girls engaging differently with what is formally the 
same microworld. Sylvia Weir associates certain LOGO styles with spatially oriented 
children and Sherry Turkle associates LOGO styles with personality. In both cases, one 
must expect quite radically different relationships with LOGO depending on whether 
each individual's development of a particular style is (tacitly or explicitly) actively 
encouraged, simply permitted, or discharged. Robert Lawler has documented in 
dramatic abundance how personal one child's appropriation of LOGO turns out to be 
when you look at it in find detail.  
5. I count versions of LOGO as "not serious" when they reduce the power of LOGO (to 
Turtle Graphics, for example), or when they are implemented on a machine that does 
not reach significant numbers of people, or when they are so eclectic as not to show any 
consistent set of values in their technical choices.  
   
References  
Clement, D., and Gullo, D. (1984). "Effects of Computer Programming on Young Children's 
Cognition," Journal of Educational Psychology (vol. 76, no. 6).  
Gilligan, C. (1982). In a Different Voice. Harvard University Press. Cambridge, MA.  
Hawkins, D. (1985). "Messing About in Science," Science and Children (vol. 2, no. 5). February 
1965.  
Papert, S., et al. (1979). "Final Report of the Brookline LOGO Project," LOGO Memo Nos. 53 and 
54. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas. Basic Books. New 
York.  
Pea, R., and Kurland, M. (1983). "On the Cognitive Effects of Learning Computer Programming," 
New Ideas in Psychology (vol. 2, no. 2).  
Turkle, S. (1984). The Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit. Basic Books. New York.  
