by S. Papert
A key to understanding why School is what it is
lies in recognizing a systematic tendency to
deform ideas in speciﬁc ways in order to make
them ﬁt into a pedagogical framework. One of
these deformations is described here as
“disempowering ideas.” The insight leads to a
new direction for innovation in education: re-
empowering the disempowered ideas. Doing so
is not easy: it needs a new epistemology with a
focus on power as a property of ideas and a
challenge to the School culture. On the positive
side, the insight also leads to a new vision of
what technology can offer education.
O
ne can take two approaches to renovating
School1—or indeed anything else. The prob-
lem-solving approach identiﬁes the many problems
that afﬂict individual schools and tries to solve them.
A systemic approach requires one to step back from
the immediate problems and develop an understand-
ing of how the whole thing works. Educators faced
with day-to-day operation of schools are forced by
circumstances to rely on problem solving for local
ﬁxes. They do not have time for “big ideas.”
This essay offers a big idea in a reﬂexive way: the
most neglected big idea is the very idea of bigness
of ideas. I want to argue that the neglect of big
ideas—or rather of the bigness of ideas—has be-
come pervasive in the culture of School to the point
where it dominates thinking about the content of
what schools teach, as well as thinking about how to
run them.
A learning story
The presentation of this rather abstract, theoretically
oriented thesis begins with a concrete story.
Michael’s side. Last fall I worked almost daily with
a small group of deeply troubled teenagers. One day
I brought a rattrap into our meeting place. Several
boys, impressed by this ferocious-looking version of
the familiar mousetrap, gathered around and began
to make macho remarks: “you can break someone’s
ﬁngers with that” and “that’s nothing, I’ve set bear
traps.” After this kind of talk had died down, a quiet
member of the group, whom I will call Michael, piped
up with: “Awesome. That’s a wonderful idea!” It took
me a few minutes to be sure that he meant what I
hoped he did: he was saying that the mouse trap is
based on a wonderfully clever idea; he found it awe-
some that anyone could have invented it.
As I got to know Michael better I came to under-
stand that seeing an idea where others saw an in-
strument of violence was characteristic of his mind.
Ideas are what count for him. When we gave him
the opportunity to work at building constructs out
of mechanized/computerized LEGO** bricks2 he
showed a ﬂair for taking up an engineering idea and
embodying it in a variety of constructs. In this he dif-
fers from the intellectual style I have most often seen
when students of all ages from preschool to college
work with versions of the same construction mate-
rial. Almost all give priority in their thinking to the
performance or to the appearance of the product.
For most the ideas are instrumental means to these
!Copyright 2000 by International Business Machines Corpora-
tion. Copying in printed form for private use is permitted with-
out payment of royalty provided that (1) each reproduction is done
without alteration and (2) the Journal reference and IBM copy-
right notice are included on the ﬁrst page. The title and abstract,
but no other portions, of this paper may be copied or distributed
royalty free without further permission by computer-based and
other information-service systems. Permission to republish any
other portion of this paper must be obtained from the Editor.
PAPERT
0018-8670/00/$5.00 © 2000 IBM
IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL 39, NOS 3&4, 2000
720
What’s the big idea?
Toward a pedagogy
of idea power
functional ends. Michael often seems to work as if
for him it is the end product that is instrumental to
the means—a way of exercising a particular idea.
You might think that he is “the intellectual” of the
group.
You would be led to a very different impression by
his dismal school record. From the beginning he has
been a regular habitue´ of “special education” class-
rooms. As seen through school tests he appears as
an incompetent person: virtually illiterate, devoid of
mathematical knowledge—in brief “a failure.”
Working with Michael has increased for me the trou-
bling awareness that failure in school can be the
expression of valuable intellectual and personal qual-
ities.3,4 Many do badly in school because their style
simply does not ﬁt schools. Many react badly to
school because its emphasis on memorizing facts and
acquiring skills that cannot be put to use is like a
prison for a mind that wants to ﬂy. Perhaps the most
saddening occurrence is when children come to un-
derstand, as many like Michael do, that they can buy
relief from School’s pressure by getting themselves
classiﬁed in the category of “special ed.” Often con-
siderable problem-solving ability is brought to bear
on getting oneself categorized as “dumb.”
For many this is a deadly trap: once categorized in
“special ed” it is hard to get out. I do not know how
Michael’s own relationship with school evolved. But
I do know that it was perpetuated in a classical pat-
tern: A kid who cares about ideas ﬁnds precious few
of them in an elementary school where he is expected
to learn facts and skills that he experiences as ex-
cruciatingly boring. He refuses to do it. School re-
sponds by classifying him as having trouble learning
and so places him in special classes that are supposed
to be easier. This is exactly the wrong response: “eas-
ier” means even more boring, even more devoid of
ideas. And so begins a downward spiral. He comes
to hate school and everything associated with it. What
he really needed in the ﬁrst place was work that is
“harder” in the sense of having more intellectual sub-
stance and requiring more real concentration. The
form this work might take will differ from child to
child: in Michael’s case it should certainly be some
form of “idea work.”
The opportunity to spend four hours a day over sev-
eral months building technological objects gave
Michael the chance to change his self-perception of
not being “smart,” which easily becomes a devastat-
ing consequence of the special education trap. It re-
mains to be seen whether the change will be ﬁrm
enough to reverse the effects of many previous years.
I think the chances are good, but the moral of the
present story is less about what Michael learned from
us and more about what we can learn from his expe-
rience and whether we can apply it to give a better
chance to the children now entering the education
cycle.
There can be no panacea, but sometimes one has to
think about one thing at a time and in this essay I
focus on one strategy that happens to be well illus-
trated by Michael’s case, although it applies equally
across the spectrum of apparent academic abilities.
I call it a pedagogy of ideas.
My side. I have been familiar for many years with
the general pattern of failure and success shown by
Michael; but working with him also helped me to a
new understanding of a speciﬁc feature of the School
mind-set which I now recognize (shocking as this may
seem to many readers) as a bias against ideas in fa-
vor of skills and facts—an idea aversion.
It is close to 40 years since I fell in love with the idea
that a technologically rich environment could give
to children who love ideas access to learning-rich idea
work, and to those who love ideas less the oppor-
tunity to learn to love them more. But many ideas
are more easily loved than implemented. What is
idea work? How can it be made accessible to young
children?
During the 40 subsequent years, my initially vaguely
intuitive belief has gradually taken shape. This es-
say presents some key episodes in my slow progress
toward a fuller understanding, through many ups and
downs and false starts along wrong roads, that in ad-
dition to the intrinsic difﬁculty of creating a theo-
retical framework for thinking about the pedagogy
of ideas, a secondary layer of difﬁculty comes from
having to ﬁght resistance rooted in the anti-idea bias.
But ﬁghting resistance turned out to have a positive
aspect: nothing has taught me more about the na-
ture of School, or given more insight into prevailing
cultural representations of School, of learning, and
of childhood.
Perhaps the most important of these was switching
from complaining to asking what I could learn from
the fact that certain aspects of my 1980 book, Mind-
storms:Children,Computers,andPowerfulIdeas,5 were
widely ignored by commentators and practitioners.
IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL 39, NOS 3&4, 2000
PAPERT 721
Most of the many educators who found inspiration
and afﬁrmation in the book (as well as those who
hated it) discussed it as if it were about children and
computers, as if the third term was there as a sound
bite, the kind of shibboleth that pervades the dis-
course of technology in education. I did not mean
it to be that: I actually thought I was writing a book
about ideas! What I had to say about children and
about computers was important to me and useful to
many teachers but was subservient in two ways to
issues about ideas. As an educator and friend of chil-
dren I saw new opportunities for children to under-
stand, to love, and to use ideas that had previously
been inaccessible to them. As an epistemologist I
found that thinking about computers as mediators
between children and ideas led me to a better un-
derstanding of several aspects of ideas—of some par-
ticular ideas, of the nature of ideas in general, and
especially of how they come to inhabit people.
My reference to “idea power” in Mindstorms was es-
sentially positive: I wanted to show that some very
powerful ideas could be brought into the lives of chil-
dren through the mediation of digital technology.
The new insights reﬂect a greater humility in think-
ing about why there is a need to do so, but they can
also be read as a criticism of School. I am not the
ﬁrst would-be educator to think that children should
have access to the best available ideas—quite the
contrary. Many have tried and many of the ideas I
would want to bring in are already there. I have writ-
ten elsewhere about ideas that are usually not (but
should be) counted as appropriate for children to
learn; here I concentrate on the ideas that have been
brought into School’s framework but have been de-
formed in the process. In a larger treatment I would
discuss many forms of deformation; here I concen-
trate on the most signiﬁcant, which I shall call dis-
empowerment. Doing so opens new chapters of ped-
agogically oriented epistemological inquiry: How and
why are ideas subject to disempowerment? How can
we develop strategies for re-empowerment?
Sending ideas to school
The philosophy of education you can read between
the lines of my story of Michael is resonant with the
discourse of contemporary movements of school re-
form. Clearly it is in line with the constructivist bias
toward learning by doing, with the situationist cri-
tique of dissociating knowledge from a context of
use and with the cognitivist insistence on understand-
ing the concepts behind the skills and facts that are
the core of what school traditionally teaches (and
especially what it tests.) But while it is resonant with
the discourse of these movements, what I am advo-
cating is very different. I applaud and share their in-
tentions, but shall suggest here that in practice these
would-be reform movements have allowed them-
selves to be assimilated to School’s ways of thinking
and in the end bolster rather than reform the fun-
damentals of the School mentality they set out to
reform.6
Consider Michael’s relationship with school math-
ematics. Learning how to ﬁnd the common denom-
inator of a bunch of fractions is boring for him be-
cause he is not able to use it in any exciting way. It
supports neither ﬂights of the mind nor “hands-on”
projects.
Enter a constructivist who says: Michael will have
a better relationship with the manipulation of frac-
tions if he discovers the rules himself. So situations
are created (often with great ingenuity) that will lead
children to “discover” the rules of arithmetic. But
being made to “discover” what someone else (and
someone you may not even like) wants you to dis-
cover (and already knows!) is not Michael’s idea of
an exciting intellectual adventure. The idea of inven-
tion has been tamed and has lost its essence. He
wants to ﬂy, but what this kind of constructivism of-
fers him is more like decorating the captive bird’s
cage.
This failure of the constructivist to meet Michael’s
needs represents a double whammy of disempow-
erment. Jean Piaget’s very strong idea that all learn-
ing takes place by discovery is emasculated by its
translation into the common practice known in
schools as “discovery learning.” It is disempowered
in part because discovery stops being discovery when
it is orchestrated to happen on the preset agenda of
a curriculum but also in large part because the ideas
being learned are disempowered. For example, the
idea of rules for manipulating numbers was histor-
ically one of the most powerful ideas ever and in the
PAPERT
IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL 39, NOS 3&4, 2000
722
How and why are ideas subject
to disempowerment?
How can we develop strategies
for re-empowerment?
right context can still be. But no child would ever
suspect that from its presentation in school as a
rather boring routine. Setting ourselves the task of
re-empowering the ideas being learned is also a step
toward re-empowering the idea of learning by dis-
covery.
The same double whammy is present when the ex-
cellent and potentially powerful intention, that
knowledge is situated, turns into presenting manip-
ulations of fractions in the guise of “real world” sit-
uations such as shopping at the supermarket. For
Michael this contributes nothing to a sense of the
power of the idea of fractions. He cares nothing
about shopping in the supermarket and knows that
in these days of automation at the checkout counter
and unit prices on the labels, no one exercises arith-
metic while shopping.
Or consider the cognitivist who says: Michael will
have a better relationship with fractions if he under-
stands the concepts behind them. This might be so
if he could really understand how the invention of
fractions was as awesome as the invention of the
mousetrap and how the intellectual methods that
were used to invent fractions could be used to make
new inventions of his own. But the cognitivists are
not trying to recreate the intellectual situation in
which fractions were invented—and (as far as I can
see) could not do so in the context of an elementary
school math class. They simply want Michael to see
the connection between one set of ideas about which
he does not care and another similar set.
In brief, when ideas go to school they lose their
power, thus creating a challenge for those who would
improve learning to ﬁnd ways to re-empower them.
This need not be so. In the next two learning sto-
ries7 we see elementary school children use comput-
ers to make a more authentic kind of discovery re-
lated to foundational ideas of arithmetic.
“You can put fractions on top of everything”
Debbie, one of the participants in a turning-point
study by Idit Harel, had always been near the bot-
tom of her class in anything related to math; her score
on a standardized test of knowledge about fractions
was in the bottom 10 percent.8 For some school pol-
icy makers the principal moral of this story may be
that “teaching to the test” is not the only way to im-
prove test scores, which happened dramatically to
Debbie’s. For my present concerns the interesting
facet is how a young poet (which is how Debbie saw
herself) who despises math for its boring manipu-
lations ﬁnds a congenial relationship with a math-
ematical idea when she can use it in personal way.
Harel’s project was based on the creation of what
she called a “software design studio” for fourth-grade
students at the Hennigan School9 in Boston. For an
hour a day throughout the school year, these students
worked with individual computers on an assignment
to create a piece of educational software to teach
something about fractions. The choice of what would
be taught by the software was left entirely up to the
individual. Many chose to teach to the test; much of
the software could be described as drill in manip-
ulation of fractions. Debbie’s was very different.
At ﬁrst Debbie was reluctant to participate. She
hated fractions and asked to be allowed to use her
computer time to illustrate poems she had written,
and for the ﬁrst weeks of the year she did this. Then
one day she wrote in the journal the students were
required to keep: “Fractions are everywhere!!! You
can put them on anything!!!” That this had come as
a surprising “aha” was clear from the exclamation
points, the size and form of the writing, and the fact
that it energized her to begin a project that would
occupy her for the next few months. Her goal was
to “teach” the world to see fractions as she now saw
them: no longer boring marks on paper but a way
of looking at the world. Her method was to present
scenes in which she could guide the viewer to “see”
fractions. The refrain was “they are everywhere.”
And although this is more interpretive, the approach
she eventually found for her software project is in
the spirit of her sense of herself as a poet.
Why is what Debbie did important? I give different
answers to the test-oriented school administrator and
to the epistemologist. The former may be willing to
understand only the brute fact that Debbie herself,
and statistically the whole class, actually did improve
very signiﬁcantly on standardized tests even when
their projects did not bear directly on the skills be-
ing tested. The epistemologist gets a deeper answer
coupled with a challenge: It is clear that in some very
important but (at least for me) not yet clearly de-
ﬁned sense, Debbie was engaging with the idea of
fractions—we need you to help us pin down just what
this means, how it relates to the practical use of math-
ematics, and how we can make it happen more of-
ten.
Perhaps the epistemologist will respond by asking:
“But how can I help? I am just an epistemologist,
IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL 39, NOS 3&4, 2000
PAPERT 723
what do I know about how children learn?” In that
case the next story might provide a helpful slant on
the role of epistemology in understanding and pro-
moting intellectual development.
The wonderful discovery of nothing
When I was a child I was told “The Hindus invented
zero.” I remember wondering what they really in-
vented. What do you mean “invent zero”? I decided
that what they invented was the round symbol we
use for zero. Many years later a kindergarten girl10
appropriately called Dawn taught me to understand
what those Hindus really invented.
Dawn was working (or playing—I don’t see much
difference between these things when they are done
well) at a computer using a version of Logo that al-
lowed her to control the speed of moving screen ob-
jects by typing commands like SETSPEED 100, which
would make them go very fast, or SETSPEED 10, which
would make them go much slower. She had inves-
tigated some speeds that seemed signiﬁcant, like 55,
and then turned to very slow speeds, like 5 and 1.
Suddenly she became very excited and called over
ﬁrst a friend and then a teacher to show something
interesting. I happened to be visiting the class and
shared the teacher’s initial puzzlement: we could not
see what Dawn was so excited about. Nothing was
happening on her screen. Slowly I understood that
the whole point was precisely that Nothing (with a
big N) was happening. She had typed SETSPEED 0
and the moving object stopped. She was trying to tell
us, but did not have the language to do so easily, that
those objects that were “standing still” were never-
theless “moving”—they were moving with speed
zero. Her excitement was about discovering that zero
is also a number, speed zero is also a speed, distance
zero is also a distance and so on. Up to that point
zero for her was not a number. All of a sudden, it
had become one.
One way to describe what happened to Dawn is that
she discovered a property of zero she had not pre-
viously noticed. There is also a deeper description,
which connects her experience with a theme of math-
ematical history that is more general and more fun-
damental than “the discovery of zero.”
Number is not something that came into being his-
torically in one act. It was progressively constructed
by a series of extensions that is often schematically
reconstructed in modern presentations as extending
the idea of number as natural numbers (1, 2, 3 . . . )
to include zero, then to include negative numbers,
then fractions, real numbers, complex numbers, and
beyond into the realm of “abstract algebra.”
For me the most powerful idea in Jean Piaget’s11
complex lifework shows up in his belief that the de-
velopment of ideas in children’s knowledge systems
parallels, not in detail but in general form, the way
ideas develop historically. In particular the idea of
number is not created historically or acquired by an
individual child in an all-or-none fashion. Rather, it
is progressively constructed. Most often the process
is invisible and must be inferred by sampling what
children can do with the developing idea; in this case
I just happened to be present at a key moment in
Dawn’s construction of number. But this is not en-
tirely accidental. I suggest that the constructionist
use of computers increases the likelihood of such en-
counters by making the process more visible both to
the informed observer and to the children them-
selves.
School’s assimilation of Piaget
The difﬁculty is in the word “informed.” Most peo-
ple in the school world are not only not informed
about this kind of Piagetian process, they are pos-
itively misinformed by a prevalent view of Piaget dis-
torted by idea aversion.
The form of distortion is visible in the spate of re-
cent news items telling how Piaget’s constructivist
views have been refuted by recent discoveries that
babies come into the world with more abilities than
he imagined. For example:
Some of Piaget’s most famous observations con-
cern what he calls conservation. Dump a handful
of beads on the table. Rearrange them in various
ways—strung out in a line, heaped in a cluster, or
whatever. Typically children at age seven do not
believe that such rearrangements affect how many
beads there are: if none were added and none were
taken away the number is the same. But typically
at age four children can be induced to say that
there are more or less depending on the arrange-
ment—most often they say “more” when the beads
are strung out in a row and “less” when they are
piled in a heap. Somewhere between these two
ages children “construct” intellectual structures
that underlie the later certainty of conservation.
The criticism, most noisily expressed in a recent book
by Dahaene,12 is based on ingenious experimental
PAPERT
IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL 39, NOS 3&4, 2000
724
demonstration that babies can under some circum-
stances perceive the numerosity of small collections
of objects: for example they make the same response
to a set of three images whether these are clustered
togetherorarrangedinaline.Inotherwordstheyshow
a rudimentary behavior that formally resembles con-
servation. It is unclear to me what Piaget would have
made of this; my guess is that he would have been
mildly surprised. But it is very clear to me that Pi-
aget would have been very surprised (as indeed I was
and still am) to learn that anyone regarded this ex-
periment as relevant to the conservation of number.
Indeed the fallacy in treating them as one phenom-
enon is so egregious that it needs explanation.
I explain it to myself by following Piaget in making
a distinction between psychological and epistemo-
logical ways of thinking. For psychology—and cer-
tainly for behaviorist brands of psychology—it might
be considered legitimate to deﬁne conservation as
the behavior of responding in the same way to ob-
jects in different arrangements. But an epistemolog-
ical stance would immediately require making a
sharp distinction between a baby’s perception of nu-
merosity of small sets and an adult’s certain knowl-
edge that however big the set, it will not be made more
or less by rearrangement. The psychologist is talk-
ing about behaviors. The epistemologist is talking
about ideas. The interpretation of the baby experiment
as refuting Piaget on this issue is another example of
idea aversion.
Let me be clear about the nature of my defense of
Piaget. He was certainly wrong in his facts about what
speciﬁc behaviors are innate. But equally certainly
he was not wrong about the importance and the dif-
ﬁculty of the problem of explaining how knowledge
evolves from whatever is there at the beginning to
the very different and vastly more complex structures
we have as educated adults. He was not wrong in his
belief that epistemological analysis was needed to
understand this evolution. And this incident conﬁrms
his belief that it was important to struggle (as he
rather unsuccessfully did through his whole career)
to have himself seen as an epistemologist rather than
as a psychologist.13 The fact that he failed and that
the educational psychology community has thor-
oughly assimilated his work as “psychology” is one
more example of its idea aversion.
Probabilistic thinking as an example of the
disempowerment/re-empowerment cycle
If we gauge the power of an idea by the ramiﬁca-
tions of the contribution it has made to the growth
of knowledge, the idea of “probability” must score
very high. It has played a key role in the develop-
ment of rigorous procedures in all experimental sci-
ences. It made possible the launching of social sci-
ences with any pretension to be quantitative. It is at
the heart of the Darwinian idea of evolution and
plays a signiﬁcant role in many other areas of biol-
ogy. And perhaps most dramatically it became in this
century a cornerstone of theoretical physics. Prob-
ability also scores high in terms of decisions that af-
fect plain people in everyday-life decisions about
medical, ﬁnancial, and political matters. And so we
could go on. It is therefore not surprising that de-
signers of curriculum for math and science should
suggest bringing probability into the classroom. But
on the way it is subjected to the disempowerment
suffered by most ideas when they go to school.
Typical of the way probability is being brought into
the elementary curriculum is the following problem:
Collect data about preferences for ﬂavors of ice
cream and compute the probability that Jane and
Joe prefer vanilla to chocolate. The intention is that
there should be a count of boys and girls who prefer
each ﬂavor and a calculation of the obvious ratios.
To my mind this kind of problem is laughably far
from bringing out the powerful role of probabilistic
ideas in the history of thought.
To offer an image of re-empowerment I ask you to
imagine a scenario in which a child grows up from
an early age using computers in ways that lead to a
high degree of technological ﬂuency. I consider “time
slices” at three different ages at which I present ac-
tivities only slightly in advance of what one can quite
commonly see today.
First we imagine a child at age ﬁve using a modern
iconic form of Logo to make programs using ani-
mation and music for artistic effect. An iconic ran-
dom generator is used to select colors, shapes, and
actions. The probability distribution of the random
IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL 39, NOS 3&4, 2000
PAPERT 725
The psychologist is talking
about behaviors.
The epistomologist is talking
about ideas.
variables can be modiﬁed by dragging “sliders.” The
child also likes playing a computer game in which
decisions are not speciﬁc to actions, but to proba-
bilities of actions. There may be no use of formal
expression for manipulating probability, but a num-
ber of probabilistic ideas are being appropriated and
intuitions developed.
My next time frame is at age eight. I imagine a child
who has built a light-seeking vehicle using something
like the “programmable brick”—a small computer
marketed by LEGO as part of its Mindstorms** prod-
uct line (which was named after the same book we
have been discussing). The brick is programmed to
decide, by comparing the outputs of two light sen-
sors, whether the light source is more to the left or
more to the right and cause the vehicle to make a
small turn in the appropriate direction while mov-
ing continuously forward. On the assumption that
there are no obstacles, it will eventually ﬁnd its way
to the light.
Now we make the situation more complex by sup-
posing that there are obstacles that block the vehi-
cle’s movement without blocking its line of sight to
the light source. The program as described does not
“know” that the vehicle is obstructed and has no pro-
vision for corrective action if it did. So if an obstacle
is encountered, the vehicle may stay forever spin-
ning its wheels in place. What can be done?
One solution would be to give the little robot the
means to know whether it is moving, register the
presence of an obstacle, and try to circumnavigate
it. Doing this would make the construct more com-
plex both in hardware and in software, but it is still
handily within the capability of an average techno-
logically ﬂuent child of eight to construct a robot that
would be “smart” enough to perform very much bet-
ter than the ﬁrst “dumb” version.
The use of probabilistic reasoning enters the situ-
ation by providing another kind of solution. Suppose
that the original program took the form of the fol-
lowing action repeated, say, every 100 milliseconds:
If sensor1 ! sensor2 [turnleft 1 unit]
If sensor1 " sensor2 [turnright 1 unit]
Now consider what happens if we add another line
to the program:
If sensor1 ! sensor2 [turnleft 1 unit]
If sensor1 " sensor2 [turnright 1 unit]
With probability p turnleft x units
In the absence of obstacles the vehicle will follow a
more erratic path, but if p and x are small it will still
get to the light. On the other hand, if there is an ob-
stacle the vehicle will not get into a trap of butting
forever against it. Sooner or later it will randomly
turn away from the obstacle and get a second chance
at making it to the light by a different route. How
well it works would depend on the nature of the ob-
stacles and on the appropriate choice of the param-
eters. But in principle it would work in many situ-
ations.
My third time frame is at age eleven or twelve, at
which point children are able to use probability to
solve more analytic problems. I have observed such
children in the following situations, which leads me
to think that children of that age would handle far
more complex cases if they had lived through the
kinds of experiences I have been imagining for
younger ages. Doing so would have given them far
more experience with empowered probability, and
a far higher degree of technological ﬂuency, than they
in fact had been able to accumulate.
The situations I want you to imagine at this age level
are puzzles, such as guessing the probability of a co-
incidence of birthdays in a class of N students, and
sampling situations, such as estimating an area on
the computer screen by scattering random points on
the screen and counting the proportion that fall in
the area. For example, using the Logo turtle and a
technique I call concrete programming, the birth-
day problem is handled as follows in a manner that
the student would be able to invent ﬂuently, draw-
ing on previous experiences, without being specif-
ically told how to handle this one.
The Logo14 commands
setpos :start
fd random 365
will cause a turtle to move to one of 365 positions.
The commands
setc “red
pd fd 0
will cause the turtle to leave a red dot at that po-
sition and
PAPERT
IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL 39, NOS 3&4, 2000
726
If colorunder # “red [Print “Coincidence stop]
will show that it has come to the same place a sec-
ond time and stop the process.
So repeating this sequence 26 times will simulate a
class of 26 people and tell whether there is a coin-
cidence of birthdays. Repeating all that 100 times
will tell you in percentage how often there were co-
incidences. If you want to automate the counting pro-
cess in a concrete fashion you simply introduce an-
other turtle, call it Counter, and replace
If colorunder # “red [Print “Coincidence stop] by
If colorunder # “red [Counter, fd 1 stop]
At the end the command:
Counter, show xcor / 100
will print an estimate of the probability of a birth-
day coincidence in a class of 26.
The sense of power comes here from being able to
solve well-known or self-generated problems, puz-
zles, and paradoxes from personal knowledge using
very general techniques that are all part of what I
call “technological ﬂuency.”
Toward a theory of idea power
To tie together the threads of the discussion of the
re-empowerment of probability, I give a short selec-
tion of criteria for judging the appropriate kind of
idea power. Readers will easily see that this is not
all there is to it: my selection is meant to be helpful
to educators in their attempts to empower ideas, but
it is intended mainly as a sketchy beginning of a the-
ory and a challenge for further development.
With this qualiﬁcation I am willing to say that in the
context of the kind of experience adumbrated here,
the idea of probability derives its power from the fol-
lowing properties:
First and most essentially, the young user was able
to use the idea to solve a real problem that had come
directly out of a personal project. Thus it is directly
experienced as powerful in its use.
Second, the use made of the idea is directly con-
nected with other situations in the world. It leads to
the understanding of a large class of phenomena.
Many simple creatures use mechanisms essentially
similar to the probabilistic robot program; one might
say that nature found the same solution and certainly
biologists did. The Darwinian theory of evolution is
based on ideas not very far removed. In short, the
idea is powerful in its connections.
Third, the idea almost certainly has roots in intui-
tive knowledge the child has internalized over a long
period, giving it a quality that in Mindstorms I call
syntonic (borrowing the term from psychoanalytic lit-
erature). It is powerful in its roots15 and its ﬁt with
personal identity. Using such knowledge is associated
with a sense of personal power, absent from the use
of knowledge that is experienced as coming from the
outside, having qualities that in Mindstorms I call dis-
sociated and alienated.
The third of these properties is the furthest from the
usual frame of discourse of professionals talking
about curriculum. But since it might be the most im-
portant as well as the hardest to convey, I venture
another statement of the distinction between syn-
tonic and dissociated or alienated. I put it in the ﬁrst
person, since this really is a subjective and personal
kind of issue. Every now and then I do something un-
der pressure or out of error that gives me the feeling
“this is not me.” I fear that much of what we force chil-
dren to do at school is like this and so not syntonic.
Other times I have a wonderful feeling of being at one
with what I am doing. This almost qualiﬁes it as being
syntonic. The “almost” refers to the possibility that these
feelings might not be deeply authentic.
Reopening the debate: Should children
program computers?
In Mindstorms I made the claim that children can
learn to program and that learning to program can
affect the way they learn everything else. I had in
mind something like the process of re-empowerment
of probability: the ability to program would allow a
student to learn and use powerful forms of proba-
bilistic ideas. It did not occur to me that anyone could
possibly take my statement to mean that learning to
program would in itself have consequences for how
children learn and think. But I reckoned without idea
aversion. When the reference to ideas was ﬁltered
out of my claim that Logo could help children by car-
rying ideas, what was left was a claim I never made
that Logo would help children, period. I was amazed
to ﬁnd that experiments were being done in which
tests of “problem-solving ability” were given to chil-
dren before and after exposure to 20 or 30 hours of
IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL 39, NOS 3&4, 2000
PAPERT 727
work with Logo. Papers were written on “the effects
of programming (or of Logo or of the computer)”
as if we were talking about the effects of a medical
treatment.
The difference between these two conceptions of the
role of programming is of the same kind as the dif-
ference between the two interpretations of Piaget:
in both cases the crucial difference is between pri-
macy of the epistemological (talking about ideas) and
primacy of the psychological (talking about how a
person is affected by a treatment). I do not mean to
dismiss the “treatment” studies as without value. For
many children the opportunity to program a com-
puter is a valuable experience and can foster impor-
tant intellectual development.16 But encouraging
programming as an activity meant to be good in it-
self is far removed, in its nature, from working at
identifying ideas that have been disempowered and
seeking ways to re-empower them. It is even further
removed from picking up the challenge to expand
and deepen the theory of idea power sketched in the
previous section. In my discussion of Michael, I sug-
gested that what would beneﬁt him would be better
support for idea work. What I am suggesting here
is a program of idea work for educators. Of course
it is harder to think about ideas than to bring a pro-
gramming language into a classroom. You have to
mess with actual ideas. But this is the kind of hard
that will make teaching more interesting, just as idea
work will do this for learning.
Conclusion
When I was asked to review the book by David Ty-
ack and Larry Cuban6 on the history of school re-
form, I chose the title “Why School Reform Is Im-
possible,”17 and my analysis of the idea aversion
inherent in the culture of school reinforces the idea
that it is impossible. But to say that reform is impos-
sible does not mean that change cannot take place.
Biological evolution is an example of change that
does not come about by reform. More to the present
point, while some educators might think of them-
selves as “reforming” the thinking of the child, con-
structionists see the change in the growing mind as
a process that can be inﬂuenced and that often needs
to be tended, but that in the last analysis follows its
own laws of development.
So, too, the mega-change in education that will un-
doubtedly come in the next few decades will not be
a “reform” in the sense of a deliberate attempt to
impose a new designed structure. My conﬁdence in
making this statement is based on two factors: (1)
forces are at work that put the old structure in in-
creasing dissonance with the society of which it is
ultimately a part, and (2) ideas and technologies
needed to build new structures are becoming increas-
ingly available. I hope that publishing this paper will
help both factors. Public discussion of the idea-averse
nature of School makes the dissonance more acute.
Public access to empowered forms of ideas and the
ways in which technology can support them fertil-
izes the process of new growth.
**Trademark or registered trademark of the LEGO Group.
Cited references and notes
1. I use the word School with an uppercase S to refer to an ab-
straction to which individual schools conform to a lesser or
greater extent. This distinction is discussed more fully in my
book The Children’s Machine, Basic Books, New York (1992).
2. The key hardware used is the RCX
TM “programmable brick”
that forms the core of the LEGO Mindstorms line of prod-
ucts. Software is a subset of Logo (“Yellow Brick Logo”) that
has not been made commercially available. For latest ver-
sions available to researchers see www.learningbarn.org.
3. H. Kohl, ‘I Won’t Learn From You’: The Role of Assent in
Learning, Milkweed Editions, Minneapolis, MN (1991).
4. L. J. Pallidino, The Edison Trait: Saving the Spirit of Your
Nonconforming Child, Random House, Inc., New York
(1997).
5. Basic Books, New York (1980).
6. D. Tyack and L. Cuban, Tinkering Towards Utopia: A Cen-
tury of School Reform, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA (1997). I am not sure whether it was Tyack or Cuban
who is responsible for the apt summary: Reforms set out to
change school; but in the end it is school that changes the
reforms.
7. Readers who follow my work will recognize the next two learn-
ing stories and may be inclined to skip over them. Don’t. They
have a different twist here.
8. I. Harel, Children Designers: Interdisciplinary Constructions for
Learning and Knowing Mathematics in a Computer-Rich
School, Ablex Publishing, Norwood, NJ (1991).
9. The project was made possible by the donation by IBM of
several hundred computers, which allowed the installation
of what was then an exceptionally large number for a school.
10. In the Lamplighter School in Dallas, Texas.
11. Jean Piaget is often credited with being the founder of the
twentieth century study of the intelligence of children. See
my essay on Piaget in www.papert.org/works.html/ for a brief
assessment of Piaget as far more than that.
12. S. Dahaene, The Number Sense: How the Mind Creates Math-
ematics, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK (1997).
13. Piaget’s preferred name for his major ﬁeld of work was “Epis-
temologie Genetique,” which he sharply distinguished from
psychology, which he thought of as a neighboring ﬁeld in which
he sometimes participated. However since the community that
accepted him most readily was that of developmental psy-
chology he sometimes succumbed to its blandishments and
allowed its name to be applied to all his work.
14. The Logo commands should be sufﬁciently self-explanatory
for any reader to follow. The version of Logo used is Mi-
croWorlds, published by Logo Computer Systems Inc.
PAPERT
IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL 39, NOS 3&4, 2000
728
15. In his recent MIT Ph.D. thesis, Technological Fluency and
the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, David Cavallo refers to
a cognate trio of properties as “roots, shoots, and fruits.”
16. Note the word “can.” Some studies showed positive effects;
some did not. Methodologically the positive reports have the
merit of describing something real even if it was not what I
had in mind. The negative ones only proved that under the
particular conditions of that experiment, nothing happened
that could be measured by the particular tests used. It is a
remarkable commentary on the culture of the educational
psychology community that some of these were widely cited
as proving that Logo has no effect.
17. The Journal of Learning Sciences 6, No. 4, 417–427 (1997);
available on line via www.papert.org/works.html/.
Accepted for publication June 27, 2000.
Seymour Papert MIT Media Laboratory, 20 Ames Street, Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts 02139-4307 (electronic mail: papert@media.
mit.edu). Dr. Papert is internationally recognized as a leading
thinker and pioneer activist in the evolution of learning in the
digital world. His background in mathematics and philosophy led
to a collaboration with Jean Piaget at the University of Geneva
from 1959 to 1963, and then to an appointment at MIT where
he cofounded the Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory with Marvin
Minsky and served successively as Professor of Mathematics, Pro-
fessor of Mathematics and Education, and LEGO Professor of
Learning Research at the Media Laboratory. He is the principal
inventor of the Logo programming language, the ﬁrst and most
important effort to give our children control over the new tech-
nologies. His writings include The Connected Family: Bridging the
Digital Generation Gap, Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and
Powerful Ideas, and The Children’s Machine: Rethinking School in
the Age of the Computer. With Minsky he coauthored the inﬂu-
ential book Perceptrons. More information can be found at
http://www.papert.org.
IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL 39, NOS 3&4, 2000
PAPERT 729
