Illustration by David Goldin
41
a r t i c l e
T
Roderick Perkins 
Dan Smith Keller 
Frank Ludolph
INVENTING THE
USER
INTERFACE
Today’s familiar Macintosh user interface is a direct descendant of
the interface first developed and used on Apple’s Lisa computer.
Instead of a text-based system that presented the user with a blank
screen and blinking cursor, the Lisa displayed an electronic desktop,
a picture that the user manipulated directly to tell the computer
what to do. The electronic desktop, with its windows, menu bar,
and icons was not part of the original design; rather, it was the
result of a 4-year-long process of refining goals and developing,
testing, and synthesizing many alternative ideas. In fact, the iconic
desktop was first tried in 1980 and discarded! The final result (Fig-
ure 1) not only made computers easier to use, it made them fun.
T
42
i n t e r a c t i o n s . . . j a n u a r y  +  f e b r u a r y  1 9 9 7
The authors were members of the software
team that designed and implemented Lisa’s sys-
tem software and applications. Rod Perkins
joined the team in early 1979, shortly after the
start of the project, to work on applications and
prototypes of the early ideas about the appear-
ance and workings of windows, dialogue boxes,
and menus. Dan Keller and Frank Ludolph
began working on Lisa in late 1980 and were
responsible for what eventually became the
Desktop Manager with folders and icons.
Goals and Guiding Principles
The new machine, first proposed in late 1978,
was to be designed for general office use—a
high-quality, easy-to-use computer for secre-
taries, managers, and professionals that would
give the individual more independence perform-
ing multiple tasks without disrupting the office.
The ease-of-use goal evolved during 1979 as the
software team tried many ideas. Requirements,
developed jointly by marketing and engineering,
enumerated the following goals [4]. 
Lisa must be fun to use. It will not be a
system that is used by someone “because it is
part of the job” or “because the boss told them
to.” For this reason, special attention must be
paid to the friendliness of the user
interaction and the subtleties that
make using Lisa rewarding and job
enriching.
Lisa will be designed to require extremely
minimal user training and “hand holding.”
The system will provide one standard method
of interacting with a user in handling text,
numbers, and graphics...
The system will adhere to the concept of
“gradual learning”... A user must be able to
do some important tasks easily and with min-
imal instruction or preparation... The more
sophisticated features will be unobtrusive
until they are needed.
Errors will be handled consistently in as
friendly a manner as possible, and the user
will be protected from obvious errors...
... A “Set-up” program will allow the user
to customize several system attributes in order
to “personalize” interaction with the system...
in order to make the system uniquely personal
for the user without interfering with the
interface standards...
(It should allow) a user to put whatever
he/she is doing on “hold” in order to answer
the phone, look up an address, or respond to
an asynchronous interrupt (time for a meet-
ing, mail received on the network, etc.)...
In addition, the use of graphics in general
user interaction will set Lisa apart from its
competitors and will go a long way toward
making the system friendly, easy and enjoyable
to use. “Intuitive icons” can be designed to
indicate certain messages to the user... 
During the same period the engineering
team developed several principles that would
be used to achieve these goals. The interface
would be “intuitive,” modeled on documents
and other office-based objects instead of tradi-
tional and unfamiliar computer concepts.
Like the office, this electronic desktop would
not be limited to showing only one thing at a
time. Commands would be visible on the
screen, consistent across applications, and
modeless. When possible, commands would
be replaced by direct actions using the mouse.
Data were to be moved easily between docu-
ments and displayed on the screen in a style
known as WYSIWYG (“what you see is what
you get”)—that is, the screen and printed
output should look the same. 
Some of these ideas came from team mem-
bers with strongly held convictions, some
came from other projects within Apple; and
other ideas originated outside the company.
Figure 1  
The Lisa Desktop 
(January 1983)
W
T
43
i n t e r a c t i o n s . . . j a n u a r y  +  f e b r u a r y  1 9 9 7
Whatever the source, it took time for these
goals and principles to develop and be assimi-
lated by the Lisa team. 
Beginnings of the Lisa
When the Lisa project was started in late 1978
the goal was to build a computer that would
propel Apple into the business market of the
1980s. The original plan was to build a cus-
tom microprocessor that would be more pow-
erful than the established Apple II computer
and could provide greater flexibility for future
machines. The Lisa hardware would have an
Apple II–style bitmap screen and graphics
support for creating simple line drawings
using Logo™-style instructions. The hard-
ware would also scroll the screen one line at a
time to give a smooth scrolling effect. “Soft”
function keys (soft keys) and cursor keys
appeared on the keyboard to be used by the
applications. The Lisa hardware was to be
competitive with the specialized business
equipment that existed in 1978, but with the
added distinction of being a general-purpose
computer. 
The early hardware limited the user inter-
face that the Lisa applications would have.
The video capabilities of the hardware could
not display high-resolution graphics. Fortu-
nately, it was envisioned that word processing
and databases would be the first applications,
neither of which would rely heavily on graph-
ics. Each application was to be distinctive in
its use of the soft keys and cursor keys, there-
by providing an easier interface to the user.
Early prototypes of the Lisa applications were
written on the Apple II until the new hard-
ware could be used.
Early User Interface 
The first Lisa application, a data Forms Edi-
tor, was started during Summer 1979. Forms
Editor created the data entry forms for the
database engine that would drive the Lisa soft-
ware. Additionally, the Forms Editor could
create simple line drawings such as a business
organization chart. Even in this early applica-
tion, the following familiar Lisa user interface
concepts could be seen (Figure 2):
• Easy to Manipulate. The user could cre-
ate text, lines, boxes, and data fields; move
them on the screen; and go back and edit
them, all by using the cursor keys and a
special selection key. The user would con-
stantly receive visual feedback as things
were drawn, which we felt would increase
their feeling of control.
• Intuitive. The soft keys displayed the
options currently available. The user sim-
ply pointed to the option desired instead
of typing a command. There was no need
for the user to remember complicated
command sequences. Likewise, there were
no hidden commands because all choices
were clearly displayed on the screen. An
arrow displayed what cursor movements
were appropriate at a given moment. This
display was useful for drawing and while
filling in a form.
• Friendly. The Lisa would prompt with
messages instead of just waiting for a com-
mand to be typed. The prompts could be
a r t i c l e
Figure 2  
The Lisa display as
seen on an Apple II
screen (July 1979)
Figure 3a  
The Lisa display with a
simple window, as seen
on Lisa prototype hard-
ware (February 1980)
Figure 3b  
The Lisa display with 
a simple window and 
dialogue box 
(March 1980)
44
i n t e r a c t i o n s . . . j a n u a r y  +  f e b r u a r y  1 9 9 7
answered by typing in a special message
area or by selecting from the choices listed
in the soft key display. Errors would be
reported in a status panel or in the mes-
sage area using clear, friendly English, not
computer jargon. Users were prevented
from making common errors by visibly
indicating inappropriate commands.
Although the first Lisa interface was con-
sistent with the appearance of business equip-
ment of 1979, it was not very exciting to use.
It showed that Apple was serious about being
businesslike, but the Lisa interface did not
generate the same enthusiasm created by the
emerging, highly graphic-oriented video game
industry and programs found on the Apple II
platform. The progress on the first interface
established the correct goals, but left most of
us dissatisfied with our hardware and soft key
approach. Many people shared feelings that
Apple could get better leverage from the Lisa
hardware, especially from its bitmap display. 
Outside Influences 
In late 1979, two major events
occurred that helped to change
the thinking behind the design of
the Lisa hardware and software: the
announcement of the release of the Motorola
68000 microprocessor and visits by a small
group of Apple engineers to Xerox Corpora-
tion’s Palo Alto Research Center (PARC). 
The Motorola 68000 microprocessor had
the performance to support both a higher res-
olution bitmap display and a highly interactive
user interface. This made the 68000 a natural
replacement for the custom microprocessor
designed for the Lisa and broadened the vision
of what people thought possible with Lisa
hardware. Lisa software could make use of this
powerful new platform to expand on its user
interface concepts. The team thought that
with this processor the Lisa would be so fast
that it would be waiting on the user most of
the time! The idle time could then be used to
drive a more elaborate user interface.
In the summer of 1979, Apple was still a
private company and sought additional ven-
ture capital through a private offering of stock
[14]. Xerox Corporation bought 100,000
shares and agreed not to buy more than 5 per-
cent of Apple. According to Mike Scott, the
president of Apple at the time, the deal helped
Apple gain access to Xerox’s research laborato-
ry while limiting their access to Apple’s
advance products.
The visits to Xerox were prompted after a
number of people at Apple read papers pub-
lished by Xerox about their Smalltalk™ envi-
ronment [3]. Smalltalk made extensive use of
a mouse rather than a keyboard to control the
cursor. A high-resolution bitmapped display
allowed Smalltalk to prominently use graphics
to enhance what the user viewed on the
screen. It was a friendly yet powerful environ-
ment that used the concept of modeless com-
mands, which were reported to be less
confusing for the user.
The Apple group made two visits to Xerox.
The purpose of the first visit, in December
1979, was originally to see demonstrations of
programs under development at Xerox—but
not Smalltalk specifically. However, during
that trip, the Apple group was given an
impromptu Smalltalk demonstration. During
the second visit there were additional demon-
strations and another look at Smalltalk. The
Apple team was very excited by the Xerox vis-
its and sought to make the Lisa as exciting.
Enthusiasm from that visit caused us to fur-
ther rethink the Lisa’s user interface. 
W
A
45
i n t e r a c t i o n s . . . j a n u a r y  +  f e b r u a r y  1 9 9 7
A Shift in Thinking
After the Xerox visits, the user interface became
more dynamic as our new hardware became
available. We began experimenting with the
mouse and changed our interface to include
windows (Figures 3a and 3b) similar to those
we saw in Smalltalk. The soft key dis-
play was kept from the earlier
interface, but it was now
attached to the window.
Using the soft keys retained
the keyboard control that
was thought to be impor-
tant for a business-orient-
ed machine. The mouse
was introduced into the
interface as an alternative
to using the keyboard.
We began to allow things
to be drawn with either the
mouse or the cursor keys.
Likewise, the user could
select an option either from the
keyboard or by pointing with the
mouse. The decision to become com-
pletely mouse oriented was still hotly debated.
A number of us felt that radical changes could
not be made to the user interface because the
Lisa was scheduled to be announced later in the
year at the National Computer Conference of
1980. 
The interface was moving toward a standard
that was called the Lisa “look and feel.” All the
applications would be similar in their appear-
ance and use commands that would be com-
mon to each of them. This consistency
reinforced our previously defined interface con-
cepts because the user would interact
with all the Lisa applications in
the same manner. This also
made writing the applications
easier because the software
to create the user interface
could be shared by all the
applications. 
The first Lisa hard-
ware using the 68000
began to appear in
Spring 1980. Numerous
software prototypes of
our user interface ideas
were written and subse-
quently incorporated into
Forms Editor. For the first time
we could see how the user inter-
face looked as well as how it felt.
Desktop Metaphor
We had developed a model to describe the
typical Lisa user. This user was a business per-
son whose day was constantly interrupted
with immediate requests to do other things.
a r t i c l e
Rod Perkins is a
member of the 
technical staff at
Interval Research
Corporation, 
1801 Page Mill Road
Building C, Palo
Alto, CA  94304
perkins@
interval.com
Frank Ludolph is
senior user inter-
face designer at Sun
Microsystems, Inc.
2550 Garcia Ave. 
MS MTV-21-225,
Mountain View, CA
94025.
Frank.Ludolph@
sun.com
Dan Smith Keller is
a vice president for
product development
at PowerAgent, Inc.
P.O. Box 507 
Cupertino, CA 95015
dan@keller.org
Figure 4  
The Lisa display with
dialogue box (August
1980)
C
From that user model it was
decided that the Lisa had to
offer an environment that safe-
ly allowed several applications
to be used simultaneously and
would permit any of the user’s
work to be put on hold. The
job of the user interface was to
portray this multitasked environment in a
manner that would make sense to the user
(Figure 4).
After numerous experiments, a new inter-
face was developed that became known as the
Lisa desktop metaphor. The interface had
multiple windows on the screen to display the
different types of work conducted by the user.
We called he work performed within the win-
dows “documents”—to use a concept already
familiar to the user. We decided that the user
should not have to worry about which appli-
cation went with which document. Instead,
users would select the document they wanted
and the Lisa would determine which applica-
tion was needed. Switching between different
documents was as obvious as pointing at the
window containing the desired work. The
window appearance was spruced up to look
more like a file folder as we sought to create an
electronic equivalent of the user’s real desktop.
The Lisa desktop would have objects already
familiar from a real desktop such as docu-
ments, folders, calculator, and other handy
tools; everything short of an electronic paper-
clip to mangle. 
Role of User Testing 
Controversy surrounded a number of deci-
sions that were made on the user interface, the
introduction of the mouse being a good exam-
ple. We were concerned that our target users
would not accept using the mouse. We had
investigated alternatives, such as the soft keys
and even a light pen, but none proved to be as
efficient. Our own experience with the mouse
agreed with the research conduct-
ed by Douglas Engelbart [2],
who created the mouse while at
SRI International, and with that by
Xerox [1], which discussed the virtues of the
mouse. We knew that users would benefit by
using the mouse, but we had to make using it
as easy as possible. We felt that
the number of buttons affected
how easy it was to use. Factions
developed to promote their
choice for the “correct” num-
ber of mouse buttons. What
ensued became known as the
“button wars”—one of many
wars that developed over interface issues.
Normally, the user interface wars would
end in a stalemate of opinions. We found it
best during these times to test our opinions on
the users for which we were designing. We
would use as test subjects new Apple employ-
ees who had no previous computer experi-
ence. The first tests were conducted during
Summer 1980 by Larry Tesler, the applica-
tions software manager, and were observed by
psychologists as well as ourselves. Many of the
observations were recorded for later review
and served as a form of détente between the
warring factions. 
Some of the engineers resisted taking time
to make improvements derived from the user
testing or from recommendations made by
users themselves. A system was established
whereby a troika, led by Larry Tesler with rep-
resentatives from engineering and marketing
groups, ruled on controversial issues. 
User testing continued throughout the
Lisa’s development for each application, the
desktop manager, and new Lisa concepts such
as pull-down menus, the location of scroll bars,
and alert boxes. More than a year before first
shipment, a special room was built to give a
sneak preview of the Lisa to potential corporate
customers. These “sneaks,” as they were called,
generated positive feedback when participants
were challenged to learn the user interface and
be productive within 30 minutes of use. 
Recommendations from the sneaks helped
generate changes that fine-tuned the interface
design. In some cases, the recommendations
were misguided and were either rolled back or,
more often, led to some other approach being
taken. Many of the high priority changes were
made before the final product shipped. The
team felt this was an innovative approach for
the personal computer industry because the
user interface was being designed from the
user’s perspective using their direct feedback.
46
i n t e r a c t i o n s . . . j a n u a r y  +  f e b r u a r y  1 9 9 7
O
W
B
In the case of the mouse button, it was dis-
covered that with our user interface the three-
button mouse used in Smalltalk had a slight,
but not significant, advantage for the experi-
enced users. Similar results were observed for
the two-button mouse. For beginners, the
extra buttons were confusing as the users
sought to remember which button to press.
The extra buttons also hindered learning the
Lisa user interface quickly. The one button
mouse was chosen to make the user interface
easier for the first-time user.
Arriving at an Interface 
By the end of Summer 1980 the design of the
Lisa user interface culminated in the release of
the Lisa User Interface Standards document
[5]. The document served as a guideline for
what should and should not be done in the
user interface. The document also began to
involve the hardware as part of the overall user
interface. 
The scope of the user interface now includ-
ed items such as the keyboard layout, how the
machine was turned on and off, how the
machine would be serviced—even whether
there should be a door on the disk drive.
These issues became part of shaping users’
perceptions of the entire machine and defin-
ing what would entice them to use it. 
The interface would continue to evolve, but
the release of this document signaled the birth
47
i n t e r a c t i o n s . . . j a n u a r y  +  f e b r u a r y  1 9 9 7
of what eventually became the Lisa and Mac-
intosh user interfaces (Figure 5). Only after
the user interface standards were resolved did
serious work begin on the applications. Work
on Forms Editor and other prototypes
became the basis for the other Lisa applica-
tions.
Early Days of the Desktop Manager
With the basics of the interface defined, work
began on filling out the rest of the user model
of the system. In late 1980, we began design-
ing the interface for the filing functions of
the Lisa system. The questions we were try-
ing to answer included
• How are documents created or
destroyed?
• How are they located?
• How are they returned to their filing
homes?
• How should their attributes be dis-
played?
In considering each of these questions, we
were guided by the desire for consistency,
ease of use, and efficiency.
Desktop Icons Rejected!
One of the first models we considered used
desktop icons for performing the basic filing
functions. Our interface to this point had
only folder title tabs as document and folder
a r t i c l e
Figure 5  
The Lisa display as seen in
the Lisa User Interface
Standards Document
(October 1980)
O
48
i n t e r a c t i o n s . . . j a n u a r y  +  f e b r u a r y  1 9 9 7
icons. The title tabs could be moved into and
out of filing folders by nesting. Destroying an
object was accomplished by moving it into a
wastebasket icon. Diskettes were to appear on
the screen as desk drawers that could be
opened to reveal folder tabs.
A number of objections were raised early in
the discussion of the icon model. The Lisa had
only a 12-inch-diagonal display, and some
thought that it was too small to display full-
width documents and desktop icons simulta-
neously. There was concern that simple tasks,
such as deleting a document by dragging it to
a wastebasket, would be too cumbersome if
the user tried to locate the wastebasket buried
under open documents. Locating documents
in nested folders was also considered too
unwieldy. The scenario of opening a series of
nested folders, accumulating more and more
desk clutter along the way while searching for
a document, seemed to be less efficient than a
real-world paper filing system. Some suggest-
ed that people would spend an inordinate
amount of time positioning icons and moving
or resizing windows. 
Others argued that mimicking
the office filing system would
simply give people an electronic
version of a system that already had
many problems. In particular, we thought that
most paper filing systems had serious difficul-
ties in both filing and retrieval. With all these
things considered, but without producing a
more detailed mock-up, we rejected the icon-
ic filing interface as too inefficient and set out
to design something superior.
A Document Browser
Our initial attempts at producing a more effi-
cient human interface centered on something
resembling the Smalltalk browser. The brows-
er was used to locate and display objects in the
Smalltalk system. It had a window with a top
portion containing four lists of categories,
allowing the hierarchical selection of an
object, and an area below in which the select-
ed object was displayed.
We were interested in avoiding a strictly
hierarchical filing system (Figure 6). We want-
ed to free users from having to decide the cor-
rect place to file a document and then the
converse problem of trying to find where the
document was filed. The upper area of our
document browser contained various attribut-
es that could be selected to narrow the choice
of documents. As attributes were selected,
documents with those attributes were dis-
played in the lower area. In this model, docu-
ments could be quickly located by type of
document, keyword, author, and so on. 
Our paper prototype seemed to work well
for selecting a document but became awkward
when trying to perform other operations such
as moving, copying, or creating something
Figure 6  
Desktop Manager—
The Document Browser
(December 1980) 
49
i n t e r a c t i o n s . . . j a n u a r y  +  f e b r u a r y  1 9 9 7
a r t i c l e
“ W h a t  y o u  s e e  i s  A L L  y o u  g e t ”
— H a r v e y  L e h t m a n
A
pple’s Lisa was an ambitious commercial product developed and intro-
duced at a time when the best-selling personal computers had crude dot
matrix character generation text (based on 5x7 or 7x9 character matrices
generally presented on green phosphor displays limited to 40 or 80 columns of
text.) Upon introduction in 1983, the Lisa offered a high resolution bit-mapped
image with an array of character fonts and graphic images impossible to produce
on the Apple II’s and III’s, IBM PC’s (introduced in 1981), Commodore
64’s, and Atari machines of the day.
At a time when personal computer user interfaces were still orient-
ed to hobbyists, the Lisa user interface tried to present a style of
interaction closer to the language of a general office user with little
or no specialized computer experience. The WYSIWYG and desktop
metaphor interface was a significant innovation on the Lisa. Follow-
ing and enhancing on work previously developed at SRI International,
Xerox PARC and other research laboratories, and taking advantage of
new hardware technologies, these interface innovations consciously
attempted to appeal to novice users. The Lisa was the first attempt to
make such a system commercially available.
However, in doing so Apple ironically ran counter to the philosophy
and system development of the originator of many of the innova-
tions the Lisa commercialized. Doug Engelbart and his team at SRI
International, the Augmentation Research Center (ARC), were respon-
sible for the development of the mouse, windowed display editors,
linked hypertext, and innovations in computer typesetting, and net-
working. The group was also among the initial nodes on the ARPANET
in 1969 and served for many years as the Network Information Center.
In many ways, the most superficial of Doug’s innovations contained in the
oNLine System (NLS, later known as Augment) made their way into the systems
from Xerox PARC (which included several former members of the ARC team): these
included the mouse and windowed displays. Rather than concerning itself with
the needs of the novice user, NLS was interested in creating a system that could
satisfy the needs of sophisticated individual knowledge workers and experienced
teams of knowledge workers while still being accessible to novices through a con-
sistent interface that let useful work be done in a short period of time. The goal
was the “augmentation” of the intellect of individuals and teams.
Lisa’s (and PARC’s) attempted literal mimicking of the desktop and what
appeared on the printed page were technical marvels, but largely ignored the
power NLS offered for analyzing, filtering, and formatting documents made up of
information anywhere in a network of knowledge. The system’s facilities, avail-
able in the late 1960’s, for individual and team customization of functionality and
creation of linked recorded dialogs, have only recently resurfaced in systems like
the World Wide Web.
WYSIWYG could very easily become WYSIAYG: “What you see is ALL you get.”
The WYSIWYG and desktop metaphor fall apart as the domain of large data stor-
age and shared file servers. Doug’s NLS suggested a world in which the computer’s
power let users go beyond what they could do in the physical world.
Harvey Lehtman is affiliated
with the Institute of the
Future, a nonprofit applied
research and consulting firm.
Harvey is a former member of
Doug Engelbart’s Augmenta-
tion Research Center and for-
mer employee of Apple
Computer Inc.
Harvey G. Lehtman
Institute for the Future
2744 Sand Hill Road
Menlo Park, Ca 94025-7020 USA
+1-415-854-6322
Fax: +1-415-854-7850
lehtman@netcom.com
I
I
50
i n t e r a c t i o n s . . . j a n u a r y  +  f e b r u a r y  1 9 9 7
new. It also lacked a certain approachability.
Its operation was not at all obvious when first
encountered, and other team members felt
that it was too abstract for office users.
Twenty Questions Filer
In an attempt to make the system easier for the
first-time user we tried a hierarchical browser
with more prompting, which became known as
the “Twenty Questions Filer” (Figure 7). Select-
ing Documents from the Desktop menu
brought up a dialog window that prompted the
user to select a disk, folder, and document, with
statements such as “Choose a document from
the list below.” After the user made a selection,
an Action menu would appear with items such
as Pull, Refile, Cross-file, and Discard. Select-
ing one of these menu items would apply the
action to the selected document. This system
was fast and a bit easier to understand than the
previous version but still somewhat abstract.
We were running out of time on the project
schedule and decided that despite its problems
this was to be our filing interface.
The system was fairly efficient because the
filing dialogue could be brought
up easily from a menu, and only
a few mouse clicks were needed.
However, after many months of imple-
mentation, and some early user testing, a few of
us were not satisfied with the interface. Some
users were confused about the relationship of
the selections in the upper area to the list below.
They did not always notice the appearance of
the Action menu after a selection was made and
would not know how to continue from there.
The constant prompting made users feel that
they were playing a game of Twenty Questions.
It also failed to achieve one of Lisa’s major
goals—it wasn’t fun!
“Son of Dataland”
In a clandestine effort, some of us decided to fur-
ther investigate the problem on our own and
asked Bill Atkinson, who defined many aspects
of the global human interface, for help. Bill
recalled a trip to the M.I.T. Media Lab in which
he saw a futuristic data navigation system called
the “Spatial Data Management System” [7]. In
this system, a person sat in a chair with two hand
controls and faced a large screen, referred to as
Dataland. The controls allowed you to “fly” over
some data space projected on a large screen in
front of you, in this case the Boston area, and
then to zoom in to very fine levels of detail, or
zoom out to see a huge geographical area.
Bill adapted this idea to the filing problem by
creating an enormous virtual desktop, perhaps a
mile square, and then providing methods for
very quickly moving around and zooming in or
out. Documents were represented as small icons
that could be organized spatially, with related
Figure 7  
The Twenty Questions
Filer (July 1981)
W
51
i n t e r a c t i o n s . . . j a n u a r y  +  f e b r u a r y  1 9 9 7
documents placed near each other. The idea was
incredibly simple but placed quite a burden on
the user’s memory when the number of docu-
ments became large. It also did not work well
when multiple disks were online, representing
several flat filing spaces.
Office Model
We were drawn to the simplicity of M.I.T.’s
Dataland but thought that we needed some-
thing more familiar to the office worker. Our
newly formed Macintosh group was also
experimenting with icons for its Finder. Slow-
a r t i c l e
’79
’80
’81
’82
’83
’84
MRD—Marketing Requirements Document
ERS—Engineering Requirements Specification
5/79 Jef Raskin proposes project
code named Macintosh
9/79 Macintosh Project Begins
1/79 First visit to Xerox Parc
11/80 National Computer Conference 
(original proposed introduction date)
1/81 Steve Jobs joins Macintosh Group
8/81 IBM PC Announced
10/81 Xerox Star Announced
10/81 User Interface Council Started
3/82 Jef Raskin resigns from Apple
1/84 Macintosh Announced
7/82 First Internal Icon Filer Release
1/83 Lisa Announced
6/83 Lisa Ships
1/82 “Dialog Filer” Recipes
2/82 First Cut & Paste between applications
3/82 Icon Filer Proposal
9/80 Lisa User Interface Standards Published
11/80 Dan & Frank Start at Apple
2/81 Graphics Editor ERS
4/80 Lisa MRD Published
7/80 Larry Tesler Starts at Apple; Personal Apps MRD
8/80 Button Wars
8/79 First Lisa application prototyped on Applle II
10/79 First Lisa hardware with Bit-Sliced processor
2/80 First Lisa hardware with 68000
10/78 Lisa Proposal
Spr ’79 Lisa Project Begins
7/79 Rod starts at Apple
T I M E L I N E
E
A
52
i n t e r a c t i o n s . . . j a n u a r y  +  f e b r u a r y  1 9 9 7
ly, we were migrating back to icons for the
sake of simplicity and approachability. 
While searching the literature for informa-
tion on other iconic systems, we uncovered an
IBM research proposal for a graphical office
system called Pictureworld [8]. In the concept
paper, a large screen presented small icons for
file cabinets, a desk pad, in/out trays, a waste-
basket, and other objects. Touching a file cab-
inet caused a prompting file folder to appear
with a form for specifying search parameters.
After the user filled out the form and pressed
the “Do” button, a list of matches appeared.
Selecting one of these documents caused the
list to go away and the desk pad icon to
become large in the center of the screen with
the full-sized document placed on it. If anoth-
er document was opened, the current docu-
ment was reduced to an icon and was shown
in the “Pending” box on the desk pad. Docu-
ments and other objects were moved by
touching arrows that automatically appeared
on the screen, indicating valid transfer possi-
bilities. The authors of the proposal perhaps
underestimated the power of such an interface
by the interesting statement, “We have not
implemented a Pictureworld system and we
make no claims for it as a potential product.”
At about this time, the Xerox Star [10, 12],
another office system with an iconic interface,
was announced. The Star, however, was an
actual implementation. It had a very large
screen that easily accommodated the icons
and full-sized documents, a luxury we didn’t
have. Their use of icons though, seemed to
give further validity to this approach. 
In considering these models, we created
several mock-ups that presented two levels of
detail to the user. The first view was a look at
the office as a whole. Here you could see the
desk, filing cabinets, wastebasket, and other
office objects. To view a document it was nec-
essary to remove a document icon from the
drawer and place it on the desk. The view
would then change to one looking
down on the desktop with
documents at full size. After exper-
imenting with this model for some
time we realized that having the two different
views (or “world swaps,” as they became
known) was both confusing and inefficient.
Final Desktop Model
Eliminating the dual-view model brought us
very close to the final design. We quickly
implemented a working prototype, which pre-
sented a single desktop on which both small
icons and full-sized documents were kept.
Design discussions with a few others helped to
refine some of the ideas and prompted addi-
tional cute and useful features such as windows
zooming open and closed from their icons. We
were pleased with how easily the remaining
details of the interface fell into place.
Revealing the new interface to the rest of
the team drew mixed reactions. Some were
thrilled with the new look and simplicity, and
others were concerned about the lateness of
the schedule. The new design was subjected to
the same user testing philosophy that had
guided development of the Lisa. It was found
that key areas such as speed of learning, speed
of task completion, level of comprehension,
and error rate were all indistinguishable
between the new iconic design and the Twen-
ty Questions Filer. However, no user preferred
the Twenty Questions design, and some pre-
ferred the iconic Filer because it was more
interesting and fun!
Wayne Rosing, the engineering manager at
the time, gave the go-ahead, and we raced to
catch up with the rest of the Lisa team. After
more than a year of looking for something
highly efficient, we had come full circle, back
to the more approachable, iconic, direct
manipulation interface!
In Retrospect
As we look back at our experiences on the Lisa
project, there are a few points and lessons that
stand out as critical to the success of the user
interface. Foremost is that from the very first
proposal in 1978, the focus was on the user.
This approach affected not only the interface
but also the underlying software and hardware.
A second critical factor was that the interface
was developed through experience, and was not
just some programmer’s idea of what should
work. This experience was gained by extensive
testing on representative users and the imple-
mentation of several applications. The variety
of the applications stressed the interface in
unanticipated ways, highlighting weaknesses in
PERMISSION TO COPY WITHOUT FEE,
ALL OR PART OF THIS MATERIAL IS
GRANTED PROVIDED THAT THE COPIES
ARE NOT MADE OR DISTRIBUTED FOR
DIRECT COMMERCIAL ADVANTAGE,
THE ACM COPYRIGHT NOTICE AND
THE TITLE OF THE PUBLICATION AND
ITS DATE APPEAR, AND NOTICE IS
GIVEN THAT COPYING IS BY PERMIS-
SION OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR COM-
PUTING MACHINERY. TO COPY
OTHERWISE, OR PUBLISH, REQUIRES A
FEE AND/OR SPECIFIC PERMISSION.
©ACM 1072-5520/97/0100 $3.50
53
i n t e r a c t i o n s . . . j a n u a r y  +  f e b r u a r y  1 9 9 7
References
[1[ Card, Stuart K., English,
William K., and Burr, Betty.
Evaluation of mouse, rate-
controlled isometric joy-
stick, step keys, and text
keys for text selection on a
CRT. Ergonomics 21
(1978): 601–613.
[2] English, W.K., Engle-
bart, D.C., and Berman,
M.L. Display-selection
Techniques for Text Manip-
ulation. Transactions on
Human Factors in Electron-
ics, HFE-8, 1, March 5-15,
1967.
[3] Ingalls, Daniel H. H. The Smalltalk-76 Program-
ming System Design and Implementation. Conference
Record of the 5th Annual ACM Symposium on Princi-
ples of Programming Languages, Tucson, Arizona, Janu-
ary 1978.
[4] Lisa Marketing Requirements Document. Internal
company document. Apple Computer, Inc., April 1980.
[5] Lisa User Interface Standards. Internal company
document. Apple Computer, Inc., October 1980.
[6] Morgan, Chris, Lenmons, Phil, and Williams,
Gregg. An interview with Wayne Rosing, Bruce
Daniels, and Larry Tesler. Byte 8,2 (February 1983):
90–114.
[7] Negroponte, Nicholas. Spatial Data Management.
DARPA Order MDA903-77-C-0037, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 1979.
[8] Schild, W., Power, L., and Karnaugh, M. PIC-
TUREWORLD: A Concept for Future Office Systems,
IBM Research Report RC-8384, July 30, 1980.
[9] Schmuker, Kurt J. The Complete Book of Lisa.
Harper & Row, New York, 1984.
[10] Seybold, Jonathan. Xerox’s “Star.” The Seybold
Report 10,16 (April 27, 1982). Seybold Publications,
Inc., Box 644, Media, Pa. 19063.
[11] Seybold, Jonathan. Apple’s Lisa, a personal office
system.” The Seybold Report (Jan. 28 1983). Seybold
Publications, Inc., Box 644, Media, Pa. 19063.
[12] Smith, D.C., Irby, C., Kimball, R., Verplank, B.,
and Harslem, E. Designing the Star user interface. Byte
7, 4 (April 1982): 242–282.
[13] Williams, Gregg. The Lisa computer system.. Byte
8, 2 (February 1983): 33–55.
[14] Moritz, Michael. The Little Kingdom. William
Morrow and Company, Inc., New York, 1984.
a r t i c l e
the original design. Finally, management’s com-
mitment to ease of use in spite of tight sched-
ules, and strong centralized control of the user
interface, encouraged the engineers to make
improvements that worked within the
metaphor.
The iconic desktop taught us something
about the importance of efficiency. Originally
rejected for reasons of inefficiency, we later res-
urrected the iconic desktop to replace the
“more efficient” Twenty Questions design.
Why? Because it grabbed the attention of new
users and enticed them to explore using it. We
believe that by adding direct manipulation to
an attractive graphical representation of the
familiar desktop, the icons and controls shown
on the screen became, in some sense, real and
the interface began to disappear.
We also learned something about the imple-
mentation of metaphors. As a general rule they
should, of course, be implemented as faithfully
as possible; otherwise, the user may be con-
fused when things don’t work as expected.
However there are valid reasons for occasional-
ly breaking out of the metaphor. The physical
limitations of the computer, such as the display
screen’s being smaller than a piece of paper, can
force some changes. Sometimes the computer
removes limitations of the metaphor—a desk
does not “know” what is on it, but because a
computer can keep track of what is on its screen
the Lisa had a menu that listed everything on
the desktop for quick access. No matter what
the reasons, we worked to keep the total num-
ber of differences small because each one bur-
dens the user with another thing to remember.
By combining a clear, concise presentation
and an intuitive, smoothly operating set of con-
trols with a distinctive style, the Lisa and Mac-
intosh user interfaces popularized a new way of
working with computers. (See [6, 9, 11, 13] for
additional viewpoints and details and [12] for
discussion of a similar project.)
In these few pages, we could neither record
and analyze all the important events in the
development of the Lisa interface nor individu-
ally credit all the people that contributed sig-
nificantly to the appearance and operation of
the final interface. We hope we have managed
to convey a sense of the design process and
trade-offs involved. 
