T H E P U R P O S E O F P U B L I C E D U C AT I O N I S N O T T O S E R V E T H E P U B L I C B U T
T O C R E AT E A P U B L I C .
T H O M A S J E F F E R S O N , F O U N D I N G FAT H E R
I N M A N Y S C H O O L S T O D AY, T H E P H R A S E ‘ C O M P U T E R - A I D E D I N S T R U C -
T I O N ’ M E A N S M A K I N G T H E C O M P U T E R T E A C H T H E C H I L D. O N E M I G H T
S AY T H E C O M P U T E R I S B E I N G U S E D T O P R O G R A M T H E C H I L D . I N M Y V I -
S I O N , T H E C H I L D P R O G R A M S T H E C O M P U T E R A N D, I N D O I N G S O , B O T H
A C Q U I R E S A S E N S E O F M A S T E R Y O V E R A P I E C E O F T H E M O S T M O D E R N
A N D P O W E R F U L T E C H N O L O G Y A N D E S TA B L I S H E S A N I N T I M AT E C O N TA C T
W I T H S O M E O F T H E D E E P E S T I D E A S F R O M S C I E N C E , F R O M M AT H E M AT-
I C S , A N D F R O M T H E A R T O F I N T E L L E C T U A L M O D E L B U I L D I N G .
S E Y M O U R PA P E R T, C O M P U T E R S C I E N T I S T
A G O O D E D U C AT I O N A L S Y S T E M . . . S H O U L D P R O V I D E A L L W H O W A N T T O
L E A R N W I T H A C C E S S T O AVA I L A B L E R E S O U R C E S AT A N Y T I M E I N T H E I R
L I V E S ; E M P O W E R A L L W H O W A N T T O S H A R E W H AT T H E Y K N O W T O F I N D
T H O S E W H O W A N T T O L E A R N I T F R O M T H E M ; A N D, F I N A L LY, F U R N I S H A L L
W H O W A N T T O P R E S E N T A N I S S U E T O T H E P U B L I C W I T H T H E O P P O R T U -
N I T Y T O M A K E T H E I R C H A L L E N G E K N O W N .
I VA N I L L I C H , P H I L O S O P H E R
W E L E A R N T O D O S O M E T H I N G B Y D O I N G I T. T H E R E I S N O O T H E R W AY.
J O H N H O LT, FAT H E R O F M O D E R N H O M E S C H O O L I N G
C H R I S A N G E L L I , L E O D E S I M O N E , S H AU N A -
LY N N D U F F Y, R O B G R E G O RY, B A K H T I A R M I K H A K ,
J O H N O T E R I , A L E C R E S N I C K , C H R I S R O G E R S ,
M A R C U S S A N T O S , A D A M S W E E T I N G , L I S A TAT-
T E R S O N , K A R E N W O O D S
T H E S O M E RV I L L E
S T E A M A C A D E M Y
I N N OVAT I O N P L A N
T H E S O M E RV I L L E S T E A M A C A D E M Y
I N N OVAT I O N P L A N N I N G C O M M I T T E E
Drafted by sprout & co.
Copyright © 2013 Chris Angelli, Leo DeSimone, Shaunalynn Duffy, Rob Gregory, Bakhtiar Mikhak, John
Oteri, Alec Resnick, Chris Rogers, Marcus Santos, Adam Sweeting, Lisa Tatterson, Karen Woods
published by the somerville steam academy
innovation planning committee
First printing, November 2013
Contents
Introduction
17
Executive Summary
23
I
What We’ll Learn
Curricular Content
37
Modeling & Representation
37
Computational Immersion
38
STEAM
40
Non-cognitive Skills, Executive Function, & Metacognition
41
Fundamental Fluencies
42
Educational Standards
44
Autonomy Analysis
47
Curricular Forms
49
Curriculum Mapping
49
Species of Time
50
Work Design, Exhibition, & Critique
53
Autonomy Analysis
54
II
Who We’ll Be
Students
59
Target Population
60
Enrollment Outreach
61
6
Enrollment Process
64
Assessment
65
Advancement
66
Matriculation
67
Transcripts & Portfolios
69
Transitional Services
70
Longitudinal Support
71
Growing the SSA
72
Autonomy Analysis
73
Student Evaluation
75
Individual Action Plans
76
Peer Reviews
77
Surveys
77
Portfolios
77
Dimensions of Performance
78
Standardized Testing
79
Longitudinal Analysis
81
Autonomy Analysis
81
Stafﬁng
83
Administration
83
Outreach
84
Hiring & Firing
84
Professional Development
85
Team Teaching
86
Staff Structure
86
Autonomy Analysis
88
Staff Evaluation
91
Individual Action Plans
91
Peer Reviews
92
Surveys
92
Portfolios
92
Dimensions of Performance
93
Longitudinal Analysis
94
Autonomy Analysis
94
7
SHS ⇔SSA Interface
97
Coordinating Structures
97
Financial Relationship
98
Professional Development
99
Deﬁning Good Standing
99
Academic Cross-Registration
100
Extracurricular & Sports Participation
100
Community Partnerships
101
Credit Mapping
101
Transfers
101
Safety, Transportation, & Discipline
102
Autonomy Analysis
102
Community Interface
105
Collaborative Relationships
105
Collaborators
109
Autonomy Analysis
111
III
How We’ll Get It Done
Programmatic Student Supports
115
District Supports
115
Community Supports
117
Low-Income Students
118
English Language Learners
119
Special Education Students
120
Immigrant Families
123
Gender- and Ethnicity-Speciﬁc Supports
123
Autonomy Analysis
124
School Improvement Plan
127
Organizational Priorities
129
Student Attendance
132
Student Discipline and Safety
132
8
Student Promotion, Graduation, and Dropout Rates
132
MCAS & PARCC
132
Progress in Areas of Academic Underperformance
133
Progress Goals Among Subgroups of Students
133
Narrowing the Achievement Gap
133
Operations
135
Financials, Supplies, Services, & Procurement
135
Physical Plant
137
Technology
138
Scheduling
139
Wellness
143
Autonomy Analysis
145
Governance
149
School Authorization
151
School Autonomies
151
Principalship
151
Board of Trustees
152
Project Advisory Boards
152
Autonomy Analysis
152
Open Questions & Concerns
155
IV
The Appendices
Socioeconomics of Somerville Public Schools
161
Demographics of Somerville Public Schools
163
Budget of Somerville Public Schools
165
English Language Learner Support at Somerville High School
166
Special Education Support at Somerville High School
167
9
Free & Reduced Lunch Budgets in SPS
169
SSA Enrollment Outreach Budget
171
Legal Affordances
173
Massachusetts General Law
174
Code of Massachusetts Regulations
186
Exemptions and Variances from 603 CMR
199
Supporting Documents
217
Innovation School Laws & Regulations
241
Innovation School Statute
241
Innovation School Regulations
248
Bibliography
257
List of Figures
1
The Somerville STEAM Academy Innovation Plan Committee
18
2
What’s different about the SSA?
24
3
The SSA’s curriculum mapping process, visualized.
50
4
Species of student time at the SSA
51
5
8th grade time budget
52
6
12th grade time budget
52
7
The enrollment process and boundary conditions for the SSA
60
8
The multi-tiered enrollment outreach process for the SSA
62
9
Varieties and audiences for assessment at the SSA
76
10
Handling the MCAS at the SSA
80
11
An evocative staff time budget at the SSA
86
12
The SSA advisory staff/student structure
87
13
Community integration as a keystone at the SSA
106
14
The basics of the Gini coefﬁcient
133
15
An overview of the SSA’s budget
136
16
The Generation Schools scheduling setup
140
17
An evocative 8th grade time budget
142
18
An evocative 12th grade time budget
142
19
An evocative staff time budget
143
20
Governance structures at the SSA
150
21
Enrollment outreach budget for the SSA’s inaugural year
171
List of Tables
1
Year-over-year improvement goals among student subgroups
133
15
Dedicated to the Somerville of 2020.
Introduction
In January 2010, Governor Patrick signed historic education reform
legislation that gives all students and families greater access to high-
quality schools. The Innovation Schools initiative, a key component
of this legislation, provides educators and other stakeholders in all
districts across the state with the powerful opportunity to create new
“Innovation Schools,” in-district and charter-like schools that will
operate with greater autonomy and ﬂexibility with regard to curricu-
lum, stafﬁng, budget, schedule/calendar, professional development,
and district policies. These public schools will be able to implement
innovative strategies to improve student achievement while keep-
ing school funding within districts. There are currently 47 approved
Innovation Schools across the commonwealth.
This book lays out what we hope will be the plan for the 48th In-
novation School in Massachusetts: the Somerville STEAM Academy.
The design and approval process constitutes seven stages.
1. prospectus drafting & approval: At the very beginning, the
applicant—in this case, sprout & co—drafts a prospectus. After
our initial conversations with the Mayor wherein he encouraged
us to apply, we put together a prospectus broadly outlining what
the problems and opportunities that a new school might be able
to address were, and the very broadest strokes of our vision
for the school. You can ﬁnd this prospectus in the Supporting
Documents appendix.
The prospectus had to include, but was not limited to, a descrip-
tion of:
(a) whether the school will be a new school or a conversion of an
existing school;
(b) if the school is a new school, the proposed location of the
school;
(c) if the school is a conversion of an existing school, the school
that is being proposed for conversion;
(d) the external partners, if any, that will be involved in the
school;
(e) the number of students the school is anticipated to serve and
the number of staff expected to be employed at the school;
(f) the overall vision for the school, including improving school
performance and student achievement;
18
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
(g) speciﬁc needs or challenges the school will be designed to
address;
(h) a preliminary assessment of the autonomy and ﬂexibility
under subsection (b) that the school will seek;
(i) why the ﬂexibility described is desirable to carry out the ob-
jectives of the school;
(j) anticipated components of the school’s innovation plan;
(k) a preliminary description of the process that will be used to
involve appropriate stakeholders in the development of the
innovation plan; and
(l) a proposed timetable for development and establishment of
the proposed school.
2. screening committee approval: Within thirty days of re-
ceiving the prospectus, the screening committee decided, on the
basis of a two-thirds vote whether the prospectus: (i) presented
a sound and coherent plan for improving school performance
and student achievement; (ii) supported or enhanced existing
educational efforts in the district; and (iii) reasonably could be
expanded into a comprehensive innovation plan.1 This prospec-
1 You can ﬁnd a copy of the ofﬁcial
acceptance letter in the Supporting
Documents appendix
tus was unanimously approved in the summer of 2012 by the
screening committee, constituting the Superintendent (Tony
Pierantozzi), Chair of the School Committee (Paul Bockelman),
and President of the Somerville Teachers Association (Jackie
Lawrence).
3. convening the innovation plan committee: Within 30
days of screening committee approval, we convened the Inno-
vation Plan Committee. The innovation plan committee had to
include the following individuals but could not have more than
eleven total members:
Figure 1: From left to right,
top to bottom: (row 1) Adam
Sweeting, Marcus Santos,
Karen Woods, Leo DeSimone,
row 2 Rob Gregory, Chris
Angelli, Bakhtiar Mikhak,
Lisa Tatterson, row 3 Chris
Rogers, Shaunalynn Duffy,
John Oteri
introduction
19
(a) the applicant (represented by Shaunalynn Duffy);
(b) the superintendent or a designee (Leo DeSimone, appointed
by Tony Pierantozzi);
(c) a school committee member or a designee (Adam Sweeting);
(d) a parent who has one or more children enrolled in the district
(Lisa Tatterson);
(e) a principal employed by the district (John Oteri); and
(f) two teachers employed by the district—one of whom is se-
lected from nominees submitted by the local teacher’s union
(Karen Woods, with Chris Angelli representing the Somerville
Teachers Association)
The purpose of the innovation plan committee is to: (i) de-
velop the innovation plan; (ii) assure that appropriate stakehold-
ers are represented in the development of the proposed Innova-
tion School; and (iii) provide meaningful opportunities for the
stakeholders to contribute to the development of the school.
4. drafting the innovation plan: The purpose of the innova-
tion plan is to comprehensively articulate the areas of autonomy
and ﬂexibility that the proposed school will use. The Innovation
Plan Committee (IPC) met an average of bi-weekly beginning in
mid-October 2012.2
2 Meetings were convened on: 2012:
16 October, 23 October, 15 November,
4 December, 18 December; 2013: 29
January, 9 April, 22 April, 29 April, 2
May, 7 May, 8 August, 14 August, 6
September, 16 September, 4 November.
These group meetings were in addition
to over three hundred meetings be-
tween individual committee members
and dozens of one-on-one meetings
between committee members and staff,
residents, and district employees.
The innovation plan must include, but is not limited to:
(a) a curriculum plan, which includes a detailed description of
the curriculum and related programs for the proposed school
and how the curriculum is expected to improve school perfor-
mance and student achievement;
(b) a budget plan, which includes a detailed description of how
funds will be used differently in the proposed school to sup-
port school performance and student achievement;
(c) a school schedule plan, which includes a detailed description
of the ways, if any, the program or calendar of the proposed
school will be enhanced or expanded;
(d) a stafﬁng plan, which includes a detailed description of how
the school principal, administrators, faculty and staff will
be recruited, employed, evaluated and compensated in the
proposed school and any proposed waivers or modiﬁcations
of collective bargaining agreements;
(e) a policy and procedures plan, which includes a detailed de-
scription of the unique operational policies and procedures to
be used by the proposed school and how the procedures will
support school performance and student achievement; and
(f) a professional development plan, which includes a detailed
description of how the school and other partners will provide
high-quality professional development to its administrators,
teachers and staff.
20
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
In order to assess the proposed school across multiple mea-
sures of school performance and student success, the innova-
tion plan must also include measurable annual goals includ-
ing, but not limited to, the following:
i. student attendance;
ii. student safety and discipline;
iii. student promotion and graduation and dropout rates;
iv. student achievement on the MCAS;
v. progress in areas of academic underperformance;
vi. progress among subgroups of students, including low-
income students as deﬁned by Chapter 70, limited English-
proﬁcient students and students receiving special educa-
tion; and
vii. reduction of achievement gaps among different groups of
students.
A majority of the members of the innovation plan committee
had to approve the innovation plan in order to proceed.
5. adjusting the collective bargaining agreement: After
the Innovation Plan was approved by the Innovation Plan Com-
mittee, the applicant, local union president, and superintendent
are required to negotiate waivers or modiﬁcations to the appli-
cable collective bargaining agreement that are necessary for the
school to implement the innovation plan. Notably, this process
is not a referendum on the plan overall, but rather speciﬁcally
limited to working conditions.
If the negotiations have not resulted in an agreement within
40 days, any of the parties can petition the Division of Labor Re-
lations for the selection of an arbitrator. The Division will select
an arbitrator within 3 days of the petition from a list submit-
ted by the parties, who will conduct a hearing within 14 days
of the arbitrator’s selection. Within 14 days of the close of the
hearing, the arbitrator will submit a decision which will be ﬁnal
and binding for all parties. The sole concern of the arbitrator is
the extent to which the revisions or exemptions requested are
consistent with the Innovation Plan as drafted.
6. executive office of education exemptions: If an innova-
tion plan includes provisions that conﬂict with state laws or reg-
ulations governing other public schools, they must be approved
by the Commissioner of Elementary and Secondary Education.
If an innovation plan includes proposed waivers to Innovation
Schools regulations that were adopted in July 2010, they must be
approved by the Board of Elementary and Secondary Education.
If an innovation plan committee determines that Commissioner
approval or a waiver under the respective regulations may be
necessary in order to effectively implement an innovation plan,
the innovation plan committee should submit the following
documents listed below to the Department’s Ofﬁce of School Re-
introduction
21
design, with a copy to the district’s superintendent and school
committee:
• For Commissioner approval under 603 CMR 48.03(3), a letter
listing the provisions contained in the innovation plan that
may conﬂict with state law governing other public schools;
a speciﬁc legal citation for each state law or regulation that
poses a conﬂict and therefore requires Commissioner ap-
proval; and a detailed explanation for why approval is neces-
sary to advance the mission or educational programs of the
innovation school.
• For waiver requests under 603 CMR 48.03(4), a letter listing
the provisions in 603 CMR 48.00 that require a waiver, and a
detailed explanation of why each waiver is necessary to ad-
vance the mission or educational programs of the innovation
school.
• For all requests, the most recent draft of the proposed innova-
tion plan.
7. school committee approval: After receiving an innovation
plan, the school committee is required to hold at least one public
hearing. After the hearing, but not later than sixty days after
the receipt of the innovation plan, the school committee votes
to authorize the Innovation School for a period of up to ﬁve
years. Approval of the majority of the school committee as fully
constituted is required to authorize an Innovation School.
If school committee approval is not obtained, the School Com-
mittee should provide guidance as to the changes needed, and
an innovation plan committee may revise the innovation plan
and resubmit, re-negotiating waivers to the collective bargaining
agreement as applicable.
After this plan’s approval, we’ll begin the enrollment out-
reach process, which you can read more about in Enrollment Out-
reach.
Executive Summary
via MGL.I.XII.C71.§92: . . . Upon the
formation of the innovation plan com-
mittee in subsection (i), the committee
shall develop the innovation plan for the
proposed Innovation School. The purpose
of the innovation plan shall be to compre-
hensively articulate the areas of autonomy
and ﬂexibility under subsection (ii) that
the proposed school will use. . . .
“
In my life as an architect, I ﬁnd that the single thing which inhibits
young professionals, new students most severely, is their acceptance
of standards that are too low. If I ask a student whether her design is
as good as Chartres [the ﬁnest Gothic cathedral in France], she often
smiles tolerantly at me as if to say, “Of course not, that isn’t what I
am trying to do . . . I could never do that.”
Then, I express my disagreement, and tell her: “That standard must
be our standard. If you are going to be a builder, no other standard
is worthwhile. That is what I expect of myself in my own buildings,
and it is what I expect of my students.” Gradually, I show the stu-
dents that they have a right to ask this of themselves, and must ask
this of themselves. Once that level of standard is in their minds, they
will be able to ﬁgure out, for themselves, how to do better, how to
make something that is as profound as that.
— Christopher Alexander, architect and author of A Pattern Language
The Somerville STEAM3 Academy (SSA) will be a vocational lab
3 ≡Science, Technology, Engineering,
Arts, and Mathematics
school opening in Fall 2015 emphasizing computational immersion
and targeting struggling students offering an intimate, small school
setting where learners will explore project-based curricula integrat-
ing the arts and sciences. The SSA will feature tight community
integration via internships and mentorships and will rely on tie-in
volunteer effort throughout Somerville.
No one school can serve every student equally well. But that is
exactly the charge of public education. And one of the most ex-
citing aspects of the mission of public education is to do so in a
way that creates a public we are proud of, one which brings peo-
ple from every ethnicity and economic station and race and creed
together for a collective experience which nurtures our future. So,
how do we reconcile this tension between egalitarianism and indi-
vidualization? Just as we do with political parties or religions: by
ensuring that there is a diversity of options to meet people’s needs
and the freedom to choose. But that choice mustn’t be just for the
wealthy or white or academically strong, just as it mustn’t just be
for the poor or black or academically weak. Apartheid schooling—
even with the best of intentions—is a deeply anti-American project.
Which means that we are left with the question: what does it mean
to provide for a diversity of options for families in Somerville equi-
tably and excellently?
24
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
WHO
WHEN
WHY
WHAT
HOW
SSA
integrate struggling learners
leverage volunteers
computational 
immersion, 
project-based 
STEAM curricula
year-round, 
10-5P, no outside 
homework
intimate, small 
school 
experience
a lab school to 
incubate new 
approaches for 
struggling 
students
Figure 2: The ﬁrst four months
of the Innovation Plan’s devel-
opment were devoted to talk-
ing to parents, teachers, and
administrators to discover—if
there was going to be a new
school in Somerville—what
problems and opportunities
should it address? How could
a new school complement ex-
isting options? This is what
we came up with: a vocational
community lab school opening
emphasizing computational
immersion and targeting strug-
gling students offering an
intimate, small school setting
where learners will explore
project-based curricula inte-
grating the arts and sciences.
Overall, the SSA grows from a single hypothesis: there are fam-
ilies in Somerville—spanning demographic and socioeconomic
spectra—whose children would beneﬁt from a small, intimate
setting where project-based approaches open up traditionally
academic subjects to more vocational and artistic approaches. In
particular, we think technology—in concert with Somerville’s rich
community of creative people and organizations—can stand to
reach and uniquely equip those for whom traditional contexts have
not proven a good ﬁt.
Embracing that opportunity, the mission of the SSA is to trans-
form students into independent investigators, cultivating learners’
scientiﬁc curiosity and the hands-on capacity needed to follow
through on that curiosity. The SSA will speciﬁcally target those stu-
dents who have struggled with existing options or found them lacking
who feel they may beneﬁt from an intimate, small school setting
where learners deeply integrate the arts and sciences through com-
putational, project-based curricula.
The SSA is neither remediation nor enrichment—the principles un-
derlying its design and operation cut across lines of race and class
and academic background. That said, our moral and civic responsi-
bility as a public school demands we reduce the achievement gap.
After all, it is exactly public education’s role in ensuring political,
social, and economic mobility that has ensured it such a central
place in the American project. To narrow that gap requires we have
executive summary
25
some understanding of how current options are falling short.
For some students, this means providing more support in tra-
ditional contexts. For other students, improving their experience
requires something new, something different. This is not a critique
of existing options in Somerville; it is just an acknowledgment that
no one school can serve every student equally well. This means that
all else held equal, a diversity of options is a good thing for Somerville stu-
dents. A big school cannot offer a small school experience. A school
day with seven periods cannot accommodate whole categories of
project-based experiences. Conversely, a small school cannot offer
the same breadth of activities within its walls as a big school. And
a small school has a distinctly different feel and camaraderie than a
big school.
We’ve decided as a society that one size cannot ﬁt all. So in
considering the design of a new school in Somerville, where does
that leave us?
Design Constraints
Because similar rhetoric could be used to justify some of the worst
examples of “starting a private school with public funds” which has
characterized many charter schools [and dominated the opposition
to past proposals for new schools in Somerville], let’s unpack “all
else held equal.” We think it is essential the SSA avoid detracting
from the experience of other Somerville students and staff. Ulti-
mately, even though it it essential to try new things as part of our
commitment to doing right by students, it’s also essential to do so
thoughtfully and responsibly, both with regards to minimizing the
risk to the students involved and mitigating the impact on SPS at
large. Through all our conversations with parents, teachers, and
school administrators, we’ve adopted four design constraints for
the SSA to address these concerns:
Complement—don’t compete with—existing options
To do things well,
the SSA must focus on doing as few things as possible. That means
that wherever possible, the SSA will turn to community partners
with relevant expertise to provide everything from varsity sports
via Somerville High School to healthy, affordable food via local
restaurants.
Focus on historically struggling students
Our focus on complement-
ing existing resources is one reason—in addition to many moral
and civic—we must focus on those students who have not thrived
with existing options. For the SSA, that means one half the stu-
dents enrolled in the SSA each year will have been identiﬁed as
‘struggling’—either by their status in the bottom 50% of MCAS
score and/or attendance rates.4 The remaining half of each year’s
4 If neither of these data are avail-
able for whatever reason (e.g. they
are new to the district or otherwise
undocumented, letters of recommen-
dation from a teacher or parent to that
effect can also identify a student as
struggling.
enrollment will match the socioeconomic and demographic makeup
of Somerville High School, and gender parity will be ensured
26
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
across the entire enrollment. 5
5 Why not focus 100% enrollment
on students who have struggled
with existing options? For many
reasons, but the two biggest are
simple: 1) public education at its best
is a democratic, egalitarian institution
that serves everyone. Creating schools
only for struggling students, even if it
improves test scores, leads to apartheid
schooling. Even if instituted with the
best of intentions (and to academic
beneﬁt!), functional segregation is
ultimately hurtful to the community. If
we believe that Somerville’s diversity
is a strength, that diversity should be
reﬂected in the classroom and in the
streets. 2) It is easy to assume that
the success of students is the result
of what a school does to them. The
reality is more complex, and among
the strongest determinants of students’
experience will be their peers. And
if you’re going to be asking students
to reform their image of themselves
as “not good at school” you can’t
make them attend a school ﬁghting
a reputation as the school for “dumb
kids.”
Start small, grow slowly
As a new model (albeit combining a va-
riety of proven approaches), the SSA must start small and grow
slowly. The SSA will feature an intimate, small school setting pro-
viding individualized attention. But at nearly any size, a school is
a complex undertaking. Complex systems which work invariably
evolved from a simple system which worked. Designing a complex
system from scratch never works, and worse, it cannot be patched
up and made to work. Furthermore, starting small and growing
slowly minimizes any disruption to the rest of SPS (which is espe-
cially important, given how closely the SSA would like to integrate
with SPS). Combined with the fact that we are trying something
new, we think this means that we should start as small as possible
and grow as slowly as possible. Two constraints limit this:
• the ﬁnancial viability of a small school (we couldn’t set up a
school with the per capita allocation of ten students)
• and the social viability of a small cohort (if your entire eighth
grade were ten students, there would be some cases where no
matter how good your program design, there simply wasn’t
enough social room to offer a good experience)
Taken together, these deﬁne a minimum of thirty students to start,
and a growth rate in the neighborhood of three dozen students per
year.6
6 Mather, D. and B. Hanley (1999). Co-
hort grouping and preservice teacher
education: Effects on pedagogical
development. Canadian Journal of Ed-
ucation/Revue canadienne de l’education,
235–250
Clearly deﬁne results and commit to consequences for failure
Trying
something new can be valuable. But when you’re talking about
the lives of Somerville students, that novelty should come with
measurable results. It is easy to talk about the a priori virtues of
project-based, computationally enabled curricula; but ultimately,
the SSA’s purpose is civic and political. Right now, students who
do not succeed with existing options are statistically sentenced
to enter the underclass, recapitulating the achievement gaps with
which our whole society struggles. Escaping this requires a focus
on measurable results. We will be designing a system to collect lon-
gitudinal data on everything from MCAS scores to starting salary
to college GPA and concentration, but the immediate metrics which
will deﬁne the School Committee’s oversight are the SSA’s success
in hitting its goals for: 1) MCAS7 student growth percentile perfor-
7 and later PARCC
mance, 2) socioeconomic and demographic equity in enrollment,
and 3) [in]equality in student performance within the SSA.
Contributing Models
Developing new things is hard. It is especially hard in education.
New things require experimentation, and experimenting with peo-
ple’s futures is not what public education is for. The SSA is new,
executive summary
27
but it is a hybrid approach. We’ve spent the last year working full
time to bring together a variety of proven models in Somerville’s
unique context. Combined with the SSA’s commitment to start-
ing small, remaining nimble, and growing slowly, we’re conﬁdent
that—especially since the SSA is focused on students who’ve strug-
gled with traditional contexts—the SSA will be a wholly positive
development for Somerville students.
Many other points of inspiration are elaborated on in the re-
mainder of the Innovation Plan, but there are ﬁve, central models
we’re combining as the basis of the SSA. But these models are not
simply best practices. They’ve been selected to match the unique
challenges and opportunities posed by Somerville’s context and the
SSA’s speciﬁc focus on working with folks who have struggled with
traditional options:
• The schedule and integrated staff positions of Generation Schools
make it possible to provide for a schedule better matched to
teens’ biology and more ﬂexibly accommodate the challenges
outside of the classroom that often dominate student perfor-
mance. The year-round setup helps address issues like summer
learning loss while providing for time to set up new support
structures which typically are impossible to ﬁt into a traditional
schoolday.
• The academic case management and tight community integration
of Harlem Children’s Zone ensures that the wraparound ser-
vices and attention required to make urban education work
reinforce, rather than compete with, the academic goals of public
schooling. Many of the reasons that students struggle sit outside
the classroom. And given Somerville’s proximity to incredi-
ble human and institutional resources, this community-driven
approach to providing deep support is uniquely possible in
Somerville.
• The personalization of Big Picture Learning means staff will be
free to focus on the affective, not just the cognitive, aspects of
student learning and engagement. Targeting individual students’
interests and background is especially important for students
who have historically been turned off from academic work, and
tying work to those interests is very hard for staff unless you
give them the time and curricular autonomy to do so. For those
students who would struggle with larger school contexts, this
personalization is key to their success.
• The project-based approach of High Tech High has been repeat-
edly shown not only to deepen engagement among struggling
students, but to develop an increasingly essential set of metacog-
nitive and executive function skills across all levels of academic
aptitude. And given the tremendous diversity of companies,
artists, and professionals in Somerville and greater Boston, the
28
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
possibilities for even deeper, internship and co-op based ap-
proaches is very exciting.
• The emphasis on autonomy and high ﬁdelity assessment of institu-
tions like Hampshire College takes what can be an extraordi-
narily broad and diverse set of opportunities and experiences
and effectively packages it up not only for use in traditional aca-
demic contexts (e.g. transcripts), but offers levels of subtlety and
nuance in feedback that can be essential for students for whom
a straight-up ‘C’ grade has been useless—or worse, actively
distracting—in the past. Somerville’s already been pioneering
the e-portfolio program and approach; this extends and builds
on the best strengths of that approach.
Enrollment
Fundamentally, the creation of the SSA is meant to improve the
lives and prospects of Somerville students. That means its design
must begin with the question of who those students are and why
existing options haven’t worked as well as we’d hope for them.
50% of the SSA’s enrollment will be students who have been
identiﬁed as having struggled with existing options. For the SSA,
“struggling” will mean that students will either have scored in
the bottom 50% on MCAS in ﬁfth grade or have found themselves
in the bottom 50% of attendance rate in the three years prior to
their enrollment. If neither of these data are available, a parent and
teacher recommendation elaborating the students struggles will
substitute.
The remaining 50% of the SSA’s enrollment will match the so-
cioeconomic and demographic proﬁle of Somerville High School
(backed out from a combination of Department of Education, Cen-
sus, and City data).8 Gender parity will be ensured across the en-
8 In particular, the socioeconomic pro-
ﬁle of Somerville High School will be
much higher resolution than simply
free- or reduced-lunch. American
Community Survey data allows us to
match the proﬁle down to quarter-
multiples of the poverty line, de-
termined by household income per
capita.
tire cohort, and a diagnostic academic examination will be required
for admission to provide data enabling placement and data-driven
guarantees that the SSA is not creaming high-performing students.
The examination does not penalize students for low scores, it is
meant to help us meet our equity commitment and provide higher
resolution data about the SSA’s performance.
Our enrollment outreach plan embodies this commitment to gen-
erate broad and diverse enough interest to meet our equity goals.
We’ve raised $100,0009 to cover the planning and implementation
9 with a commitment of up to $300,000
if needed.
of the enrollment outreach process in the year before opening (after
opening, the enrollment outreach will continue, but will be funded
from the SSA’s allocation).
1. (february 2014–may 2014) program development and planning,
wherein SSA staff are developing the outreach plan, materials,
setting up after school and in-school connections and beginning
marketing.
executive summary
29
2. (march 2014–january 2015) community programming, wherein
the SSA offers free after- and in-school programming at local
middle schools, as well as mini-camps during school vacations
and a full-ﬂedged summer camp.
3. (january 2015–may 2015) targeted outreach, wherein if during
the ﬁrst three months of the community programming phase we
do not generate sufﬁciently broad or diverse interest to meet our
equity commitments, we begin targeting speciﬁc families at the
District’s recommendation for outreach
4. (may 2015) If by May 2015 we still have not generated sufﬁ-
ciently broad or diverse interest, we will ask the School Commit-
tee for permission to perform an opt-out lottery—a phase we plan
to never arrive at—wherein we select middle school students by
past academic performance, socioeconomic status, and demo-
graphic to ﬁll any remaining gap between our registered interest
and our equity commitment (up until this point, enrollment will
be opt-in).10
10 We are ambivalent about the opt-out
lottery because on the one-hand, it’s
a classic countermeasure to mitigate
the inevitable selection effects in
traditional lotteries. But on the other,
if we aren’t able to generate sufﬁcient
interest from families, we think that
this should push us to step back and
reconsider the claim that there are
students who would beneﬁt from
this. Of course, there are many other
factors at play—e.g. the ﬁdelity and
reach of the outreach efforts—which
is why we’ve decided to leave it as
a gametime decision to be overseen
by the School Committee. At that
time, the SSA will present a case for
why—despite its failure to generate
interest—we should proceed with an
opt-out lottery to bridge the outreach
gap.
In addition to outreach, this year-round enrollment process will
double as a testbed where the SSA can prototype and test curricula
and vet potential hires, interns, and community volunteers.
Curriculum
The SSA’s curricular innovations are what drive the other design
elements and autonomies in the Innovation Plan. The basic premise
behind the SSA is that computational thinking opens up novel,
project-based, vocational, and artistic approaches to traditionally
academic disciplines. “STEAM” is the closest moniker we have for
this new angle.
We’ve chosen our focus on transitioning folks from students to
independent investigators carefully. You can’t just dump someone
into complete autonomy and expect them to thrive. Scaffolding that
transition involves slowly growing and coaching students’ ability to
manage their time, deal with uncertainty, and master tools basic to
future projects. This is reﬂected in our breakdown of SSA time into
seminars, studio time, and intensive workshops. Seminars most resemble
traditional classes, but rather than being organized around a disci-
pline (e.g. ‘math class’) they’ll be organized around big ideas which
cut across disciplines, lending themselves to the interdisciplinary
projects characterized by STEAM. Studio time will be facilitated time
focused on developing and completing projects. Intensive workshops
will be one or two week workshops where students are focused
entirely on the topic of the workshop, all day each day. These will
be reserved for picking up new toolsets or basic skills in which a
minimum ﬂuency is required for students to be able to productively
tinker—e.g. programming or web development or video editing
or. . .
30
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
But to make this dramatically different approach viable, we
must reconcile it with standards. This is what the SSA’s curricular
mapping process will accomplish. Each student will have an indi-
vidualized record mapping pieces of various projects they complete
and seminars they participate in back to the Common Core. This
will both serve as the basis for generating documentation like tran-
scripts and as an ongoing-but-not-omnipresent guide to help staff
select appropriate projects and opportunities for students through-
out their time with the SSA.
Overall, the SSA will have complete curricular autonomy. Staff
teams will have ﬁnal authority in making curricular decisions for
their cohort. Though the principal and Board of Trustees will be
able to submit recommendations or offer guidelines, the admin-
istration’s primary curricular responsibilities will be twofold:: on
the front end, run defense and procure resources to enable staff to
develop and implement curricula, and on the back end, ensure the
availability of time and outside expertise to formalize and docu-
ment successful curricula.
These curricular differences manifest most immediately in the
SSA’s need for a different approach to stafﬁng, one focused on fa-
cilitation, project management, and the type of interdisciplinary
integration which will characterize students’ transition from work-
shop to seminar to open ended studio work.
Stafﬁng
The stafﬁng structure and policies of the SSA are driven by a
twofold mandate:
• develop ways of making things more learnable (as opposed to
teaching them more effectively).11 This entails active research
11 via Papert’s “Constructionism
vs. Instructionism”—“All my work
is focused on helping children learn,
not on just teaching. Now I’ve coined
a phrase for this: Constructionism
and Instructionism are names for two
approaches to educational innovation.
Instructionism is the theory that says,
‘To get better education, we must
improve instruction. And if we’re
going to use computers, we’ll make
the computers do the instruction.’
And that leads into the whole idea of
computer-aided instruction.
Well, teaching is important, but
learning is much more important.
And Constructionism means ‘Giving
children good things to do so that
they can learn by doing much better
than they could before.’ Now, I think
that the new technologies are very,
very rich in providing new things for
children to do so that they can learn
mathematics as part of something
real.”
developing new tools and curricula, exploring new subject do-
mains, and creating new ways of representing old skills and
ideas to create activities which are focused less on communica-
tion and more on students’ engagement with projects and tools.
• nurture people’s growth from students (i.e. largely passive re-
ceivers of information) into independent investigators (i.e. largely
independent askers-and-answerers of questions, posers-and-
solvers of problems). This entails working closely with SSA
students, taking responsibility for the development of the whole
person and not focusing on a single discipline.
Taken together, these objectives inspired our focus on mentorship-
over-instruction, our insistence on staff-as-practitioner, and our
small cohort model.
Mentorship-over-instruction
The focus of the SSA is helping stu-
dents grow into independent investigators. This is not a change that
can be effected through a simple act of communication. That is a
change that involves trust and guidance and deep personalization.
executive summary
31
Combined with the SSA’s project-based pedagogy, this means that
staff will more often be acting as mentors or coaches, facilitating
seminars and suggesting project prompts and helping people to
manage motivation and time than instructors standing up, lecturing
a class.
Staff-as-practitioner
Staff must have a natural authority to act as
effective mentors. Combined with the fact that staff will be con-
stantly rifﬁng on student projects and designing new curricula, it is
essential that staff be practitioners of their domain—e.g. that in some
sense, a staff member whose focus is mathematics be a practicing
mathematician. This does not mean that they need to publish arti-
cles in the American Mathematical Monthly, but it means that they
should have a live interest in math, independent of the teaching of
math.
Small Cohort Model
Every student at the SSA will be part of small
(∼36 person) cohort, similar in some ways to the ‘advisories’ you
see at schools like High Tech High. Each advisory is managed by a
team of three SSA staff. These staff are entirely responsible for the
experiences of their thirty-odd students. In addition to the domain
expertise of each staff member, each will have a unique role:
• The social worker will take responsibility for students’ physical,
social, and emotional well-being. Whether that’s knowing that
a given student is struggling with food security issues at home,
knowing that today is their birthday, or knowing they’re recently
excited about medicine because of the TV show House, this staff
member is responsible for making sure the non-academic reali-
ties of a student are known and actively incorporated into their
SSA experience.
• The curriculum developer will take responsibility for brainstorm-
ing and developing the projects and seminars which will form
the backbone of students’ academic experiences at the SSA. The
curriculum developer will also be in charge of working with the
project manager to coordinate the curriculum mapping process
for each student.
• The project manager will take responsibility for ensuring that
student work is being completed on time and under-budget
[quite literally—students will have project stipends they manage]
. This will entail regular check-ins with students, and as stu-
dents branch out into community internships and mentorships,
liaisons with local community partners.
Each of these roles is not exclusive to that staff member—e.g. the
social worker need not be the closest conﬁdant of every student.
The point is that there is someone who is taking ownership of those
dimensions of student experience. For some students, in the case
of the social worker, that may simply mean ensuring that a student
32
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
has a group of close friends. Or for the project manager, that their
community partner contact point is checking in regularly. Or for
the curriculum developer, that they’ve found a book well-suited to
self-study they’re working through.
Because these roles and structure are so different from traditional
classroom environments, the SSA’s principal will have complete
autonomy (subject to applicable STA collective bargaining provi-
sions) in determining its stafﬁng policies and procedures, including
deﬁning new positions and licensure requirements (subject to the
statutory limitations and the ﬂexibility created by the exemptions in
the Innovation Plan).
Together this trio will act as a tightly knit team, planning sem-
inars and reﬂecting on the day’s work and attending PD together,
etc. At best, they will grow to be part of students’ extended family—
hosting and attending dinners with families, brainstorming new
community partners the school should reach out, helping to frame
and document student work, etc. The advisory will be the orga-
nizing unit of the SSA, much like a lab at a research university or a
company in the armed forces.
And it is precisely from the gains afforded by the ﬂexibility of
a project based approach and the vertical integration of the small
cohort model that frees up the resources—both time and money—
to make this new approach viable.
Financial Viability
It is easy, in re-imagining a system from scratch, to overspend. A
new program here and a new program there and pretty soon you’re
talking real money. We have gone line-by-line through the District’s
End of Year audit and calculated the share of Somerville’s $16,108
per student allocation12 This comes out to $13,842/student.
12 which accounts for the various,
centralized functions the SSA will not
be replicating and therefore should
not pull funds from—e.g. the costs of
Central Ofﬁce.
The SSA will be completely sustainable on this base budget.
Although the SSA will have new budget ﬂexibilities, the SSA will
allocate as much or more per ELL and SPED student as Somerville
High School, and through a buyback arrangement, every SSA stu-
dent will have access to the full range of Somerville Public School
services. This buyback mechanism was incorporated into the design
to ensure that students would have access to the services the SPS
provides while enabling the SSA to explore approaches to meet-
ing SPED and ELL needs which may not show up on a budget as
line-item SPED or ELL services.
This ﬂexibility is exemplary of the SSA’s complete budget auton-
omy. Throughout the design process, the best practices we’ve seen
and been recommended at every turn—from institutions like High
Tech High to the advice of Tom Hehir, previous Director of Special
Education for the United States and IDEA Author—has emphasized
the importance of the “single bucket” approach the SSA will incor-
porate, leveraging the Innovation School legislation to carve out the
necessary regulatory room.13
13 viz. exemptions from MGL 30§39M,
30B, 149, and 7§44-57
executive summary
33
Taken together, this means that the efﬁciencies and ﬂexibilities
made possible by the SSA’s curricular approach will enable us to si-
multaneously work with students who have struggled in traditional
contexts (who in general, draw more resources from SPS) while
ensuring the same or greater ELL & SPED coverage and all without
pulling resources away from any centralized district functions
This suggests a necessary question: where is this ‘extra’ money
coming from? What are we scaling back or not offering? You can
refer to Financials, Supplies, Services, & Procurement for further
details, but the basic story is that we’ve accomplished this by inte-
grating a variety of staff positions (e.g. guidance) into the academic
case management model while also vertically integrating curricu-
lar functions usually centralized at the District, rather than school,
level (e.g. music and art).
Schedule for School Day & Year
As with money, it is trivially easy to overspend your time in de-
signing a new school. A new program here and there and pretty
soon you need twenty ﬁve hours in a day. The SSA will operate on
a sustainable schedule for teens: Monday through Friday, 10AM–
5PM, with no mandatory work outside those hours. Inspired by the
Generation Schools model, the SSA will feature a mix of foundation
and studio courses alongside intensive workshops in varying pro-
portions over students’ ﬁve years with us. The integration of multi-
ple roles into staff positions means that—like Generation Schools—
over 90% of staff time will be academic, reducing administrative
overhead. The SSA itself will be year-round, with open vacation
policies (subject to both logistical and academic constraints) for
students and teachers, and while the schoolday will span 10AM–
5PM, auxiliary services will be provided before school to make sure
families can comfortably drop off students when their schedules
permit.
As with money, the SSA will have complete scheduling auton-
omy (subject to the applicable provisions of the negotiated collec-
tive bargaining agreement and legal mandates deﬁning a full school
year) which will be the principal’s responsibility to structure; how-
ever, staff within each advisory/advocacy group will have the ﬁnal
authority and control, subject to their cohort’s performance.
Location
The fact that the SSA will look and feel very different means that
that difference will also be reﬂected in the built environment of the
school. 14
14 We’ve budgeted for 75 square feet
per student, which is lower than
the median 125 square feet allotted
per high school student nationwide.
However, there are a variety of factors
that bring this ﬁgure in line, including
but not limited to:
• we will be working with much
more open ﬂoor plans, meaning no
square footage will be devoted to
hallways
• we won’t have a cafeteria or gym-
nasium
• students will often be working
(especially as they get older) in the
community and community spaces
throughout Somerville
We’ve budgeted to ensure that we can afford to rent space within
walking distance of Somerville High School (to ease the logisti-
cal challenge of the tight integration we’re seeking with SHS), and
while we haven’t signed a lease yet, we have identiﬁed ﬁve cur-
34
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
rently available spaces which would suit our needs. Part of our
focus during the planning and implementation year will of course
be securing a space.
Why not be in SHS? Our interest in
both giving students a fresh start and
in avoiding pulling away resources
from SPS. Furthermore, on the advice
of many, many school designers and
operators—including staff at Depart-
ment of Elementary and Secondary
Education—we’ve decided that having
two programs with such different de-
signs, schedules, and general look and
feel co-located will create unnecessary
and distracting friction.
Governance
The SSA is designed to maximize the autonomy of students and
staff. The SSA will have little to no administration beyond a prin-
cipal. The small cohort model will be the organizing unit for the
SSA, and the day-to-day job of the administration will be primarily
twofold: 1) run defense for the time and resources of students and
teachers, and 2) develop the community partnerships and oppor-
tunities which students and staff need to do their respective jobs
well.
Ultimately, the SSA is accountable for exactly three results: 1)
the SSA’s graduation rates and collective MCAS/PARCC perfor-
mance, 2) maintaining equity in enrollment, and 3) family and staff
satisfaction.15
15 These metrics are unpackd in more
detail in our draft School Improvement
Plan
A six person Board of Trustees will act as the interface be-
tween the SSA and the Superintendent and School Committee,
approving metrics and goals set semi-annually. Repeatedly missing
MCAS/PARCC, graduation, or equity goals will mean that the School
Committee will have the option to put the SSA’s authorization to
a School Committee referendum. Repeatedly missing family sat-
isfaction goals will mean that families have the option to put the
principalship to a referendum. Repeatedly missing staff satisfaction
goals will mean that families have the option to put the principal-
ship to a referendum. The Board of Trustees will make the decision
to recommend the principal’s contract be renewed each year. Out-
side of this, the principal, advised and overseen by the Board of
Trustees, will have complete autonomy.
The Future of the SSA
The SSA would begin as an 8–12th grade institution. Each year, the
SSA will only commit to enrolling 8th graders, though other ages
may be considered. Once that setup is stable, it’s likely the SSA
will look to grow into lower grades one year at a time, spending a
few years in each new conﬁguration before going onto another. At
some point, it may even make sense to expand into K–12, but for
the foreseeable future we are focused on 6–12th.
Part I
What We’ll Learn
Curricular Content
“Curriculum” comes from the Latin for “[horse] race course”16,
16 Simpson, J. A., E. S. Weiner, et al.
(1989). The Oxford english dictionary,
Volume 2. Clarendon Press Oxford
evoking a linear track that everyone travels, some more quickly and
some more slowly. The SSA is about breaking apart this metaphor
in favor of deeply divergent experiences. i.e. at the SSA, there is an
emphasis on pushing everyone to end up with unique work and
output. We do not think this is simply a matter of subverting some
of the more pernicious aspects of competition and self-concept17,
17 Chickering, A. W. and L. Reisser
(1993). Education and Identity. The
Jossey-Bass Higher and Adult Education
Series. ERIC
but a basic design principle of rich, individualized learning expe-
riences. This aesthetic must be reconciled with the need to render
students and their work legible18 both to provide the appropriate
18 Scott, J. C. (1998). Seeing like a
state: How certain schemes to improve
the human condition have failed. Yale
University Press
measure of accountability and feedback (after all, the basic justiﬁca-
tion for curricula is often located in the notion that, “Well everyone
should know x. . . ”) and to make possible smooth transitions be-
tween schools and from high school to whatever comes next for a
student.
In discussions about the future of school, the focus is almost
always exclusively either on the what or the how, but rarely both—
despite the fact that they are in fact tightly coupled. That said, this
chapter focuses on the what of the STEAM Academy. What students
learn, what curricula they cover, what ﬂuencies they will develop,
what STEAM really means, and so on.
Modeling & Representation
Nobel Laureate Herbert Simon, in his classic The Sciences of the
Artiﬁcial wrote19
19 Simon, H. A. (1996). The sciences of
the artiﬁcial. MIT press
All mathematics exhibits in its conclusions only what is already
implicit in its premises. . . Hence all mathematical derivation can be
viewed simply as change in representation, making evident what was
previously true but obscure.
This view can be extended to all of problem solving—solving a
problem simply means representing it so as to make the solution
transparent. If the problem solving could actually be organized
in these terms, the issue of representation would indeed become
central. But even if it cannot—if this is too exaggerated a view—a
deeper understanding of how representations are created and how
they contribute to the solution of problems will become an essential
component in the future theory of design.
The SSA takes this and the whole tradition of related claims that
cut across ﬁelds as diverse as artiﬁcial intelligence and mathemat-
38
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
ical physics seriously. Concrete representations—and the process
of articulating, designing, and tweaking them with the aid of com-
putational media—go directly to the constructionist project of sup-
porting learners in becoming skillful model-builders. In Piaget’s
classic experiments exploring children’s conception of wind,20 it
20 Piaget, J. (1930). The child’s conception
of physical causality. Transaction
Publishers
is made clear that when six-year old Mary says that the wind is
caused by trees’ waving their leaves, the essential next step is not
to correct her and bring her into line with the meteorological or-
thodoxy of high and low pressures. Instead, we know that it is
essential to engage learners in active, reﬂective model building and
debugging.21
21 Duckworth, E. R. and E. Duckworth
(1996). " the having of wonderful
ideas" & other essays on teaching &
learning
Because programs and projects at the SSA won’t be built around
traditional subjects per se (e.g. there will be no ‘Algebra class’), this
emphasis on modeling and representation can be incorporated as
a natural response to learners’ work unpacking and controlling
phenomena. Whether it’s building your own cartographic repre-
sentation for projects using geospatial data with d3.js or exploring
all the different representations of a circle (as a surface of con-
stant curvature, as x2 + y2 = r2, as the set of all points equidistant
from some other point,. . . ), the emphasis will be on understanding
through multiple models and uses.
This emphasis ﬁlters up from curricula to the design approach to
many aspects of work at the SSA, ranging from a natural role in the
public exhibitions of projects students will be putting together to
an emphasis on storyboarding as an approach to writing, outlining,
and storytelling to workshops focused on visualization and visual
brainstorming in the tradition of the work of Tufte, Roam, et al. 22
22 Roam, D. (2009). The back of the nap-
kin (expanded edition): Solving problems
and selling ideas with pictures. Penguin;
and Tufte, E. R. and P. Graves-Morris
(1983). The visual display of quantitative
information, Volume 2. Graphics press
Cheshire, CT
Computational Immersion
Throughout the SSA’s design process, we’ve struggled to ﬁnd a
clear way to articulate these visions for people who haven’t spent
time building models and programming computers. We’re not
done yet, but the best we have right now is by way of analogy to
a language immersion school. The classes are not limited to com-
municative competence in said language. Similarly, the SSA is not
limited to “programming computers”—instead, computers are the
medium on which most of the other experiences in the school rely.
This will require new curriculum development and professional
development. In many ways, the SSA will be in uncharted terri-
tory through this focus; it’s been pioneered in higher education and
professional contexts, but has only recently made its way into the
learning sciences community23 and as far as we know, has not been
23 Wing, J. M. (2006). Computational
thinking. Communications of the
ACM 49(3), 33–35
as deeply integrated into a school design as we’re proposing here
(though it has appeared in more programmatic forms in a wide
variety of schools, e.g. High Tech High, Brightworks, et al.)
The SSA’s approach was not possible ﬁfteen years ago. The
technology was too expensive, the resources online too sparse, the
ecosystems of apps too minimal. But in recent years a dramatically
curricular content
39
different approach, ﬁrst envisioned by researchers like Papert24 et
24 Papert, S. (1980b). Mindstorms:
Children, computers, and powerful ideas.
Basic Books, Inc
al. in the 1970s, is now possible. Unlike initiatives like the Academy
for Software Engineering in New York City, the SSA is not look-
ing to create more software engineers or web developers or turn
every student into a computer scientist. Instead, we think that the
prevalence of computational tools enables deeply different ways of
thinking, teaching, and learning, which because of the computer’s
Protean adaptability to so many domains, has enormous potential
to change how learning and teaching happen. Most technology use
focuses on using technology to teach those things we’ve always
taught, but better [or cheaper or faster or more engagingly]. We
think that this dramatically undersells technology’s potential.
The reason the quadratic equation is in so many curricula is
not because we, as a society, have decided that conic sections are
capital-I Important. It’s because it was a domain and type of mathe-
matics that, among other things, was well-suited to the omnipresent
technology of paper, pencil, and blackboard (which is why most
people remember the quadratic equation, not ‘conic sections’). For
the same reason, Monte Carlo methods were typically reserved
for advanced study in mathematics. The availability of a tool like
Mathematica makes it possible to open up traditionally academic
subjects which have historically been reserved for those comfort-
able with and excited by symbolic manipulation. All of a sudden
it becomes possible to authentically expose people to kinemat-
ics through game design or statistics through real-time electoral
analysis or control theory through mechatronic theater. Plenty of
disciplines remain untouched—or at least, we’re not sure what the
value of a computational approach is, yet—Moby Dick is still a great
book. But even the basic nuts and bolts of these other disciplines
(and even the operation of the SSA writ small) are transformed by
omnipresent technology. When every student has a tablet, all of
a sudden reading analytics becomes possible. It becomes feasible
for everyone to be reading something different without incurring
the overheard of trips to the media center or complicated purchase
ordering for staff.
Over the past four years, sprout’s programs have focused on
the curricular and pedagogical issues attendant to combining com-
putation with themes of modeling and representation to build
entry points opening up traditionally academic subjects to more
artistic and vocational angles. We know that it can work and that
it has something compelling to offer many students, especially
some of those who have struggled in traditional environments for
the lack of a hands-on, project-based approach or because of their
self-concept as ‘not a math person’ or ‘not a science person’ or at
the extreme, ‘not a learner.’ In different ways, programs ranging
from computational art25 to mechatronic theater to cybernetics26
25 Abelson, H. and A. A. Di Sessa
(1986). Turtle geometry: The computer as
a medium for exploring mathematics. the
MIT Press
26 Braitenberg, V. (1986). Vehicles:
Experiments in synthetic psychology. MIT
press
to acoustics in musical instrument design have sketched a path for-
ward that we think has something exciting to offer a minimum of
three dozen Somerville students per year.
40
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
STEAM
Partly born of our struggles to articulate computation for a broader
audience, we decided early on that STEAM was the closest we
could come to communicating the naturally multidisciplinary,
technologically enabled emphasis on design and investigation as
opposed to traditional, subject-based classes.
But, STEAM is a buzzword. STEM was a buzzword. And as
STEM became more dilute, people noticed that the world was mov-
ing to acknowledge the importance of creativity and design and
I’ve said this before, but thought it was
worth repeating: It’s in Apple’s DNA
that technology alone is not enough. That
it’s technology married with liberal arts,
married with the humanities, that yields us
the result that makes our hearts sing.
— Steve Jobs . . .
with the publication of books like Richard Florida’s The Creative
Class27 increasing pressure was brought to bear on educational
27 Florida, R. (2002). The creative class.
The rise of the creative class
policymakers and decisionmakers at all levels to embrace the arts.
Hence John Maeda’s STEM to STEAM initiative.28
28 Maeda, J. (2011, October). Stem to
steam
Unfortunately, despite there being a real kernel of exciting ped-
agogical potential in the initiative, like many fads you often see a
kitchen-sink approach to the matter, literally tacking on art to an
already fragmented curricula, saddling staff with another initiative,
and creating circumstances guaranteed to fail. We think STEAM
requires re-thinking much of the structure and emphasis of the tra-
ditional classroom—which is why this Innovation Plan is as long
as it is. So despite its weaknesses—like the implication that ‘Art’ is
one-ﬁfth of the experience, really serving as no more than a vehi-
cle for STEM—we’ve decided to move forward with it because we
think there’s something valuable in its frame.
Often, STEM is handled with what we describe as a ‘cough
medicine’ approach: there’s an assumption that you’re right, STEM
is in fact dry and hard and boring, and teachers’ job is to ﬁnd the
right shtick or angle to wrap it up in a sufﬁciently palatable pack-
age to make sure it goes down easy. The SSA rejects that metaphor,
and rejects the misuse of STEAM as an attempt to cast the arts in
that cough-medicine role. The real test of relevance in an educa-
tional setting is not, “Will you use this in ‘real life,”’ whatever that
means, but “Do you want to solve it?” It’s not that you want to
solve it because it’s relevant; wanting to solve it is what it means
to be relevant. For us, the arts represent a wellspring of fascinat-
ing, expressive domains and problems that naturally resonate with
people because of the role of arts in culture. We think that the tools
and ideas which have been monopolized by STEM ﬁelds for so
long have a lot to offer—in obvious places like computational art29
29 Greenberg, I. (2007). Processing:
creative coding and computational art.
Apress
and less obvious places like information visualization and graphic
design. And it is in this emphasis on design thinking that’s intrin-
sically multidisciplinary, not synthetically interdisciplinary, that
many proponents of STEAM have it right in calling out the value of
STEAM and design curricula, even if it isn’t obvious how it maps
back onto traditional frameworks.
curricular content
41
Non-cognitive Skills, Executive Function, & Metacognition
As of late it has become fashionable to talk about ‘grit’30 and the
30 Duckworth, A. L., C. Peterson, M. D.
Matthews, and D. R. Kelly (2007). Grit:
perseverance and passion for long-
term goals. Journal of personality and
social psychology 92(6), 1087
value a variety of ‘non-cognitive skills’ have for our youth. Skills
like the ability to persevere or handle confrontation or manage your
time or remain comfortable with uncertainty. Skills like the ability
to reﬂect on your learning and work or take initiative and responsi-
bility or tackle a poorly posed problem and turn it into something
actionable. Unsurprisingly, as the role of the knowledge worker and
the scope of their work has grown dramatically in recent years,31
31 Drucker, P. F. (2009). Managing in a
time of great change. Harvard Business
Press
postsecondary institutions and employers have increasingly turned
toward school as a mechanism for building the soft skills which
are so central to productivity in the workplace. This project has ac-
quired a renewed urgency as it has been uncovered that especially
for those folks who struggle in school by dint of socioeconomic or
cultural circumstance, academic success is less important to long
term outcomes than the development of this variety of soft skills.32
32 Tough, P. (2012). How children
succeed: Grit, curiosity, and the hidden
power of character. Houghton Mifﬂin
Harcourt (HMH); and Borghans, L.,
A. L. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and
B. Ter Weel (2008). The economics
and psychology of personality traits.
Journal of Human Resources 43(4), 972–
1059
The SSA’s approach is explicitly designed to develop these ca-
pacities by shifting the basic frame of program design from prepa-
ration—to which traditional curricula and classrooms are well-
suited—to practice. So rather than a math class that’s a prerequisite
for another math class that will prepare you for a career in engi-
neering, the SSA will emphasize projects that bring all of the ‘real-
world’ challenges of teamwork, communication, design thinking,
etc. into the classroom. Conversely, we’ll also be working to push
students to take on larger and larger scale projects, culminating in
co-op and internship relationships with local organizations, institu-
tions, and businesses.
Right now, you can walk into an eighth-grade classroom and ask,
“What’s the longest period of time this student can be productively
autonomous?” For some, it’s ﬁve minutes. For some, it’s ﬁfty. As
a general rule, it isn’t a day or a week. Because of the SSA’s mis-
sion to transform every person from a student to an independent
investigator, a signiﬁcant portion of the SSA’s emphasis will be on
developing independence (which need not be solitary). Concretely,
that shows up in the SSA’s focus on metrics like mean time au-
tonomously productive. Growing that capacity involves constantly
providing contexts just beyond students’ capacity,33 which when it
33 Vygotsky, L. (1987). Zone of proximal
development. Mind in society: The
development of higher psychological
processes, 52–91
comes to self-management, requires a more ﬂexible, project-based
context where students can explicitly reﬂect on their learning and
self-management strategies. Despite the fact that many say that
school is about learning to learn, we spend a surprisingly small
amount of time actually talking about learning and how to do it
well (or how people do it poorly). We spend time talking about
French or history or the binomial theorem and largely hope that
people pick up the skills of learning through implicit practice.
One of the strongest pedagogical differences in a computational,
project-based environment is the shift from convergent to diver-
gent workﬂows. In a traditional environment, at any given mo-
42
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
ment, most students are working toward the same goal, which at
its best, looks and feels the same (e.g. the typical math worksheet
is the epitome of this). In most writing or art classes however, that
convergence would be regarded as a failure. One upshot of this
generally convergent atmosphere is that students learn to construe
their work in very binary, right/wrong terms and develop poor
mental and emotional hygiene around that, meaning only the most
studious students take a corrected test and really reﬂect on or re-
work through problems they got wrong. Computational and project
based environments bring this same divergence to a much broader
array of subjects. When your program doesn’t work as you expect
the ﬁrst time, you quickly learn to shift into a debugging mindset
rather than thinking, “Oh, I got this wrong.” This both gives people
explicit language for thinking not only about their mental model
and how it did or didn’t work, but about the broader problem solv-
ing and self-management strategies which ﬁgure so much more
prominently than straight-up IQ in determining success.34
34 Borghans, L., A. L. Duckworth, J. J.
Heckman, and B. Ter Weel (2008).
The economics and psychology of
personality traits. Journal of Human
Resources 43(4), 972–1059
More than any particular canon, the SSA is focused in the de-
velopment of students’ capacity and disposition with respect to any
individual skill. In our experience, it is easy to roughly categorize
aspects of a learning experience and the design process going into
it as being primarily cognitive or primarily affective in nature. We
think that the affective is consistently and dramatically underem-
phasized; the returns on someone’s deep and authentic engagement
cannot be underestimated. This means we are much less concerned
about making sure someone reads Moby Dick by the time they’re
seventeen than we are about making sure that they fall in love
with reading. It means that we’re much less concerned about the
quadratic equation than we are with numeracy and comfort with
abstraction. Of course, there are realities (including the Common
Core and PARCC) to confront, but we don’t think it is necessary to
relinquish deep learning experiences to those pressures, especially
given the ﬂexibilities offered by the Innovation School architecture.
Fundamental Fluencies
This comparative canon-agnosticity can be misinterpreted as a
simple rejection of structure and curriculum. It is no such thing. As
Papert put it,35
35 Papert, S. (1980a). Constructionism
vs. instructionism. In Speech by video
to a conference of educators in Japan.
Available WWW:[http://www. papert.
org/articles/const_inst/const_inst5. html]
In the real world, there are many ways to do things, and this is
how creativity develops. This is how people make exciting new
discoveries—because they try many different ways to get the results
they’re looking for. And here, in all the examples I’ve shown you,
we’re going to look at some more more closely, children are using
knowledge about computers and about mathematics in personal
ways to do personal projects. Each one doing something differ-
ent, but through these different activities, learning the same sort of
knowledge.
Does that seem strange? In school we say there’s a curriculum: ev-
erybody must do the same curriculum or else how can they learn
curricular content
43
the same thing? To see what nonsense that idea is, think of a baby.
All babies—well, all Japanese babies I suppose, are going to learn to
speak Japanese. But we don’t think they all ought to say the same
things to their mother.
Each one says something different. They just live their lives in dif-
ferent homes, and have different toys, and they have different rela-
tionships, each one saying what comes from the heart—what they
feel, what they think. But they all learn Japanese because they’re us-
ing the same language. And they learn it well. But at school, we try
to systematize and make everybody do the same thing. I just can’t
understand why, except maybe it was because we didn’t have the
technological possibility to give children this wonderful variety of
things to do.
We think this broad construal of ﬂuency is powerful; it is not
simply a metaphor. And this is why we think the canon is less
important than the fundamental ﬂuencies—numeracy, literacy,
analysis, synthesis—which we all agree are basic ingredients for
good society, not to mention for productive contributors to that
society.
All that idealism aside, what are the nuts and bolts of devel-
oping these ﬂuencies? Generally, we expect to take an approach
of immersive, direct instruction to get students to a point where
they can tinker on their own combined with the design of a project
workﬂow which necessarily brings all of these ﬂuencies together
at every time scale. Concretely, let’s take a look at what written
ﬂuency in English might look like.
For an English Language Learner, that might begin with a multi-
week, full-time immersion program in English. For others, it may
begin with one of our intensive workshops but focused on writ-
ing, storytelling, or rhetoric. Regardless, we know that one, forty
hour week of full time focus is far more effective than forty, one
hour classes spread out over a month or year—and not just for lan-
guage.36 These intensive experiences aren’t typically allowed for in
36 Bishop, A. J. (1991). Mathematical
enculturation: A cultural perspective
on mathematics education, Volume 6.
Springer
a traditional schedule, requiring the SSA’s scheduling ﬂexibility.
These immersion experiences are intended to get students to a
basic level of proﬁciency such that the other aspects of our curricu-
lar approach can take over. In particular, work at the SSA is intrinsi-
cally multidisciplinary at every stage: from articulating your project
plan to communicating with your project manager to exhibiting
your work to reﬂecting on the aesthetic dimensions of your work,
language ﬂuency will be front and center, even if you are nomi-
nally working on a computational art project. These fundamental
ﬂuencies extend beyond literacy and numeracy to include graphic
design, multimedia skills, public speaking, negotiation skills, et
al. Over the course of a student’s time with us, each of these and
more will be the subject of a variety of intensive workshops paired
with longer term follow-up structures as part of the project and
curriculum development undertaken by each student’s Advisory.
Of course there are important details to take care of for ELL and
44
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
SPED students, but even in those contexts the interventions we’ll be
planning (see the Programmatic Student Supports chapter for more
detail) ﬁt under this broad rubric of intensive workshop combined
with ongoing dimension of project performance.
Educational Standards
With this context and detail in hand, we’re ready to turn to consid-
erations of reconciling these curricular impulses with the necessary
boundary conditions of the MCAS/PARCC, Common Core, and
NGSS.
Common Core
The Common Core can be traced back to the founding of Achieve,
Inc. in 1996 at the peak of the “Accountability Movement.” As part
of Achieve’s American Diploma Project, the report “Ready or Not:
Creating a High School Diploma That Counts” was released calling
attention to the ostensible skills gap between high school graduates
and the expectations of colleges and employers. This report and
its descendants would ﬁgure prominently in the 2009 discussions
of the National Governors Association which, over the course of
the next couple years, eventually resulted in the drafting of what
is now the Common Core State Standards (CCSC). Incentivized by
Federal Race to the Top grants, Massachusetts (along with forty-
four other states) adopted the CCSC.
That said, Massachusetts is famously local in its jurisdictional
structure. While Massachusetts encourages districts to adhere to
the state curricula, districts have the ability to deﬁne their own cur-
ricula. The SSA will take full advantage of this autonomy to guar-
antee coverage of the Common Core without structuring our curricula
around the Common Core.
The Common Core only covers Mathematics and English Lan-
guage Acquisition (ELA), so with regards to science, the SSA will
guarantee preparation for the MCAS Science Technology and Engineering
Test. Although the Next Generation Science Standards have been
drafted, Massachusetts is likely to signiﬁcantly revise these stan-
dards before adoption and the consequent revision of the MCAS is
at least two years away.37 Currently Somerville High School focuses
37 Foster, J. (2013, September). Personal
communication with jake foster, dese
director of curriculum for ste
on the MCAS Biology test. The SSA will focus on the Technology
and Engineering strand of the MCAS Science test.
Collectively, these curricular standards are surprisingly high-
level and canon-agnostic. e.g. the ELA Common Core does not
mandate particular books or even genres be covered. By way of
example, consider one of the Writing Standards for students in
Grades 9–10:
Write narratives to develop real or imagined experiences or events
using effective technique, well-chosen details, and well-structured
event sequences.
curricular content
45
1. Engage and orient the reader by setting out a problem, situation,
or observation, establishing one or multiple point(s) of view,
and introducing a narrator and/or characters; create a smooth
progression of experiences or events.
2. Use narrative techniques, such as dialogue, pacing, description,
reﬂection, and multiple plot lines, to develop experiences, events,
and/or characters.
3. Use a variety of techniques to sequence events so that they build
on one another to create a coherent whole.
4. Use precise words and phrases, telling details, and sensory lan-
guage to convey a vivid picture of the experiences, events, setting,
and/or characters.
5. Provide a conclusion that follows from and reﬂects on what is ex-
perienced, observed, or resolved over the course of the narrative.
This flexibility is intentional on the part of the drafters of the
CCSC; after all, there is a big difference between a curriculum and
a curricular framework. The SSA will take advantage of this ﬂexi-
bility to make divergent, project-based curricula possible when they
are usually prohibitively challenging to plan. In many classrooms,
teachers walk in with the goal of teaching all their students the
same facts and skills in a given day, even in the case of approaches
like differentiated instruction.38 The SSA is looking to change that.
38 which we think sounds great, but
frankly typically calls for a super-
human increase in the amount of
preparation and coordination required
by staff
Rather than thinking about what everyone needs to cover in that
single period, we want to enable staff to think about what an indi-
vidual student should be covering in the next three or four weeks.
On a daily time scale, we want staff and students coming together
considering what the deepest, most interesting project is. To make
this possible, we will develop a curriculum mapping process39
39 Which you can read more about in
the Curriculum Mapping section.
which makes it possible to retrospectively map student work back
onto the Common Core and the MCAS STE Curriculum Framework
for Technology and Engineering. We’ll cover this in more detail
later; for now, it is enough to know that we will guarantee Common
Core coverage and adequate preparation for the MCAS STE tests.
PARCC & MCAS Science
The MCAS Math and ELA tests are not long for this world. PARCC
is coming. And PARCC targets the Common Core. Funded by a
$186,000,000 grant through the USDOE’s Race to the Top competi-
tion, PARCC will be ﬁeld-tested in the 2013–2014 school year and
its administration will be fully operational by the 2014–2015 school
year. By summer 2015, PARCC will have set its achievement levels,
including college- and career-ready performance levels. This lines
up nicely with the Fall 2015 enrollment of the SSA.
Though related, it is valuable to separate questions of curric-
ula from questions of standardized tests, especially since the SSA
will be drawing a bright line between learning-focused activi-
ties and standardized tests. For us, the best case scenario is that
testing—whether PARCC or the MCAS—‘just’ measures learning
46
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
well, meaning we ‘just’ have to do a good job and test scores will
reﬂect that. In the worst case scenario, standardized tests are or-
thogonal to learning and require teaching to the test to make any
headway. We suspect the truth is somewhere in between. Rather
than compromise students learning experience or staff’s auton-
omy, our plan explicitly ﬁrewalls test prep time from the rest of
students’ time. Allotting about eight percent40 of student time to all
40 For more details on the time budget
of staff and students as it pertains to
test prep et al., refer to Standardized
Testing
the non-academic support work they’ll need to do (beginning with
MCAS/PARCC prep, later SAT/ACT prep, interview skills, college
admissions essays, etc.), the SSA will install ongoing diagnostic tests
which provide ﬁnely-grained, individualized maps of who’s test
performance is weak in which areas. These diagnostic tests will
inform ongoing test prep which will be kept to a viable minimum.
MCAS Science and Technology/Engineering Tests
The MCAS Sci-
ence and Technology/Engineering (STE) Standards deﬁne four
tests open to high school students: Earths and Space Science, Life
Science (Biology), Physical Sciences (Chemistry and Physics), and
Technology/Engineering. Somerville High School offers three of
the four, excepting Technology/Engineering. The SSA will focus
on the Technology/Engineering strand, which emphasizes the
engineering design process and is the highest-level and most canon-
agnostic of the tests. Consider the following summary from the
MCAS STE Framework itself:41
41 Driscoll, D. P. (2006). Massachusetts
science and technology/engineering
curriculum framework. Technical
report, Massachusetts Department of
Education
In a high school technology/engineering course, students pursue
engineering questions and technological solutions that emphasize
research and problem solving. They achieve a more advanced level
of skill in engineering design by learning how to conceptualize a
problem, develop possible solutions, design and build prototypes
or models, test the prototypes or models, and make modiﬁcations
as necessary. Throughout the process of engineering design, high
school students are able to work safely with hand and/or power
tools, various materials and equipment, and other resources.
Furthermore, the other tests and the prevalence of scientiﬁc vo-
cabulary pair especially poorly with the needs and weaknesses of
many English Language Learners and students with an IEP with
indications for language or reading issues. In combination with
the natural resonance between the Technology and Engineering
strand and the SSA’s curricular focus—where students will be in-
tensely engaged in repeated, iterative design projects cutting across
disciplines—the Technology/Engineering strand becomes the obvi-
ous choice. And as with the PARCC, this test will be incorporated
into the ongoing test preparation and diagnostic structure to ensure
that the SSA’s students collectively meet the goals set out in this
Innovation Plan42 and future School Improvement Plans.
42 For more details on our MCAS
goals [which will need translation to
PARCC indicators after the PARCC
is calibrated and ﬁnalized], see the
School Improvement Plan
Next Generation Science Standards
PARCC—by virtue of targeting the Common Core—does not have
anything to say about science or engineering. This means the
curricular content
47
MCAS Science strand tests will persist for at least another three
years.43 While the NGSS are nearing completion, it is also clear that
43 Bickerton, B. (2013, October). Mass
drive-in conference
Massachusetts won’t adopt the NGSS without “signiﬁcant” revi-
sions.44 The nature of those revisions are unclear; however, they are
44 Foster, J. (2013, September). Personal
communication with jake foster, dese
director of curriculum for ste
likely to include an increased emphasis on computational thinking,
a thread for which many organizations like Massachusetts Comput-
ing Attainment Network (MassCAN) have been lobbying, going so
far as to push for the inclusion of computer science as a required
subject in K–12 settings.45 It seems that these revisions will only
45 Farrell, M. B. (2013). Tech ﬁrms call
for mandatory computer classes
line up more closely with the SSA’s emphases; regardless, similar
to the Common Core, the standards are surprisingly high-level and
canon-agnostic, e.g. consider this progression for the Grade 9–12
grade band:46
46 (2013, April). Appendix f – science
and engineering practices in the ngss
Asking questions and deﬁning problems in 9â ˘A¸S12 builds on Kâ ˘A¸S8
experiences and progresses to formulating, reﬁning, and evaluating
empirically testable questions and design problems using models and
simulations. Ask questions
• that arise from careful observation of phenomena, or unexpected
results, to clarify and/or seek additional information.
• that arise from examining models or a theory, to clarify and/or
seek additional information and relationships.
• to determine relationships, including quantitative relationships,
between independent and dependent variables.
• to clarify and reﬁne a model, an explanation, or an engineering
problem.
Needless to say, there’s an incredibly broad array of projects
which could map onto this, and by design many of the projects
undertaken at the SSA will line up with this [and related] stan-
dards. But changing the problem of curricular coverage from a
demand-side to a supply-side problem is essential to provide staff
the ﬂexibility to implement a truly project-based—as distinct from
project-oriented or problem-based or inquiry-driven—curriculum.47
47 Robin, J. What project based learning
isn’t
Autonomy Analysis
To make all this happen, it is necessary that the SSA have complete
curricular and stafﬁng autonomy. Although we’ll be committing to
speciﬁc results through our MCAS/PARCC goals, the autonomy to
design the curricula to make this happen will sit within the SSA.
Furthermore, while the principal will be responsible for managing
and directing the vision for these curricula (as well as ensuring the
availability of the necessary time, money, and resources to develop
them), the authority to choose, riff on, and design curricula will sit
directly with staff at the advisory level.
Why should we expect this will beneﬁt students?
We know that it
is necessary for teams of teachers to be relatively autonomous in
order to obtain a variety of beneﬁts—for students and teachers.48
48 Buckley, F. J. (1999). Team teaching:
what, why, and how? Sage
48
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Furthermore, this autonomy is necessary to implement a compu-
tational, project-based curricula: something which is largely un-
charted territory. And this computational, project-based approach
stands to both reach many of those students traditionally struggling
or disengaged for a variety of reasons—whether IEP indications
for dyslexia, ADD/ADHD, or spectrum disorder or longstanding
self-concepts of alienation from particular subjects or school in
general. Going beyond this, the research supporting the value of
computational thinking, project-based approaches, and the variety
of non-cognitive, executive, and metacognitive skills this type of
experience develops are well-documented49 but generally impos-
49 DeBerard, M. S., G. Spielmans, and
D. Julka (2004). Predictors of academic
achievement and retention among
college freshmen: A longitudinal
study. College Student Journal 38(1),
66–80; Wing, J. M. (2006). Computa-
tional thinking. Communications of the
ACM 49(3), 33–35; (2011). Building
the brain’s “air trafﬁc control” sys-
tem: How early experiences shape the
development of executive function.
Working Paper 11, Center on the De-
veloping Child at Harvard University;
and Meltzer, L. (2011). Executive func-
tion in education: From theory to practice.
Guilford press
sible to implement with the traditional curricular and scheduling
constraints.
What legal affordances will be required?
We are still in the process of
writing up the necessary exemptions and waivers required for this.
You can ﬁnd a partial list in Legal Affordances, but per 603 CMR
48.03(b),
If an innovation plan committee is proposing an innovation plan that
may conﬂict with laws (including regulations) governing other public
schools, the committee shall, before presenting the plan to the school
committee for approval, request approval from the Commissioner
for any provision in the plan that may conﬂict with such laws. The
Commissioner’s approval shall be based on his determination that
the plan is consistent with 603 CMR 48.03 (2) and with the state’s
obligations under the education clause of the Massachusetts Con-
stitution, Mass. Const., pt. II, ch. V, s. II, as deﬁned by a court of
competent jurisdiction, and that the provision in the plan that may
conﬂict with such laws is necessary to advance the mission or educa-
tional programs of the innovation school. If the Commissioner does
not approve the proposed provision in the plan, the innovation plan
committee may ask the Board to review the matter and the Board
shall make the ﬁnal decision.
which means that the full process of articulating points of con-
tact between state laws and regulations and the Innovation Plan as
voted on need not conclude until the School Committee presenta-
tion. As with negotiating necessary affordances in the Collective
Bargaining Agreement to make the Innovation Plan possible, non-
substantive design edits and alterations may be made after the
Innovation Plan Committee vote without triggering a re-start of the
process.50
50 French, D. (2013, August). Personal
communication with dan french.
Regarding voting and editing process
between Innovation Plan and School
Committee votes
Curricular Forms
With such a different curricular approach, the SSA will require dif-
ferent curricular forms than the traditional sixty-six minute class.
But in implementing a different curriculum and different form for
that curriculum it is doubly important to install mechanisms to
insure and document curricular coverage and competence. This
chapter explains our current design for the structures and forms we
expect will govern student work and how those will be reconciled
with traditional curricular requirements of legibility and documen-
tation.
Curriculum Mapping
A core feature of the SSA’s design will be our curriculum map-
ping process supporting our version of what is fundamentally an
earned credit model like that implemented at Full Circle/Next
Wave. Through this process we will take traditional curricula and
curricular frameworks–viz. the Common Core and MCAS STE Tech-
nology & Engineering test materials—and set up a system by which
work is retrospectively mapped back onto those curricular frame-
works. Traditionally curricular frameworks are drafted then precise
lesson plans designed which are known with 100% certainty to
cover said standards. This is not feasible in an environment where
you’re aiming to ensure maximal divergence between students’
work, and even less feasible when you’re designing to accommo-
date individualized paths through the various ontologies possible
within a curriculum.51
51 Turker, A., ˙I. Görgün, and O. Conlan
(2006). The challenge of content
creation to facilitate personalized
e-learning experiences. International
Journal on E-Learning 5(1), 11–17;
Ferran, N., E. Mor, and J. Minguillón
(2005). Towards personalization in
digital libraries through ontologies.
Library Management 26(4/5), 206–
217; and Baldoni, M., C. Baroglio,
I. Brunkhorst, N. Henze, E. Marengo,
and V. Patti (2006). A personalization
service for curriculum planning. In
LWA, pp. 17–20
Instead, staff and students will come into the SSA each day fo-
cusing on how to deepen the intellectual work of a project, reﬁne
its output, and reﬂect on the dimensions of performance deter-
mining individual student’s engagement in a process inspired by
the success of Expeditionary Learning.52 Questions of curricu-
52 Rheingold, A., J. Seaman, and
R. Berger (2014). Assessment across
boundaries: How high-quality stu-
dent work demonstrates achievement,
shapes practice, and improves com-
munities. In Assessing Schools for Gen-
eration R (Responsibility), pp. 115–131.
Springer; and Series, A. A. E. C. (2009).
Qualities of quality: Understanding
excellence in arts education
lar coverage, instead of constrained on the demand-side, will be
accounted for on a much longer time scale (months) through the
mechanism of project choice and seminar design. As students work
on projects (or develop extensions to those projects, like exhibitions
or essays), their Advisory will help guide those decisions in a way
to ensure that their individualized path through the Common Core
and MCAS STE standards is complete. This requires signiﬁcant
time investment on both staff and students’ parts, which is why it is
50
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Construct and compare linear, quadratic, and exponential models and 
solve problems.
•
CCSS.Math.Content.HSF-LE.A.1 Distinguish between situations that 
can be modeled with linear functions and with exponential functions.
◦
CCSS.Math.Content.HSF-LE.A.1a Prove that linear functions 
grow by equal differences over equal intervals, and that 
exponential functions grow by equal factors over equal intervals.
◦
CCSS.Math.Content.HSF-LE.A.1b Recognize situations in which 
one quantity changes at a constant rate per unit interval relative 
to another.
◦
CCSS.Math.Content.HSF-LE.A.1c Recognize situations in which 
a quantity grows or decays by a constant percent rate per unit 
interval relative to another.
•
CCSS.Math.Content.HSF-LE.A.2 Construct linear and exponential 
functions, including arithmetic and geometric sequences, given a 
graph, a description of a relationship, or two input-output pairs (include 
reading these from a table).
•
CCSS.Math.Content.HSF-LE.A.3 Observe using graphs and tables 
that a quantity increasing exponentially eventually exceeds a quantity 
increasing linearly, quadratically, or (more generally) as a polynomial 
function.
•
CCSS.Math.Content.HSF-LE.A.4 For exponential models, express as 
a logarithm the solution toabct = d where a, c, and d are numbers and 
the base b is 2, 10, or e; evaluate the logarithm using technology.
Interpret expressions for functions in terms of the situation they 
model.
•
CCSS.Math.Content.HSF-LE.B.5 Interpret the parameters in a linear 
or exponential function in terms of a context.
letters of 
recommendation
project writeups
learner interviews
work summaries
parent meetings
credit calculations
transcripts
project choice
mediated by staff & volunteers
High fidelity project 
documentation
}
Figure 3: Inspired by the de-
sign process behind curricula
like the Interactive Mathe-
matics Program, the SSA’s
curriculum mapping pro-
cess will invert the traditional
lesson plan design process,
putting control and auton-
omy in the hands of staff and
students while insuring total
documentation of curricular
coverage.
built into the reﬂection and portfolio development process. Rather
than a paperwork tax, the expectation is that this coverage and
documentation thereof will be iteratively developed as a relatively
natural part of the project design and documentation process—
exactly the focus and responsibility of the Project Manager in each
Advisory.
This curriculum mapping process will create a high-ﬁdelity,
personalized record (backed up by speciﬁc links to student work,
whose resolution and completeness are substantially enhanced by
virtue of the SSA’s digital infrastructure) guaranteeing and docu-
menting curricular coverage and performance. This record will be
at the center of a variety of other mechanisms in the SSA, ranging
from our matriculation requirements to transcripts to deﬁnitions of
students’ good standing.
Species of Time
School is generally tasked with the responsibility for taking a bunch
of skills and content—the curriculum—and getting it ‘into’ stu-
dents. A natural design response to this need is to linearize the
task: take that pile of content and spread it evenly over the the
seven periods per day, one hundred eighty days per year you have
with students. It cannot be overstated how much this design con-
curricular forms
51
straint has inﬂuenced the structure of the modern American school,
despite research documenting how much of an obstacle this struc-
ture is for many of the learners who struggle in traditional environ-
ments.53
53 Tyack, D. B. (1976). Ways of seeing:
An essay on the history of compul-
sory schooling. Harvard Educational
Review 46(3), 355–389; Lee, V. E., J. B.
Smith, and R. G. Croninger (1997).
How high school organization inﬂu-
ences the equitable distribution of
learning in mathematics and science.
Sociology of education, 128–150; and
Lee, V. E. and D. T. Burkam (2003).
Dropping out of high school: The
role of school organization and struc-
ture. American Educational Research
Journal 40(2), 353–393
9th
10th
11th
12th
Year-round, 10A-5P; open, staggered 
vacation policy; focus on building 
self-management skills via projects.
8th
% time
Design & Research Seminars
MCAS & SAT prep
Foundation
Communications
Analysis & Synthesis
Co-ops &
internships
Independent & group projects
Guided, 
project-based seminars
Figure 4: Over the course of
students’ ﬁve years with the
Somerville STEAM Academy,
they will spend their time with
increasing autonomy, shifting
from structured options of
staff design to options of their
own design. The speed and
nature of their transition will
be governed by their advisory
team.
The texture of staff and student time at the SSA will be much
more varied. This presents additional logistical challenges, which
is one of the primary motivations behind our year-round design.
Rather than a single type of class structure paired with home-
work, the SSA has four species of time which represent different
approaches to immersion and autonomy across disciplines. Our
expectation is that over the course of ﬁve years with us, a greater
and greater share of students’ time will be devoted to increasingly
autonomous and self-managed experiences. But you cannot sim-
ply dump an eighth grader into an autonomous setting and expect
[most] to ﬂourish. Scaffolding that transition is essential, and con-
trolling the scope and scale of the required autonomy in the design
of a project or task is a well-established tactic.54
54 Azevedo, R. and A. F. Hadwin
(2005). Scaffolding self-regulated learn-
ing and metacognition–implications
for the design of computer-based
scaffolds. Instructional Science 33(5),
367–379; Meyer, D. K. and J. C. Turner
(2002). Using instructional discourse
analysis to study the scaffolding
of student self-regulation. Educa-
tional Psychologist 37(1), 17–25; and
Athanassiou, N., J. M. McNett, and
C. Harvey (2003). Critical thinking in
the management classroom: Bloom’s
taxonomy as a learning tool. Journal of
Management Education 27(5), 533–555
Intensive Workshops
The most straightforward of these is the intensive workshop. Seven
hours a day, every day, for 1–3 weeks, these workshops are in-
tended for basic ﬂuencies which suffer for being cut up into smaller
pieces. Anyone who’s taken Spanish for four years and can’t speak
52
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
a lick but has a friend who went abroad for six months and came
back conversational has an intuition for the research behind this
piece of the SSA’s design. Whether it’s learning a new program-
ming language, developing your negotiation skills, learning the
basics of rapid prototyping, or getting the fundamentals of story-
telling down, many of the skills which will be regularly relied on in
SSA projects will get their start in short, intensive workshops taking
advantage of the SSA’s scheduling ﬂexibility.
10AM
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
11AM
Foundation 1
12PM
Foundation 1
Foundation 2
Foundation 1
Foundation 4
Foundation 3
1PM
Foundation 2
Foundation 4
2PM
SHS Track
3PM
SHS Track
MCAS
Studio Time
MCAS
Studio Time
4PM
MCAS
Foundation 3
CAE Spanish
Studio Time
5PM
MCAS
Foundation 3
CAE Spanish
Figure 5: An evocative 8th
grade time budget; see Sample
Schedules for more details.
10AM
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
11AM
12PM
Foundation 1
Foundation 2
Foundation 1
1PM
Studio Time
SHS Band
2PM
SHS Track
SHS Band
3PM
SHS Track
Studio Time
Studio Time
4PM
Studio Time
Studio Time
Studio Time
Studio Time
5PM
Studio Time
Graphic Design
6PM
Internship
7PM
Figure 6: An evocative 12th
grade time budget; see Sample
Schedules for more details.
Seminars
Stepping up a level in terms of scope and ﬂexibility, the SSA’s sem-
inars will be the nearest relative of a traditional class. Spanning
several months, meeting for 2–4 hours daily, these seminars will be
structured around research and design questions rather than spe-
ciﬁc disciplines. Rather than “Algebra II,” you might have “Signs
of Life”—a program we’ve run in the past which explores what it
means for something to be alive by making something that’s alive
in one way or another, each week. Whether that’s a basic robot
that responds to feedback or software implementing a genetic
algorithm, it’s clear how this cybernetic approach can get at en-
tirely new angles to traditional questions of biology and computer
science. But going beyond that, we’ve been able to bring in philo-
sophical, literary, and religious angles in an authentic way. These
seminars will offer a natural transition from traditional classroom
environments in terms of their expectations of student work and
self-regulation, as well as a natural starting point for practicing
the process of brainstorming and designing appropriate projects
through decreasingly speciﬁc prompts framed by the theme of the
seminar.
Internships & Co-ops
The most complex form in the SSA is the internship or co-op. In-
volving community partners like local businesses, universities, and
artists, students will be paired up with these partners in one-off
arrangements which may be as simple as taking on a part-time job
or as subtle as a collaboration between the SSA and the community
partner to design a project together that addresses student inter-
ests and partner capacities while walking through speciﬁc aspects
of the Common Core. In particular, this is where the most intense
development of non-cognitive and executive function develop-
ment is expected to occur, and is the natural holding pattern and
testbed for students transitional support (see the section on longi-
tudinal support for more details) in taking their next steps. By the
end of a student’s time with us, they very well may be spending
the majority of their time working with their community partner,
checking in with their project manager to document and ﬂesh out
their portfolio (and go through the curriculum mapping process).
This will be the epitome of the the SSA’s notion of school and staff
curricular forms
53
playing primarily a mentoring, coaching, facilitating and connecting
role, leveraging Somerville’s incredible community resources. And
already at this stage in the planning process, we have concrete part-
ners like Wolfram Research, Artisan’s Asylum, Google, MIT, and
Tufts who are excited and ready to support a variety of these types
of relationships.
Project Studios
There is a smooth continuum connecting the autonomy expected of
a student in one of our seminars and that required to go through
the highest form of our construal of independent investigation:
1. Articulate a problem or question personally meaningful to you.
2. Design a project or experiment to engage that question.
3. Rustle up the necessary resources to carry out that project or
experiment.
4. Manage yourself, your time, and said resources to execute that
project successfully, iterating on the ﬁrst three steps of this pro-
cess to converge on a clear vision.
5. Document and share the results of that project or experiment
with relevant experts and people whose opinion you care about
in a [meaningful] culturally and socially situated context.
As we back off the support and constraints offered students in
their seminars, they will transition more and more to their own,
independent projects. Importantly, ‘independent’ need not mean
‘alone.’ The structure for these increasingly independent projects
will be the project studio. Inspired by the pedagogy of the archi-
tectural studio,55 these project studios will move from the content
55 Kuhn, S. (2001). Learning from the
architecture studio: Implications for
project-based pedagogy. International
Journal of Engineering Education 17(4/5),
349–352; and Dutton, T. A. (1987).
Design and studio pedagogy. Journal of
Architectural Education, 16–25
themes and questions of the seminar structure to much broader and
more ﬂexible formats where students enter the studio with a sense
of the direction and form they’d like their project to take (akin to
traditional, independent study formats). Staff work with students to
constrain the scope of the project, deﬁne milestones, enrich the plan
with deeper intellectual and academic components, and manage the
execution of the project.
Work Design, Exhibition, & Critique
Public exhibition and critique of staff and student work is central to
the SSA’s workﬂows. We know that exhibiting work to an authenti-
cally interested audience—especially one with the natural authority
of domain expertise or meaningful personal relationship—is an
incredible lever for student engagement.56 Unfortunately, it’s gener-
56 Hetland, L. (2013). Studio Think-
ing 2: The Real Beneﬁts of Visual Arts
Education. Teachers College Press;
and Mergendoller, J. R., T. Markham,
J. Ravitz, and J. Larmer (2006). Per-
vasive management of project based
learning: Teachers as guides and
facilitators. Handbook of Classroom
Management: Research, Practice, and Con-
temporary Issues, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum, Inc
ally very hard to get excited about an essay that’s on the same thing
as twenty other students that you didn’t have a chance to revise
and which won’t be showcased anywhere publicly.
54
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
That’s why every substantial piece of work students are asked to do
at the SSA will have some meaningful, public endpoint after going
through several rounds of revision. Sometimes that may be as sim-
ple as posting it on their personal portfolio with an analysis of the
strengths and weaknesses of the project and a summary of the cri-
tique they received from their peers. But for many projects, it will
be as substantial as identifying early on who would be a qualiﬁed
and interesting expert to critique the project (e.g. a computational
artist for a computational art project) and bringing them in an ad-
visory capacity to both comment on revisions of the project and
ultimately execute a studio-style critique session.57
57 Goldschmidt, G. and D. Tatsa (2005).
How good are good ideas? corre-
lates of design creativity. Design
Studies 26(6), 593–611
Of course, there will also be a variety of very natural, very pub-
lic contexts like exhibitions of student work, community-facing
projects, or structurally public endpoints for student work output
(e.g. rather than asking for an essay to be handed into a teacher,
graded, and dumped, supporting students in the process of se-
lecting an online publication for submission, editing, revision, and
publication).
Real is better than fake is the simple design principle at work
here. And like most design problems, embodying that principle
involves inevitable trade-offs and compromises (e.g. the Common
Core, MCAS, transcripts, etc.) But to whatever extent students can
practice rather than prepare, issues of engagement, assessment, plan-
ning, and depth are mitigated.
Autonomy Analysis
To make this happen requires not only complete curricular au-
tonomy as has already been covered, but signiﬁcant ﬂexibility
in scheduling and credit mechanics. The different time scales of
student and staff work and interfacing with the community in a
meaningful way almost immediately require not only a year-round
schedule, but Advisory-scale autonomy in designing student sched-
ules. Similarly, the SSA will require complete autonomy in deﬁning
and implementing credit standards to develop an earned-credit
system that acknowledges the individualized paths through the
curricula and their diverse mappings to the variety of time forms
detailed herein.
What legal affordances will be required?
These types of setups also
make questions of ‘seat time’ incoherent. Rather than focusing
on inputs, the SSA is committing to certain outputs, but requires
autonomy in how those outputs are delivered. This is within the
Department of Education’s 1996 revisions to the deﬁnition of ‘struc-
tured learning time,’ viz. via 603 CMR 27.02
Structured learning time shall mean time during which students are
engaged in regularly scheduled instruction, learning activities, or
learning assessments within the curriculum for study of the ‘core
curricular forms
55
subjects’ and ‘other subjects.’ In addition to classroom time where
both teachers and students are present, structured learning time
may include directed study, independent study, technology-assisted
learning, presentations by persons other than teachers, school-to-
work programs, and statewide student performance assessments.
but will require autonomy in designing systems for measuring and
documenting that learning time retrospectively.
Why should we expect this will beneﬁt students?
The research on ex-
tended learning time and extended learning time schedules (espe-
cially those incorporating a later start time) is clear on the question
of improving student outcomes, especially for students who have
struggled historically with motivation or issues of summer learning
loss (something especially a concern for SPED students).58 Year-
58 Wolfson, A. R. and M. A. Carskadon
(1998). Sleep schedules and daytime
functioning in adolescents. Child
development 69(4), 875–887; and Cooper,
H., B. Nye, K. Charlton, J. Lindsay,
and S. Greathouse (1996). The effects
of summer vacation on achievement
test scores: A narrative and meta-
analytic review. Review of Educational
Research 66(3), 227–268
round scheduling is not a panacea; when it is deployed as simply
‘more school’ the results are inconclusive at best.59. In the cases
59 McMullen, S. C. and K. E. Rouse
(2012). The impact of year-round
schooling on academic achievement:
Evidence from mandatory school
calendar conversions. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(4),
230–252
where it has been most effective has used the extended schedule to
create signiﬁcantly more ﬂexible experiences.60,
60 Gandara, P. and J. Fish (1994). Year-
round schooling as an avenue to major
structural reform. Educational Evalu-
ation and Policy Analysis 16(1), 67–85;
and Jacobson, R. and M. J. Blank
(2011). Expanding the learning day:
An essential component of the commu-
nity schools strategy. New directions for
youth development 2011(131), 55–67
Part II
Who We’ll Be
Students
Who will comprise the SSA? We know that the SSA can comple-
ment existing options for students. Early in the design process—as
we were simply working to get a handle on what problems or op-
portunities people thought a new Innovation School might be able
to address—it became clear that many people within and without
Somerville Public Schools felt that there was room for a smaller,
more intimate setting targeting students who had struggled in tra-
ditional classroom environments. No one school can serve every
student equally well. All other things held equal, we think that
means a diversity of options is a good thing. We kept hearing the
phrase, “kids who fall through the cracks.” These are the students
with whom we’re most interested in working. But we need to bal-
ance that emphasis with an essential pedagogical and civic counter-
party: the importance of school’s function in creating a public, not
‘just’ remediating inequality.
Pedagogically, it’s essential that students who come to the SSA
don’t feel like they ended up there because they were the dumb
kids, the kids who failed. Civically, it’s essential that those inter-
ested in supporting those who struggle in a public institution not
inadvertently design an apartheid institution separating the haves
and have-nots. This tension will be one that we all struggle with as
we work to make our civil institutions better and more equitable,
but in the context of the SSA’s design in particular we have a dis-
tinct advantage: the premises behind the increased ﬁt and efﬁcacy
of computational, project-based work deployed in an intimate set-
ting cuts across class and race and creed. This, coupled with the
SSA’s [very small] size has made it possible to design a uniquely
egalitarian process of enrolling students which leverages several
affordances speciﬁc to the Innovation School architecture.
The purpose of this chapter is to lay out the entire arc of stu-
dents’ progress through the SSA—with whom will we be working?
How will they hear about the SSA? How will they enroll? What
constitutes advancement? How does matriculation work at an in-
stitution like the SSA? What sort of support will the SSA offer in
transitioning students to their next steps, whatever that may be?
60
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Target Population
The SSA is explicitly not an enrichment program. Nor is it a mag-
net program. Nor is it a remediation program. The SSA is intent
on working with students who have struggled in traditional con-
texts, especially for reasons of boredom; a proclivity for hands-on
projects; IEP indications for dyslexia, ADD/ADHD, or spectra dis-
orders; or a self-concept of being ‘not a {math, science, or worst of
all school/learning} person.’ To return to Papert’s discussion of our
approach once more,61
61 Papert, S. and I. Harel (1991). Situat-
ing constructionism. Constructionism,
1–11
When one looks at how people think and learn one sees clear differ-
ences. Although it is conceivable that science may one day show that
there is a “best way,” no such conclusion seems to be on the horizon.
Moreover, even if there were, individuals might prefer to think in
their own way rather than in the “best way.” Now one can make two
kinds of scientiﬁc claim for constructionism. The weak claim is that
it suits some people better than other modes of learning currently
being used.. . . A variant of the strong claim. . . allows the full range of
intellectual styles and preferences to each ﬁnd a point of equilibrium.
1%
34%
0.2%
38%
0.3%
11%
16%
{
{
PARENT, TEACHER 
RECOMMENDATIONS
African American
Asian
Native American
Hispanic
Pacific Islander
White
Multi-Race
20  LOTTERY
STUDENTS
20 
STRUGGLING
STUDENTS
MATCHING
DEMOGRAPHIC
MATCHING
SOCIOECONOMIC
BOTTOM 50% OF 
MCAS, ATTENDANCE
No single school can 
serve every student 
equally well.  This 
means a diversity of 
options is a good thing.
We will focus on 
struggling students 
not through reme-
diation, but new kinds 
of chances to excel.
Students struggling with 
traditional options
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
< 0.5
0.5-1
1-1.5
1.5-2
2-3
3-4
4-5+
$0
$25,000
$50,000
$75,000
$100,000
Income for a Household of 3
% Somerville Families
Figure 7: Ultimately, the ques-
tion of, “For whom is the
SSA?” is the one that is quick-
est to people’s tongues, and for
good reason. Our commitment
is to focus on students who
haven’t found their place in
traditional academic settings
while guaranteeing that we
meet our civic and equity com-
mitments. It’s essential that
the SSA be neither remediation
nor enrichment. We’ve taken
advantage of the Innovation
School legislation’s ﬂexibility
to make it legally impossible
for us to enroll a cohort that
does not meet our equity com-
mitments. We’ve also installed
safeguards (see Governance
for details) to prevent us from
breaking our equity commit-
ments through attrition.
Unlike charter, pilot, or traditional district schools, the SSA is not
forced to have a blind enrollment process. This means we can de-
sign an enrollment process which guarantees we embody the equity
and diversity commitments we’d like to make. Concretely, we’ve
decided on the following equity targets for its annual enrollment of
students
61
∼36:62
62 Throughout this plan, you’ll see dis-
cussion of both the numbers forty and
thirty-six. Our target is 36. Conver-
sations with other school leaders and
staff at the Department of Elementary
and Secondary Education suggests a
10% melt rate for families that express
interest and then back out. The plan’s
ﬁnancials and logistics is robust to that
range and uncertainty.
• The SSA is only committing to enrolling eighth graders at this
time, though it will reserve the option to register interest from
younger or older students in cases where the family meets with
the SSA staff and the principal approves the registration.63
63 Because the SSA will not be age
segregated, this will be possible;
however, we expect the overwhelming
majority of students to be rising eighth
graders. The social and academic
considerations outside of that default
scenario are too heterogeneous to
put a policy in place. These students
enrollment are subject to the same
equity constraints as the targeted
eighth grade students.
• 50% of students enrolled each year will have been identiﬁed as
‘struggling.’ That will mean one of three things: 1) being in the
bottom 50% of MCAS performance, 2) being in the bottom 50%
of attendance rate in the previous year, or 3) if and only if those
data are not available, a parent and teacher recommendation to
that effect.
• Some portion of the complementary 50% of students enrolled
each year may well also be struggling, but will match the socioe-
conomic and demographic proﬁles (including proportions of
SPED, ELL) of Somerville High School.
• Gender parity will be ensured across the entire enrollment.
• After families have registered interest and entered the weighted
lottery, an examination will be administered which will be used
to ensure that the academic strength of students actually admit-
ted is widely distributed.64 That is, someone does not pass or
64 More precisely, we’ll ensure the
results are normally distributed—i.
e. are Gaussian. We’ll also release the
full dataset of aggregate, anonymized
student performance on the diagnostic
test for audit. The speciﬁc diagnostic
still needs to be designed.
fail the exam, the examination is explicitly meant to ensure that
those students who are academically weak receive extra emphasis
in the enrollment process. Not participating in the exam—for
whatever reason—will not penalize a potential enrollee, the exam
will just be administered as part of their enrollment process for
purposes of data collection and maintaining the school’s ac-
countability for this equity commitment.
Notably, these equity commitments will be applied schoolwide—
meaning if through attrition the socioeconomic or demographic
distribution of the SSA shifts substantively, future enrollment pro-
cesses will be forced to compensate.
Enrollment Outreach
Somerville is tiny. There will be ∼350 seventh graders next year.
That means we can sit down with every single potential enrolling fam-
ily in one form or another. We’ve designed an enrollment outreach
process which ensures that we’re able to meaningfully reach out
to every single seventh grade family in Somerville. In our experi-
ence, you can’t go up to most families in Somerville and talk about
a “computational, project-based school”—aside from language and
cultural barriers, those buzzwords just don’t mean much to people
outside of the world of education (and barely that). Instead, we’ve
found that it’s much better to give families a taste of what that
means in real life, after which it’s much easier to decide whether
you want more of that for your child or not.
62
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
INDIVIDUAL ATTENTION PER PARTICIPANT
EVENT
10m
College admissions, employer talks.  Potluck dinners. 
Movie screenings. Middle school demo days. Booth at 
local festivals // talks at PTA meetings
SUMMER 
RETREAT
10h
After the school ofﬁcially opens, we will be 
undertaking a variety of nonacademic activities 
(e.g. camping) to build relationships, later touring 
organizations informing a facilitated process of 
deﬁning the school’s vision collaboratively.
PROGRAM
Free versions of our existing 8-16w programs, 
targeting solely Somerville students. 
Prototyping and documenting new programs 
which may grow into SSA Seminars
2h
WORKSHOP
Middle school enrichment workshops. 
Free, public 1-2 day workshops, with local 
partners and parents.  PD workshops.
20m
MINICAMP
Free camps during spring, winter vacation & 
other school holidays/half-days (offering free 
child care), also open to local adults.
5h
SUMMER 
CAMP
Full on, all day summer camp where we include as 
many of the registered students whom we know 
will enroll as possible.  Closest to full operation.
8h
Figure 8: The SSA will imple-
ment a year-round enrollment
outreach effort designed to
ensure that each of the ∼
300
seventh graders each year
are meaningfully exposed to
STEAM-ly experiences so that
they and their family can make
an informed decision about
registering interest. This en-
rollment outreach process will
double both as a testbed for
potential hires and a lower-
pressure sandbox to prototype
curricula for the following
year. We’ve raised $100, 000 to
cover the costs of implement-
ing this outreach process the
inaugural year. Subsequent
years’ efforts will be folded
into the professional develop-
ment time of staff and a subset
of the seminars of existing SSA
students.
To make this possible for as wide an audience as possible, we’ve
designed a six-level enrollment outreach process intended to work
with potential enrollees in increasing depth:
1. events: These events will aim primarily to get families in the
door. Working with local churches, businesses, and schools we’ll
host some primarily social events (e.g. potlucks, movie screen-
ings, booths at local festivals), some events focused speciﬁcally
on the questions and concerns that potential enrollees might
have (e.g. We’ve arranged for talks from local college admissions
staff and employers to address questions about postsecondary
options for students from an environment like the SSA.), and
ﬁnally straight-up informational sessions organized through
channels like the Parent Information Center (PIC) and local
PTAs.
2. workshops: Inevitably, if you are only reaching out to fami-
lies outside of the schoolday, you create a selection bias mak-
ing it less likely that families that already struggle with school
engagement—whether by dint of circumstance or culture—will
connect. To address this, we’ll be running in- and after-school
workshops during X-block, science and math classes, and after-
school at the local K-8 schools65 We’ll also be inviting staff at
65 and have already begun meeting
with principals to arrange the details.
the local K-8 schools to participate in [free,] related professional
development workshops [in addition to one-on-one outreach] to
help develop a sense for the type of place the SSA will be and
students
63
what type of students might beneﬁt from it. This is essential be-
cause we expect teachers who have worked with students to be
the best source of help and connection reaching out to potential
families.
3. programs: We’ll also offer free versions of sprout’s existing
8–16-week programs, targeting solely Somerville students. This
will serve to prototype and document new programs which will
grow into SSA Seminars. Because of their depth and intensity,
we expect the audience here to be much smaller than for the
workshops and event series.
4. minicamps: Some subset of the students participating in the
programs we run as part of this enrollment process (as well
as other potential, interested enrollees) will have the option of
attending free minicamps during spring, winter vacation, and
other school holidays/half-days.
5. summer camp: Immediately prior to enrollment each year, we
will also conduct a full on, all day summer camp where we in-
clude as many of the registered students whom we know will
enroll as possible. This will be the closest we come to full op-
eration and will act as a trial period mitigating growing pains
year-over-year. In particular, this means the summer camp will
be tightly integrated with ongoing operations after the SSA’s ﬁrst
year.
6. retreat: In the weeks before ofﬁcial enrollment, we will also
coordinating a retreat for students and staff that aims to do two
things: 1) seed students’ relationships to staff and to one another
in a non-academic setting offering something of a clean slate,
and 2) offer an entry point for a facilitated process of involving
students in the ongoing deﬁnition and reﬁnement of the school’s
vision and brand (e.g. via workshops with local designers creat-
ing and iterating on the graphic identity package for the school).
Needless to say, at each level fewer and fewer students will par-
ticipate. The whole idea is to give students and their families an
increasingly high ﬁdelity sense for what the SSA will be like so that
they can make a meaningfully informed decision. At the same time,
the earlier we identify enrollees we’re likely to see in their eighth
grade year, the earlier we can begin working with them and their
families to develop a relationship and the necessary trust to un-
dertake a big shift like this. We’ve raised $100,000 to support this
enrollment outreach process before the SSA opens. After the SSA
opens, these enrollment outreach activities will be brought into the
SSA and coupled to student and staff work.
This enrollment outreach process’s ﬁrst function is to generate
sufﬁciently broad and diverse interest to meet our equity commit-
ments. But it doubles both as a testbed for hiring (which we’ll talk
more about later) and an informal sandbox for curriculum devel-
opment for the following year. In this way, the enrollment outreach
64
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
process will be built into the ongoing hiring, professional develop-
ment, and curriculum formation processes for the SSA, requiring no
additional funding.
That said, we’re being very conservative in our approach to
designing and funding the enrollment outreach process the ﬁrst
year. Not only have we never done it before, but the importance
of the initial hires, enrollment, and launch cannot be overstated
given our emphasis on getting the culture of the school right.66 You
66 Deal, T. E. and K. D. Peterson (1999).
Shaping school culture: The heart of
leadership. ERIC; and MacNeil, A. J.,
D. L. Prater, and S. Busch (2009). The
effects of school culture and climate
on student achievement. International
Journal of Leadership in Education 12(1),
73–84
can read more about the speciﬁcs of our funding and plan in SSA
Enrollment Outreach Budget.
Enrollment Process
We’ve detailed an enrollment mechanism which will prevent us
from enrolling cohorts which do not satisfy our equity commit-
ment. But that means the onus to generate sufﬁciently broad and
diverse interest among families in Somerville is on us. This will
involve a three step process:
1. We’ll begin the outreach process immediately upon approval of
the SSA67 and continue year-round.
67 We’ve found that, especially for
families unused to school outreach and
engagement, being asked to dig into
the details of an imaginary school tests
their patience
2. If, after three months, we somehow have generated insufﬁciently
broad and diverse interest to meet our equity commitments,
we’ll go to the District for help targeting families. We’ll look at
the socioeconomic, demographic, and academic backgrounds of
families who have registered interest and work with the District
to solicit families whose enrollment would bridge the gaps we
have. This would not only involve reaching out to them for par-
ticipation in the public outreach process as detailed in the section
on enrollment, but for one-on-one and one-on-few conversations
over dinner, coffee, or by phone.
3. If after another three months, we somehow have not yet gener-
ated sufﬁciently broad and diverse interest to meet our equity
commitments, we’ll frankly take a step back and reconsider
whether this initiative is something Somerville actually wants
before running an opt-out lottery to close the remaining gap
between the cohort of interested families and our equity commit-
ments. Typically, the best-practice starting point for public insti-
tutions reaching disengaged populations is “active outreach”68
68 Wood, C. (2005). Making choice a
reality in secondary education. London:
Social Market Foundation
which in the case of schools, typically looks like a mix of infor-
mational sessions and an opt-out lottery.69 Because of how much
69 Lubienski, C. (2004). Charter school
innovation in theory and practice:
Autonomy, r&d, and curricular confor-
mity. Taking account of charter schools:
What’s happened and what’s next, 72–90
work we’ll be doing in advance of this phase, we want to be sure
to put some pause in place for reﬂection. Concretely, this will
mean that the SSA will have to ask for the School Committee’s
permission70 to conduct an opt-out lottery and publicly explain
70 A majority vote of the School Com-
mittee as fully constituted will be
required to allow the opt-out lottery
after no fewer than two public hear-
ings and thirty days’ consideration.
or interpret its failure up to this point (which we hope we never
reach) to generate sufﬁciently broad or diverse interest.
Note that the enrollment process will very explicitly avoid mar-
keting or advertising itself as targeting struggling students; how-
students
65
ever, we will take pains to ensure that those students who have
struggled know that the SSA is very explicitly not an enrichment
or magnet program. Participants in the enrollment process will be
informed about the mechanics of the lottery in detail after they reg-
ister, though the full details will also be made available online from
the beginning. This shift and timing of emphasis is essential to the
counterproductive stereotyping of the SSA’s students, sabotaging
the re-invention of their relationship to school before they even
start. No waitlist will be generated or considered year-over-year in
selecting students.
Transfers Into the SSA
The SSA has only committed to enrolling
eighth graders. Transfers outside of this age-range and outside of
the yearly enrollment period (whose dates remain to be deﬁned,
though interest will be registered throughout the year) will be en-
tirely optional for the SSA, though yearly enrollment must be con-
strained by the equity commitments deﬁned in this plan. Transfers
will carry with them a prorated per capita allocation from the send-
ing District. Just as at Full Circle, the principal will be responsible
for sitting down with relevant staff to review student transcripts,
work, and background to translate their background into the SSA’s
curricular coverage, portfolio, and credit system.
Deﬁning a Margin of Error for the SSA Enrollment Process
The SSA’s
general margin of error will be 10% of the reference distribution’s
standard deviation. For some measures—like MCAS CPI targets—
this is easy to deﬁne since everything is one-dimensional and natu-
rally quantitative. For others—like measures of statistical dispersion
for achievement gap metrics or target distributions of demographic
or socioeconomic proﬁles in SSA enrollment—more sophisticated
statistical tools are required. Depending on the nature of the refer-
ence distribution—in particular, whether that distribution is over
a theoretically continuous variable like household income or a
categorical variable like race—a normalized version of either the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov71 or Bhattachyra72 goodness-of-ﬁt measures
71 Massey Jr, F. J. (1951).
The
kolmogorov-smirnov test for good-
ness of ﬁt. Journal of the American
statistical Association 46(253), 68–78
72 Eubank, R. and J. D. Hart (1992).
Testing goodness-of-ﬁt in regression
via order selection criteria. The Annals
of Statistics 20(3), 1412–1425
of statistical distance will be deﬁned. The SSA will document and
explain these tools, releasing them into the public domain, and will
brief the Somerville School Committee on their usage.
Assessment
Just as your family doctor does not rely on your temperature alone
to assess your health, the SSA will not rely on a single metric like
GPA to quantify student performance. Similarly, the performance
it commits to through its School Improvement Plans in aggregate
will not be one-dimensional (see the school improvement plan for
further details). Every student will have a full record which will
contain a mix of quantitative and qualitative assessment artifacts
gathered from a variety of sources over time. This record will be the
66
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
basis for discussions requiring summative assessment—viz. cross-
registration, matriculation, and approval of projects, internships,
and co-op participation.
For these summative uses, the primary metric of progress will
be a Standards Coverage metric combining velocity and depth of
coverage of the Common Core and MCAS STE/NGSS standards
as documented through our curriculum mapping process. These
metrics will be accompanied by a host of narrative evaluations from
projects, regular staff meetings with and about students, commu-
nity partners, et al.—basically everyone who’s worked with the
student in a signiﬁcant capacity. The results from the ofﬁcial and
diagnostic MCAS/PARCC/SAT tests and test preparation courses
over time will also be included.
More important than all of these metrics, however, is students’
capacity to produce quality work and the match between that ca-
pacity and the students’ self-described aims. For further details on
how students will evaluate themselves, their work, and their peers
(which we distinguish from assessment for formative and summa-
tive purposes), see Student Evaluation. An essential part of making
the transition from student to independent investigator is being
able to deﬁne the standards of performance for a project. Con-
cretely, this means that in every project students undertake, there
will be a phase—which may sometimes just be a few minutes in
very small projects or very early on in students’ time at the SSA—
where they are sitting down and considering what would make
their project a success. As projects get more and more sophisti-
cated, this will involve ﬁnding and choosing experts who can act in
a critical capacity. Much of the work that students do will be sub-
ject to small-group, studio critique style evaluations, each of which
will produce a variety of artifacts, inspired by the narrative evalu-
ation system at institutions like Hampshire College.73 Throughout
73 Astin, A. W. et al. (2012). Assessment
for excellence: The philosophy and practice
of assessment and evaluation in higher
education. Rowman & Littleﬁeld
a project’s evolution and over the course of many projects, staff
will be consistently mapping students’ work back to the Common
Core/MCAS STE.
Advancement
The SSA will not be age segregated, so the traditional notions of
grade advancement do not apply. That said, there are two, pri-
mary dimensions along which students will formally advance,
though they are spectra and not discretized categories: 1) project
autonomy and 2) project sophistication. Neither of these standards
will be rigorously quantiﬁed or necessarily used to segregate stu-
dents. Inevitably, some separation will occur as different seminars
or projects ask for different backgrounds or maturity levels. But
the design of SSA curricula will speciﬁcally aim to encourage suf-
ﬁciently broad divergence in student work so as to accommodate
amateur work alongside expert work, given the plethora of research
supporting this proximity and the resulting interactions, modeling,
students
67
and formal student teaching opportunities as extremely valuable.74
74 CORNISH, L. (2012). Mixed-grade
elementary-school classes and student
achievement. International Guide to
Student Achievement, 122; Doherty, A.
(2012). " teacher, i showed her how to
do that!": Teaching early-years children
through mixed-age play. Primary
Science 122, 24–26; Whitman, N. A.
and J. D. Fife (1988). Peer Teaching:
To Teach Is To Learn Twice. ASHE-ERIC
Higher Education Report No. 4, 1988.
ERIC; and Boud, D., R. Cohen, and
J. Sampson (1999). Peer learning and
assessment. Assessment & Evaluation in
Higher Education 24(4), 413–426
Project Autonomy
The SSA’s mission is to transform students into
independent investigators. Students cannot simply be dumped into
autonomous environments and expected to ﬂourish, and so we’ve
carefully designed a setup which will allow us to individually scaf-
fold the growth of student autonomy. Some students who might
otherwise ﬁnd themselves in the ninth grade may be a perfect
match for a co-op opportunity, while others who might be seniors
may still be struggling to manage projects longer than a week in
scope. These decisions—about the scope and scale of projects that
students are ready to take on—will be made in coordination with
the student’s Advisory (see Stafﬁng for more details) and will cut
across concerns as diverse as project time scale to funding control
(students will receive increasing project budgets to manage over
their time with the SSA).
Project Sophistication
Much more simply, many projects will re-
quire skills and background an interested student may not have.
While this will partially be captured by the curriculum mapping
process, inevitably there will be dimensions of readiness which
will need to be interpreted and brought to bear by staff. Again, the
student’s Advisory will make decisions about student readiness
based on demonstrated competence and their experience with that
student.
Matriculation
Re-thinking assessment and advancement necessarily involves re-
thinking matriculation. The SSA has very deliberately excluded
college entrance or aggregate completion rates in its deﬁnitions
of success. The SSA’s mission is to transform people from stu-
dents into independent investigators, and if we’re going to help
those who traditionally fall through the cracks, we must reduce
the number of cracks. That means the SSA will not only be much
more intimate, but more vertically integrated—rather than grow-
ing in breadth, the SSA will be looking to grow in depth. Instead
of considering high school to be a four-year transaction, we want
to structurally build in support for decade long relationships with
students. You can read more about this later on, but this focus on
longitudinal support does not obviate the notion of matriculation,
but it behooves us to revisit it.
For the SSA, matriculation is a step that is taken when a student
is ready for and excited about their next step in life—whether that’s
entering the workforce or going to college. The minimum precondi-
tion for matriculation will be one of the following:
• Complete Standards Coverage as documented by our curriculum
mapping process.
68
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
• Admission to a postsecondary institution.
• Board of Trustees approval of your portfolio and personal sum-
mary.
Transfers Out of the SSA
An axiom underlying the design and creation of the SSA is that
no one school can serve every student equally well. Which means,
all things held equal, a diversity of options is better for students.
This applies to the SSA just as it applies to SHS. This means that we
expect to experience attrition through transfers as students either
discover the SSA isn’t working out or that it isn’t for them. Overall,
we’ve been inspired by what the IEP and special education advo-
cacy process looks like at its best, going from 1) articulating and
programmatically attempting to address issues with the current
setup to 2) identifying long-term, irreconcilable needs to 3) care-
ful, individualized support of the entire family in searching for,
securing, and supporting the transition to alternatives.
Deciding “It’s just not working out,” is a long process culminat-
ing in a decision not to be made lightly. Just as we take the equity
ramiﬁcations of our enrollment extremely seriously, we take the eq-
uity ramiﬁcations of students leaving the SSA even more seriously.
We are committed to avoiding creaming students and to ensure that
we serve those students who need alternative options most. But we
can’t let that commitment hurt students. To reconcile these tensions
requires two different types of response.
First, how do we prevent any student attrition from exacerbating
inequality in Somerville Public Schools or working against the
SSA’s equity goals? Rather than frame this student by student,
we’ve committed to maintaining distributions of demographic,
socioeconomic, and academic diversity and need that if we violate
repeatedly, will result in the dissolution of the SSA (see chapter I
for details). These measures do not just address enrollment, but
retention as well because these distributions will be measured for
the student body as a whole.
Second, how do we avoid hurting that student? If, after delibera-
tion by the principal and the student’s Advisory Team and family,
the decision is made to begin searching for alternatives to the SSA,
the SSA will shift into a phase similar to a student’s college search.
We will arrange for tours and perhaps trial periods at other edu-
cational options throughout Somerville and Greater Boston. This
might be Next Wave/Full Circle, Somerville High School, Prospect
Hill Academy, or the bevy of schools that inter-district choice opens
up. Overall, the emphasis will be on ﬁnding the right place for that
student, and the SSA will take full responsibility for supporting the
family in investigating those options while ensuring their children
don’t unduly lose credit or access within SPS.
students
69
SSA staff, working with SPS Student Services, will take on the re-
sponsibility for ensuring that the student ﬁnds an environment that
works for them, that their family is fully apprised of the options
and ramiﬁcations of their choice, and that the details of logistical
and ﬁnancial viability are addressed as needed. Transfers to SHS
have been ﬂeshed out in greater detail and are covered in Trans-
fers and will be further ﬂeshed out by the SSA Integration Team.
Depending on the reasons behind someone’s issues with the SSA,
either the project manager or social worker in their Advisory will
be the primary point person in managing and effecting these transi-
tions.
Handling the logistics
The SSA will be operating on an earned
credit model relying on our curriculum mapping process. When
someone transfers out, we’ll have a situation basically identical
to matriculation in terms of generating a legible and meaningful
transcript to aid placement and credit transfer. The project manager
in the student’s Advisory will be responsible for this.
Transcripts & Portfolios
In addition to a transformative educational experience, the SSA is
responsible for rendering students’ work legible so that they can
smoothly make a transition to whatever their next step may be,
whether the workforce or college. Given how unusual the SSA’s
programs will be, the transcript process will be different than that
at many schools. That said, a traditional credit-hours and course-
selection transcript will be generated, relying on the same data and
process as the overall curriculum mapping mechanism for Common
Core/MCAS/NGSS. Depending on the type of projects involved,
this may also involve pairing the student transcript with recom-
mended credit analysis effecting prorated mappings from student
work onto portions of commonly used, introductory textbooks. This
mapping process is no small task and will be one of the primary
responsibilities of the curriculum developer as members of their
cohort are preparing for matriculation or transfer. We expect the
curriculum mapping system we’ll be building will make it easier to
maintain and re-use these mappings over time.
But the most interesting and substantive meat of the transcript
will be provided for by twofold support speciﬁcally tailored to
handle project-based work:
• All students, throughout their time with the SSA, will be indi-
vidually mentored in the design and implementation of their
own websites and portfolios. These will take different forms
depending on students’ interests and background (cf. an aspir-
ing architect, electrical engineer, and writer), but this will serve
as the focal point for comprehensively documenting students’
intellectual work.
70
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
• The SSA will provide time and staff support to students to help
them design a curricular map of their work, packaging the ﬁnely
grained Common Core/MCAS mapping into a more easily
parsed record (though that full, raw record will be included
in their transcript). This curricular map may involve connect-
ing elements of their projects to appropriate textbook chapters,
apprenticeships, or related programming.
Taken together these materials will form the basis for the articu-
lation agreements with unions and other postsecondary institutions
with whom the SSA will negotiate over time. Fortunately, this is by
no means a new problem—not only have colleges like Hampshire
and New College been dealing with it for decades, but when high-
ﬁdelity narrative evaluation and mastery-based metrics (though
they weren’t called that at the time) began to crop up in the 1970s,
a small but signiﬁcant cohort of alternative high schools around the
country began taking advantage of the infrastructure. These schools
included obvious, alternative schools (free schools, conservatories,
high level sports schools, etc.) as well as wide variety of small, pro-
gressive schools.75 The preliminary conversations we’ve had with
75 Labaree, D. F. (1986). Curriculum,
credentials, and the middle class: A
case study of a nineteenth century
high school. Sociology of Educa-
tion 59(1), 42–57; and Labaree, D. F.
(1997). How to succeed in school without
really learning: The credentials race in
American education. Yale University
Press
admissions staff at local institutions like MIT, Harvard, and Olin
have convinced us that these conversations will go smoothly when
the time comes. And of course, we’ll have at least ﬁve years to open
these conversations and work closely with institutions immediately
relevant to our students.
Transitional Services
The core of the SSA’s handling of students’ transition grows from
two, basic principles:
1. Graduation should be gradual.
2. Graduation should be a team effort.
Inspired by the best practices of special education advocacy,76
76 Janiga, S. J. and V. Costenbader
(2002). The transition from high
school to postsecondary education for
students with learning disabilities a
survey of college service coordinators.
Journal of Learning Disabilities 35(5),
463–470
the SSA is intent on treating every student’s transition out of the
daily contact with the SSA to their next step—whatever that may
be—carefully and individually. For a long time, people said that
high school dropout rates were the problem. Then it was college
entrance rates. Now it’s college completion rates. At some point,
we need to take responsibility for the entirety of our students’
launch into life, returning to the notion that if we’re going to help
those who traditionally fall through the cracks, we must reduce the
number of cracks. A robust set of transitional services is central to
this.
We want to make sure that our students succeed. And we want
to build the necessary autonomy and ﬂexibility into the school’s
operations to accommodate this. Speciﬁcally, students will all have
an Individual Action Plan (IAP) which is revised over the course
of their time at the SSA and tied into evaluations of their work
students
71
and growth. A signiﬁcant portion of the IAP and the conversa-
tions around it are devoted to students deﬁning their goals and the
dimensions of growth that matter most to them. Managing these
conversations over time is one of the primary responsibilities of
the social worker in the student’s Advisory. A natural ending and
transition point for these conversations is the question of where and
how the student wants to proceed from the SSA. This conversation
will start well in advance of their matriculation and up to 8% of stu-
dent and staff instructional time will be set aside for handling these
transition questions in students’ ﬁnal year.
Not only that, but before students make their transition they and
their family will articulate their primary concerns and what types
of ongoing connections (e.g. to alumni of their intended college or
professionals in their chosen industry) would be most useful so
that the administration and social worker can take on arranging for
those connections and minimally a community member (preferably
with relevant expertise and a history with the student) who will be
in charge of checking in regularly, becoming aware of quite a ﬁne
grain of the student’s activities. e.g. both for purposes of longitudi-
nal data analysis and student transition support, we want to ensure
that informed adults are not only collecting samples of student
work and academic performance (as relevant) over time, but help-
ing students connect to professors and other colleagues to help with
tasks like class choice and scholarship applications—nominally
non-academic skills, background, and emphases which pose a sig-
niﬁcant, unarticulated advantage for students from educated or
otherwise atypically engaged families.
Longitudinal Support
Which brings us to the question of what the SSA’s long term re-
lationship to students looks like. While student’s next step—to
college or work—will be taken with the full support of our transi-
tion services, capitalizing on corporate and institutional connections
made in the course of community projects, internships, and co-ops,
the SSA wants to maintain an ongoing relationship that goes be-
yond organizing the class reunion or occasional Facebook messages
from staff, inspired by community organizing models like Harlem
Children’s Zone and mentorship models like YearUp.
Even if the SSA erases the academic achievement gap, the reper-
cussions of the social, cultural, and racial achievement gap go well
beyond students’ academic work. Interview skills, negotiation
skills, career counseling, network capital: these are just a few of the
cracks that students—even those who successfully graduate, are
admitted to college, and complete college—struggle with over time.
Cumulatively the effect is to recapitulate the existing inequities
with which our schools struggle so valiantly in the ﬁrst place.
We see the SSA as a long-term learning community. That em-
phasis on the long haul will not only offer very interesting and
72
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
important opportunities for longitudinal data analysis, but if man-
aged well a rapidly growing network of potential future mentors,
community connections, internships, co-ops, and volunteers: our
own alumni network. Combined with careful documentation of the
important people in their lives (e.g. formative professors, strong job
recommendations, etc.) and we have a potentially very compelling,
bootstrapped longitudinal support network for students that em-
bodies the best practices of such efforts.77
77 Nahapiet, J. (2009). Capitalizing on
connections: social capital and strategic
management. Social capital: Reaching
out, reaching in, 205–236
The obvious question becomes: where will the time and money
to support this come from? Like many of the SSA’s facets, this is
something that a combination of its tiny scale and emphasis on
community integration can address. Each staff member will be
graduating, on average, somewhere in the neighborhood of twelve
students per year. Each of those students will be paired with a
mentor. Even keeping tabs on students a decade out means that
one hour per week on the part of these two adults could sustain
an hour long phone call every ﬁve months from a staff member
and two half hour phone calls from their mentor every week! The
point of this calculation is not to commit to that level of mentorship
but to demonstrate how long term and how formative an inﬂuence
maintaining a connection with students could be and how feasi-
ble such efforts are. Inevitably, the details will need to be worked
out, but as with issues in transition services, we’re actually ﬁve
years away from that and know that we want to make it a priority
starting now.
Growing the SSA
The plan that we’ve sketched out here covers the SSA’s next ﬁve
years, at least. At that time the School Committee will need to re-
new the Innovation Plan for the SSA to continue. Assuming that the
SSA is a success, we expect there will be compelling opportunities
to grow down into younger grades once the SSA’s 8th–12th setup is
stable.
Boundary conditions
Without an initial motion by the SSA Prin-
cipal and subsequent, majority vote from the Somerville School
Committee, the SSA will never exceed an average of forty students
per grade level without a two-thirds approval vote from the School
Committee. The SSA will, however, be guaranteed the ability to
enroll at least thirty-six students yearly (assuming we generate
sufﬁciently broad and diverse interest to support such enrollment).
Growing into lower grades
The core, curricular innovations of the
SSA focus on computational, project-based contexts tightly in-
tegrated with the community. Several pillars of that community
integration—e.g. co-ops and internships—are socially and legally
challenging to extend into lower grades. That said, as the SSA’s
praxis and curricula are established and proven, we fully expect
students
73
to grow into the lower grades (still constrained by aforementioned
growth rate conditions). But because many of the mentorship and
community relationships will need to look different, we’d like to do
so slowly—to have a stable, functioning 8–12th community before
attempting to add further, new initiatives. This interest in “growing
down” is also based in a variety of research-based,78 peer-teaching
78 Fantuzzo, J. W., R. E. Riggio, S. Con-
nelly, and L. A. Dimeff (1989). Effects
of reciprocal peer tutoring on academic
achievement and psychological adjust-
ment: A component analysis. Journal
of educational psychology 81(2), 173; and
Goldschmid, B. and M. L. Goldschmid
(1976). Peer teaching in higher educa-
tion: a review. Higher Education 5(1),
9–33
approaches that would engage older students in mentoring and
tutoring students in younger grades.
Autonomy Analysis
To make all this possible, we need complete autonomy in our def-
inition of credits and matriculation standards, as well as all neces-
sary access to contact information for District families to implement
our comprehensive enrollment outreach process. This is mostly a
policy implementation of our curricular autonomy, just as Full Cir-
cle/Next Wave can create classes and determine appropriate credit
transfers.
Why should we expect this will beneﬁt students?
The research over-
whelmingly supports the prominence of long term, supportive
adult relationships in improving student outcomes79 especially for
79 Astone, N. M. and S. S. McLanahan
(1991). Family structure, parental
practices and high school completion.
American Sociological Review, 309–
320; Larose, S. and M. Boivin (1998).
Attachment to parents, social support
expectations, and socioemotional
adjustment during the high school-
college transition. Journal of Research
on Adolescence 8(1), 1–27; and Barone,
C., A. I. Aguirre-Deandreis, and E. J.
Trickett (1991). Means—ends problem-
solving skills, life stress, and social
support as mediators of adjustment
in the normative transition to high
school. American Journal of Community
Psychology 19(2), 207–225
students who have struggled historically80 or with special needs.81
80 Lundberg, S. (2013). The college
type: Personality and educational
inequality. Journal of Labor Eco-
nomics 31(3), 421–441; and Kidd,
C., H. Palmeri, and R. N. Aslin (2012).
Rational snacking: Young children’s
decision-making on the marshmallow
task is moderated by beliefs about
environmental reliability. Cognition
81 Wagner, M. M. and J. Blackorby
(1996). Transition from high school
to work or college: How special
education students fare. The Future
of Children, 103–120
To repeat ourselves: if we want fewer students to fall through the
cracks, then we need fewer cracks. Throughout the practice and
design of public institutions, we’re seeing a transition to increas-
ingly wraparound, vertically integrated services.82 Whether in the
82 VanDenBerg, J. E. (1996). Individual-
ized services and supports through the
wraparound process: Philosophy and
procedures. Journal of Child and Family
Studies 5(1), 7–21; Burchard, J. D., E. J.
Bruns, and S. N. Burchard (2002). The
wraparound approach. Community
treatment for youth: Evidence-based inter-
ventions for severe emotional and behav-
ioral disorders 2, 69–90; and Theodos,
B. (2010). Inclusive public housing:
Services for the hard to house
emergence of social medicine, the prominence of community orga-
nizations like Harlem Children’s Zone, the rise of ‘grit’—the SSA
wants to lean into this trend and take it to its logical conclusion.
What legal affordances will be required?
We are still in the process of
writing up the necessary exemptions and waivers required for this.
You can ﬁnd a partial list in Legal Affordances, but per 603 CMR
48.03(b),
If an innovation plan committee is proposing an innovation plan that
may conﬂict with laws (including regulations) governing other public
schools, the committee shall, before presenting the plan to the school
committee for approval, request approval from the Commissioner
for any provision in the plan that may conﬂict with such laws. The
Commissioner’s approval shall be based on his determination that
the plan is consistent with 603 CMR 48.03 (2) and with the state’s
obligations under the education clause of the Massachusetts Con-
stitution, Mass. Const., pt. II, ch. V, s. II, as deﬁned by a court of
competent jurisdiction, and that the provision in the plan that may
conﬂict with such laws is necessary to advance the mission or educa-
tional programs of the innovation school. If the Commissioner does
not approve the proposed provision in the plan, the innovation plan
committee may ask the Board to review the matter and the Board
shall make the ﬁnal decision.
74
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
which means that the full process of articulating points of con-
tact between state laws and regulations and the Innovation Plan as
voted on need not conclude until the School Committee presenta-
tion. As with negotiating necessary affordances in the Collective
Bargaining Agreement to make the Innovation Plan possible, non-
substantive design edits and alterations may be made after the
Innovation Plan Committee vote without triggering a re-start of the
process.83
83 French, D. (2013, August). Personal
communication with dan french.
Regarding voting and editing process
between Innovation Plan and School
Committee votes
Student Evaluation
The SSA has committed to very clear dimensions of performance to
which it is accountable to the School Committee (see the school im-
provement plan and chapter on governance for details). But largely,
we see those as necessary but by no means sufﬁcient to deﬁne suc-
cess. Success focuses on the SSA’s mission of transforming students
into independent investigators and helping them to happily and
successfully transition to the next steps in life.
This bright line distinction shows up clearly when considering
not only what you evaluate but why you evaluate it. Designing
an evaluation system is implicitly about setting your goals as an
organization and not just ﬁnding out if you’re meeting them (sum-
mative assessment) but providing yourself with the necessary reso-
lution and ﬁdelity in ongoing awareness so that you can make the
appropriate course corrections and feedback on progress or lack
thereof (formative assessment).
This evaluation process can happen within the student (reﬂec-
tive), within the the school (internal), or for an outside party (exter-
nal). Combining these, we have a high level picture of the evalua-
tion landscape at the SSA.
This landscape does not tell us to what end evaluations are made,
though. For the SSA, the standard is simple: we think that if stu-
dents ﬁnd themselves highly engaged in deep, hard work every day
at increasing levels of autonomy, resulting in projects of increas-
ingly high quality for ﬁve years, everything will be ﬁne. Ultimately,
our success is measured against our mission: when a student leaves
us, what is their capacity to act as an independent investigator?
Drawing from articulations of investigative process in a variety of
educational and professional settings,84 for us that means,
84 Gardner, H. (1994). The Arts and
Human Development: A Psychological
Study of the Artistic Process; with a New
Introduction. Basic Books; Berger, R.
(2003). An Ethic of Excellence: Building a
Culture of Craftsmanship with Students.
ERIC; Lakatos, I., P. Feyerabend, and
M. Motterlini (1999). For and against
method: including Lakatos’s lectures
on scientiﬁc method and the Lakatos-
Feyerabend correspondence. University
of Chicago Press; Lawson, B. (2006).
How designers think: the design process
demystiﬁed. Routledge; and Pahl, G.
and W. Beitz (1988). Engineering
design: a systematic approach. NASA
STI/Recon Technical Report A 89, 47350
1. Articulate a problem or question personally meaningful to you.
2. Design a project or experiment to engage that question.
3. Rustle up the necessary resources to carry out that project or
experiment.
4. Manage yourself, your time, and said resources to execute that
project successfully, iterating on the ﬁrst three steps of this pro-
cess to converge on a clear vision.
5. Document and share the results of that project or experiment
76
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
with relevant experts and people whose opinion you care about
in a [meaningful] culturally and socially situated context.
These three notions of autonomy, quality, and depth go to the
core of the aims of our student evaluation system, inspired by con-
servatories like Julliard, organizations like Big Picture Learning,
and Expeditionary Learning schools, each of which have differ-
ent takes on notions of craftsmanship and autonomy, and each of
which have developed successful models focusing on these qualities
in students and their work.
INTERNAL
FORMATIVE
SUMMATIVE
EXTERNAL
REFLECTIVE
resume, 
portfolio
work 
summaries, 
support 
letters
peer, staff
evaluations
journal,
personal 
site
articulation agreements & customizable 
transcripts emphasizing 
fidelity & personalization
Figure 9: Students will be re-
ﬂecting on their work, peers,
staff, and com-munity mem-
bers will interview and critique
students’ work. In addition
to the MCAS/SAT and stu-
dents’ corpus of work mapped
back to the Common Core,
this collection of high ﬁdelity
assessment will be collated
into custom transcripts and
measures, all emphasizing
a personalized and individ-
ualized approach. This will
involve a variety of often qual-
itative work assessments and
artifacts—just like the real
world. We’ll be uniting models
from success stories like High
Tech High, New College, Big
Picture Learning, and Expedi-
tionary Schools.
This chapter lays out the current designs of the SSA for achiev-
ing an effective evaluation system for students and their work
which lines up with its mission, as distinct from the boundary
conditions of things like MCAS which we’ve put into commitments
like our School Improvement Plan.
Individual Action Plans
Inspired by the best hopes of the practices of performance reviews
and IEP development, the SSA will implement what we’re currently
terming Individual Action Plans (IAPs). These plans are meant to
be individualized considerations of student background, aptitude,
goals, and development. But of course, they aren’t contextualized
as addressing a pathology, they’re meant to surface students and
student evaluation
77
families goals and concerns for themselves to articulate long term
developmental goals and reconcile those with midterm activities
and opportunities. For some, they may identify ﬁtness as a priority.
Others might want to focus on their social skills. By the time some
have a clear idea of their career interests, they may decide to incor-
porate the development of speciﬁc skills or achievement of speciﬁc,
personalized milestones into their IAP. Regardless, this plan forms
the basis of our evaluation both of the student’s progress and when
taken in aggregate, staff and school success.
These will be the basis of regular meetings and revision with
students’ Advisory and may, as time goes on, incorporate the com-
munity relationships and mentorships attaching to that student’s
projects and development. These conversations will be one of the
primary contexts in which students develop and articulate their
metacognitive vocabulary, goals, and self-concept: central to the
development of their ability to manage themselves and their devel-
opment.85
85 Azevedo, R. and A. F. Hadwin
(2005). Scaffolding self-regulated learn-
ing and metacognition–implications
for the design of computer-based
scaffolds. Instructional Science 33(5),
367–379; Pintrich, P. R. and E. V.
De Groot (1990). Motivational and
self-regulated learning components
of classroom academic performance.
Journal of educational psychology 82(1),
33; and Rivers, W. P. (2001). Auton-
omy at all costs: An ethnography of
metacognitive self-assessment and
self-management among experienced
language learners. The modern language
journal 85(2), 279–290
Peer Reviews
The SSA’s focus on autonomy does not mean students will be
working alone. Collaborating effectively is central to our vision
and deﬁnition of independent investigation. Given signiﬁcant and
frequent collaboration among students at a variety of timescales, we
will have the basic foundation for substantive project peer reviews,
which themselves will be the ﬁrst context in which students are
introduced to many of the metacognitive and reﬂective executive
functions we’re focused on developing.
The focus of these peer reviews will be on two dimensions of
performance identiﬁed as central in effective project-based and
knowledge work environments: developing students’ sense of craft
and quality86 and developing their empathy, broadly construed.87
86 Series, A. A. E. C. (2009). Qualities
of quality: Understanding excellence in
arts education
87 Association, N. M. S. (2003). This
we believe: Successful schools for young
adolescents: A position paper of the
National Middle School Association.
National Middle School Association;
and Bosworth, K. (1994). Developing
collaborative skills in college stu-
dents. New Directions for Teaching and
Learning 1994(59), 25–31
Surveys
Family and student happiness show up nowhere in the state or Dis-
trict’s default evaluation frameworks. Given that they are in fact the
primary constituency of the SSA, we think it is important to bring
that evaluation into every level of the SSA’s operation. In particular
with regard to student evaluations, surveys looking to assess their
relative contribution to the SSA community and other students’
success and satisfaction will ﬁgure into their assessment. While
measuring this is hard, there is a precedent for it and a variety of
tools (e.g. sentiment analysis88) to make it easier.
88 Pang, B. and L. Lee (2008). Opin-
ion mining and sentiment analysis.
Foundations and trends in information
retrieval 2(1-2), 1–135
Portfolios
Capturing, communicating, and rendering legible what makes indi-
vidual learners uniquely impressive is central not only to the eval-
78
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
uation process, but to ensuring that students’ next, postsecondary
steps can be taken conﬁdently and smoothly.
Independent investigators should have independent investiga-
tions to point to. These do not show up cleanly on a transcript.
Managing the process of documenting, curating, and framing these
experiences will be one of the primary responsibilities of the project
manager in the student’s advisory. A central artifact in this pro-
cess will be a student’s portfolio(s). Depending on the nature of
student’s interests and work over time, the speciﬁc form, style, and
content will differ. But collectively, they’re intended to represent a
set of high ﬁdelity narratives which make clear what the student is
[uniquely] capable of, what their story of growth and development
has been, and what their near term targets for themselves and their
work are.
For some, this portfolio will be their eventual submission to their
Advisory and Board of Trustees for graduation. For all, we expect it
to be a valuable record likely to be incorporated into their personal
web presence which will be central to future job offers, college
admissions processes, scholarship interviews, etc.
Dimensions of Performance
One upshot of the SSA’s emphasis on divergent activities across the
board is that in no way are we looking for all students to look or
achieve the same. Traditional schools offer some of this diversity
through a mix of extracurricular activities and sports in addition
to whatever course catalogue diversity they can support. Despite
this, most of the evaluation frameworks available to discuss stu-
dent work are surprisingly one dimensional (e.g. GPAs) or entirely
qualitative (e.g. letters of recommendation). For the SSA, the overall
student evaluation will speciﬁcally target four dimensions of per-
formance which will be collectively judged by their peers, Advisory,
portfolio, and involved community partners in a process managed
by their Advisory’s project manager:
• skill: We think depth is more important than breadth. We’re
not looking to cultivate well-rounded students, per se. We want
students to become deeply expert in a few things but develop a
broad awareness of and sensitivity to other skills and domains.
In industry and academia, this trope is referred to as “T-shaped”
people.89 Aside from the instrumental value distinguishing
89 Morgan, J. M. and J. K. Liker (2006).
The Toyota product development system.
Productivity press New York; and
Rip, A. (2004). Strategic research,
post-modern universities and research
training. Higher Education Policy 17(2),
153–166
students from their peers in job and college applications, most
students are denied the opportunity to ever feel deeply expert in
something, and we now know that these feelings of competence
and expertise have [very positive!] repercussions that reverberate
well beyond the domain of expertise.90
90 Bouffard-Bouchard, T., S. Parent,
and S. Larivee (1991). Inﬂuence of
self-efﬁcacy on self-regulation and
performance among junior and senior
high-school age students. International
Journal of Behavioral Development 14(2),
153–164
• productivity: One downside to some schools’ emphasis on
preparation is that students spend remarkably little time produc-
ing anything. As anyone who’s managed a ﬂaky college student
student evaluation
79
knows, the ability to consistently produce shippable output
while maintaining effective work/life balance is a deeply valu-
able skill. But despite the widespread acknowledgment of the
importance of these skills—especially in knowledge work—
there’s rarely any time to acknowledge their importance in
school, much less develop this skill. At the SSA, a student’s
productivity will be explicitly called out as a dimension of their
performance which transcends any individual project.
• group contribution: The SSA aims to be a learning commu-
nity. Much of the work that goes into maintaining and expand-
ing such a community and its efﬁcacy don’t necessarily show
up in individual projects. Students who act as social leaders,
those who motivate others, those who mediate disputes—these
skills and capacities go unrecognized (and therefore, largely un-
cultivated) in traditional classroom environments. The SSA’s
project-based context will not only mean these skills are much
more important, but will make authentic assessment and articu-
lation of these skills plausible.
• project contribution: Because the SSA is focused on devel-
oping new models of community-driven learning and research,
with much of its staff designing new curricula and projects from
scratch, there’s an overall project articulated in which students
themselves can participate. Whether helping to create curricular
materials or developing tools for managing student records or
ﬂeshing out the SSA’s CRM database for managing community
connections, there are many ways of ‘giving back’ to the SSA
which might not show up as curricular projects but which are
central to the SSA’s success and development (not to mention
deep developmentally for the students involved).
Standardized Testing
In conversations about alternative schools, many folks’ ﬁrst ques-
tion is often, “Well sure, but what about the MCAS?” The SSA
design team feels that the MCAS is a wonderful measure of socioe-
conomic status and family education, but largely irrelevant to our
mission of transforming students into independent investigators.
But it is a boundary condition of public education, and denying
that does many students a disservice.
After visiting a number of high performance, test-focused
schools in Boston and New York focused historically struggling
students and reviewing the literature on successful test preparation
approaches91, we’ve put together a mix of targeted test preparation
91 Buchmann, C., D. J. Condron, and
V. J. Roscigno (2010). Shadow educa-
tion, american style: Test preparation,
the sat and college enrollment. Social
Forces 89(2), 435–461; and Volante, L.
(2004). Teaching to the test: What ev-
ery educator and policy-maker should
know. Canadian Journal of Educational
Administration and Policy 35(Sept. 25)
and diagnostics which we’re conﬁdent can address student’s testing
needs.
Rather than focusing speciﬁcally on the MCAS in designing
the structure of the SSA, we’ve allocated ∼8% of students’ time
for all the work associated with schooling which we see as too
80
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
disconnected from the design of good learning experiences to allow
to have a ﬁrst-class impact on the design of projects and curricula.
Speciﬁcally, this includes the MCAS, SAT/ACT, college admissions
essay-editing, interview preparation, general test-taking skills, etc.
BEST 
CASE
WORST 
CASE
MCAS 
measures 
learning
MCAS
measures 
economics
Deep projects consistently 
mapped back to the curriculum 
will result in higher test scores.
Structured test prep, ﬁrewalled 
from the primary curriculum, is 
required for MCAS success.
reality?
weekly diagnostic surfacing students needing prep.
daily, volunteer-led MCAS prep sessions
monthly testing skills workshops
one week before MCAS devoted to test prep
Figure 10: Improving MCAS
scores is a minimum pre-
condition for our success,
but it by no means deﬁnes
success. We want to cleanly
separate the MCAS, SAT, and
other schooling-mechanisms
from deep learning while re-
specting the central role these
gatekeepers play in students’
futures. Emulating the test
prep programs at performant
academies and test prep pro-
grams like Kaplan, we’ll be
isolating those concerns and
optimizing students’ training
accordingly.
We think that denying the importance of these mechanisms is
irresponsible. But, we’ve ﬁrewalled developing these skills from the
rest of the SSA experience.
In the MCAS’s case, our general reasoning is simple: If MCAS
measures real learning, we “just” need to do a good job. If it’s just
a test that tells you nothing about learning, you would have to prep
for it exclusively. To avoid all the issues of ‘teaching to the test’ we
are completely separating MCAS (and later, SAT) preparations from
the rest of the curriculum.
Students—with the help of community mentors—will undergo
ongoing diagnostic tests assessing MCAS readiness. This diagnostic
will be paired with ongoing, small-group, targeted test prep. This
prevents staff from distorting their lesson plans to match the MCAS
while insulating students from harmful stereotype threat and other
effects which stem from being identiﬁed as a ‘failing’ student.
Even better, this means there will be time set aside for test-taking
as a skill—a neglected and unfortunately essential part of many
present and future academic experiences.
student evaluation
81
Longitudinal Analysis
The SSA is intent on maintaining a much longer term relationship
with students than is typically expected. This will be effected by
both a more gradual matriculation process and an emphasis on
continued transitional support services and mentorship. This will
afford the SSA a unique vantage point from which to perform on-
going student evaluations to assess their growth and the SSA’s
success. This longitudinal setting suggests a three part framework
for considering whether the SSA did right by a given student:
• Whom did that student want to become?
• How smoothly was their transition out of the SSA and into the
steps leading to that goal effected?
• To what heights has the student gone? While there are some
obvious proxies for this—salary, level of education, etc.—we’re
much more interested in their deﬁnition of success and how
they’ve achieved that. For some that might be salary, for oth-
ers industry prominence, for others a stable family, for others
creative output, etc.
Autonomy Analysis
The SSA will have complete autonomy in deﬁning and implement-
ing evaluation frameworks for its students.
Why should we expect this will beneﬁt students?
We think the prob-
lem of designing evaluation systems sits at the boundary between
two points of view. The mathematical physicist Lord Kelvin said,
“If you can not measure it, you can not improve it.” A few decades
later, Albert Einstein said, “Not everything that can be counted
counts, and not everything that counts can be counted.” Obvi-
ously, they’re both right. And just as obviously, the solution isn’t a
compromise. Just as your doctor doesn’t rely solely on your tem-
perature to assess your health, research over the past three decades
has made it clear that in educational settings—when its feasible
to implement—multifaceted, narrative evaluation processes offer
higher ﬁdelity, better outcomes, stronger metacognitive skills, and a
whole host of other student beneﬁts that pair nicely with the SSA’s
emphasis and ﬂexibilities.92
92 Astin, A. W. et al. (2012). Assess-
ment for excellence: The philosophy and
practice of assessment and evaluation in
higher education. Rowman & Littleﬁeld;
Wolf, A. (1995). Competence-based
assessment. Open University Press
Buckingham; Rheingold, A., J. Seaman,
and R. Berger (2014). Assessment
across boundaries: How high-quality
student work demonstrates achieve-
ment, shapes practice, and improves
communities. In Assessing Schools
for Generation R (Responsibility), pp.
115–131. Springer; Adelman, C. (2006).
The toolbox revisited: Paths to degree
completion from high school through
college. US Department of Education;
and Levine, E., T. Sizer, T. Peters,
D. Littky, and E. Washor (2002). One
kid at a time: Big lessons from a small
school. Teachers College Press New
York
But fundamentally, we feel that if it is so natural for these evalu-
ation structures to be promulgated in the real world—and even in
plenty of collegiate settings—then the burden of proof should be
on traditional modes of evaluation to justify how they are uniquely
suited to the needs of high school students.
What legal affordances will be required?
To effect some of our speciﬁc
ideas for evaluation systems and their longitudinal use, we’ll need
82
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
some legal ﬂexibilities empowering students to be more in control
of their student records and the constraints attaching to those.
We are still in the process of writing up the necessary exemp-
tions and waivers required for this. You can ﬁnd a partial list in
Legal Affordances, but per 603 CMR 48.03(b),
If an innovation plan committee is proposing an innovation plan that
may conﬂict with laws (including regulations) governing other public
schools, the committee shall, before presenting the plan to the school
committee for approval, request approval from the Commissioner
for any provision in the plan that may conﬂict with such laws. The
Commissioner’s approval shall be based on his determination that
the plan is consistent with 603 CMR 48.03 (2) and with the state’s
obligations under the education clause of the Massachusetts Con-
stitution, Mass. Const., pt. II, ch. V, s. II, as deﬁned by a court of
competent jurisdiction, and that the provision in the plan that may
conﬂict with such laws is necessary to advance the mission or educa-
tional programs of the innovation school. If the Commissioner does
not approve the proposed provision in the plan, the innovation plan
committee may ask the Board to review the matter and the Board
shall make the ﬁnal decision.
which means that the full process of articulating points of con-
tact between state laws and regulations and the Innovation Plan as
voted on need not conclude until the School Committee presenta-
tion. As with negotiating necessary affordances in the Collective
Bargaining Agreement to make the Innovation Plan possible, non-
substantive design edits and alterations may be made after the
Innovation Plan Committee vote without triggering a re-start of the
process.93
93 French, D. (2013, August). Personal
communication with dan french.
Regarding voting and editing process
between Innovation Plan and School
Committee votes
Stafﬁng
If we could control exactly one design element of the SSA, it would
be who would be in the room—staff and students both. The SSA is
an unusual design and will require an unusual [for schools] staff,
an unusual organizational structure, an unusual professional de-
velopment strategy, and so on. These alternative structures are by
no means untested—even in education—but the SSA represents a
hybridization of many of these approaches and requires autonomy
to implement them.
Staff positions will be very different than traditional classroom
roles. In particular, the SSA will be designing roles where staff
are in many ways taking an active hand in research and develop-
ment focused on making their domain more learnable, as opposed
to teaching it more effectively. That distinction is subtle but sig-
niﬁcant, as it means that there will be a signiﬁcant emphasis on
ongoing research and professional development.94
94 Pring, R. (2012). Teacher as re-
searcher. Theory and Practice of Curricu-
lum Studies (RLE Edu B), 17
Operationally, teachers—frequently working with community
members—will be teaching in tight teams of three, in highly differ-
entiated roles of curriculum developer, project manager, and social
worker. Together these staff will be much more focused on devel-
oping student skills than the instructional provision of a particular
canon.
All of this requires a signiﬁcant comfort with uncertainty and
ambiguity that’s much more akin to a startup environment than
many schools. The purpose of this chapter is to lay out the broad
strokes of how staff will be prospected, hired, trained, organized,
and developed.
Administration
There will be very little administration at the SSA. Alec Resnick will
be the SSA’s inaugural principal. We will begin with no more than
a principal, part of whose time—in emulation of the Generation
Schools model—will be devoted to teaching. Overall, the SSA’s
management structure will be remarkably ﬂat. The goal of the
administration is simple and twofold:
1. run defense for staff and students time and attention so that they
can do deep work of which they’re proud.
2. work to rustle up the necessary resources—connections, money,
84
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
professional development opportunities, etc.—that the staff and
students require.
Especially in the early years, a primary focus of the principal will
go beyond this twofold mandate and include hiring and training
new teachers. Fortunately, the SSA’s scale and slow growth makes
this feasible (three staff per year, at most).
Outreach
Hiring outreach will be bundled into the SSA’s overall enrollment
outreach efforts. However, they will be advertised nationwide
through a variety of channels at graduate schools of education,
colleges, and businesses (which is a network the principal will be
charged with growing over time to increase the scope and reach of
the SSA’s hiring.)95 We have no idea how we would ﬁlter resumes
95 Needless to say, existing Somerville
Public School employees are of course
more than welcome to apply.
or conduct a three-hour interview to hire effectively for the types of
positions we’re looking at. We do, however, have a very keen sense
after working with someone of whether they’re a good ﬁt. The in-
formational sessions, after- and in-school programs, and mini- and
summer camps will serve as a testbed for potential hires. This en-
rollment outreach process will be occurring year-round, and will be
coordinated by existing students and staff.
This will be the basis for student and staff sensibilities and im-
pressions informing hiring decisions in a process that stops short of
traditional democratic schools but embodies the best practices from
a variety of create and knowledge work organizations.96
96 Davenport, T. H. and L. Pruzak
(2000). Working knowledge: How
organizations manage what they know.
Harvard Business Press; and Bowen,
D. E., G. E. Ledford, and B. R. Nathan
(1991). Hiring for the organization, not
the job. The Executive 5(4), 35–51
Hiring & Firing
Throughout the year, the ongoing enrollment outreach process at
local K-8 schools will serve as a testbed where candidates for SSA
positions will come to design and teach with us for whatever pe-
riod their schedule allows—ranging from a weekend workshop to
an entire program. Administration and staff at the SSA will review
candidates’ performance in these mini-internships and select some
for continued staff and student interviews focused on assessing
cultural ﬁt. In hiring, the SSA will keep with the best practices of
research and development organizations and focus on hiring people,
not positions—i.e. a strong candidate is more important than their
nominal position ﬁt. While traditional licensure and experience will
be taken into account as a distinct advantage in considering a hire,
the SSA will be able to hire independent of licensure, and speciﬁ-
cally, licensure cannot ever be made a requirement of an SSA hiring
contract.
These staff will be immediately brought in for orientation, train-
ing, and professional development on the job, co-teaching with
existing staff before beginning their own Advisory team in the next
enrollment period. The SSA will have the required legal and ﬁ-
staffing
85
nancial autonomy to fundraise in order to establish the ﬂexibility
to begin paying candidates before they are ofﬁcially hired so that
we can secure good candidates who might not have the ﬁnancial
ﬂexibility themselves to wait until the next school year.
And of course, while we expect some staff to discover that
teaching—or the SSA—isn’t their cup of tea or move on to other
endeavors, staff will only be dismissed under the protections and
procedures outlined in the applicable sections of the STA Collective
Bargaining Agreement and M.G.L. Chapter 71, Section 42, viz.
A teacher with professional teacher status, pursuant to section forty-
one, shall not be dismissed except for inefﬁciency, incompetency,
incapacity, conduct unbecoming a teacher, insubordination or failure
on the part of the teacher to satisfy teacher performance standards
developed pursuant to section thirty-eight of this chapter or other
just cause.
The SSA will, however, have complete autonomy in deﬁning its
staff evaluation system, which will be used as the basis for any such
considerations.
Professional Development
Staff’s professional development will be governed by their own
Individual Action Plans, similar to student’s development and
evaluation. These Individual Action Plans will form the basis for
the individualized professional development efforts for teachers.
Supporting these efforts—again in analogy with the best of perfor-
mance contract and IEP processes—will be a primary responsibility
of the principal.
In analogy with students’ IAPs, staff IAPs will articulate their
own self-development goals and struggles and near-term plans
for achieving these. They will be reﬁned through regular meetings
with their Advisory colleagues and separate one-on-ones with the
principal.
These professional development goals will be given guarded
time through three mechanisms:
• The ﬁrst is 20% time for personal projects,97 which will largely
97 Walker, A. (2011). ‘creativity loves
constraints’: The paradox of google’s
twenty percent time. ephemera, 369;
and Tate, R. (2012). The 20% Doctrine.
HarperCollins
be opened up to students for participation. SSA staff are ex-
pected to be enthusiastic and continually developing practition-
ers not only of the craft of teaching, but their domain expertise
as well.
• Additionally, staff will have two hours daily for co-planning
time, much of which will be spent with their Advisory col-
leagues, but which we expect to become more broadly connected
as the set of adults involved in the SSA grows.
• Initially, not only will we conduct targeted trainings respon-
sive to new cohorts and their background (e.g. Sheltered En-
glish Immersion (SEI) endorsement training, web development
workshops, language immersion classes, etc.), but designing and
86
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
ﬂeshing out this intake process for new hires will be itself a pro-
fessional development opportunity for existing staff, who will be
supported in developing new skills identiﬁed in their IAP and
testing their development in the training of new staff.
Team Teaching
8AM
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
9AM
Co-Planning 
Co-Planning 
Co-Planning 
Co-Planning 
Co-Planning 
10AM
Time
Time
Time
Time
Time
11AM
Foundation 1
12PM
Foundation 1
Foundation 2
Foundation 1
Foundation 4
Foundation 3
1PM
Foundation 2
Foundation 4
2PM
3PM
Personal 
Role-Specific
Work
Personal 
4PM
Projects
Role-Specific
Work
Role-Specific
Work
Projects
5PM
Figure 11: An evocative staff
time budget; see Sample
Schedules for more details.
Time and money are where
all of the hopeful and good
ideas in this plan need to mesh
with reality. Between models
like Generation Schools which
we’re emulating and back-of-
the-envelopes like these time
budgets, we’re conﬁdent that
we’ll have access to the raw
ingredients to pull the SSA off.
For years, research has been accumulating supporting the value
of team teaching both for teachers’ professional development (and
sanity!) and student outcomes.98 At the SSA, there’s no other way
98 Buckley, F. J. (1999). Team teaching:
what, why, and how? Sage; Davis, J. R.
(1995). Interdisciplinary courses and team
teaching: New arrangements for learn-
ing. American Council on Education
and the Oryx Press Phoneix, AZ; and
Bruffee, K. A. (1999). Collaborative
learning: Higher education, interdepen-
dence, and the authority of knowledge.
ERIC
to implement the project-based, heavily individualized curricula
we’re looking for, and we wouldn’t want a community any other
way. Given that for many students at the SSA, we expect the in-
timate setting of a small school environment will be among the
primary draws, it’s important to ensure that those experiences are
as human and interpersonally rich as possible. Even though we
have a similar student-teacher ratio to a comprehensive setup like
Somerville High School, by avoiding disciplinary classes and the
periods that go along with them, we’re in a position to provide a
setting where each staff member sees about three dozen, instead of
ten dozen or more, students daily. For students for whom a small
school setting has something to offer, this decreased attentional
churn has been highlighted as a central mechanism in improving
student outcomes.99
99 Meier, D. (2002). The power of their
ideas: Lessons for America from a small
school in Harlem. Beacon Press; and
Anderson, C. S. (1982). The search
for school climate: A review of the
research. Review of educational re-
search 52(3), 368–420
When you talk to staff at [successful] project-based environments
like High Tech High, they consistently return to team teaching and
protected time for planning as central to their success. The SSA will
be no different, guaranteeing an average of two hours daily for co-
planning and teaching time. Furthermore, this team teaching will
be the basis of staff intake and training—new hires will be paired
with an existing team as soon as possible and work with them,
rotating between apprenticing with each of the three Advisory
positions before the new staff members’ team is assembled.
These small, multifunctional teams have been the basis for re-
search and development and knowledge work for decades, but the
structures of a traditional classroom make them very hard to imple-
ment. At the SSA, the team teaching setup is essential to provide a
structure where slack and uncertainty can be managed comfortably.
Staff Structure
Overall, the SSA is unusually ﬂat in its organization. There is a
single principal. And above him are all the staff, organized into
multi-functional trios, each of which is called an Advisory and is
responsible for their cohort of three dozen students. Each Advisory
is entirely responsible for managing the experience of their cohort;
however, this does not mean that students only interact with their
advisors. As is covered throughout the rest of this plan, we expect a
whole panoply of adults—both within and without the SSA—to be
staffing
87
involved in each student’s life. The Advisory, however, is where the
buck stops, where the responsibility for managing and keeping tabs
on those thirty-odd students is located.
Curriculum Developer
Project Manager
Social Worker
The SSA’s project-based 
focus means staff will act 
more as mentors and 
facilitators than 
instructors. Every ~36 
students will form a single 
cohort, overseen by a trio 
of staff, their advocates.
COHORT-DRIVEN ADVISORY MODEL
Inspired by Harlem 
Children’s Zone’s academic 
case management model, 
this setup offers high-touch, 
individualized attention and 
team teaching capacities, 
focusing on students’ whole 
development as 
independent investigators.
1:12 STUDENT:STAFF
Figure 12: The SSA’s staff
structure is inspired by the
Harlem Children Zone’s Aca-
demic Case Management
model. A trio of specialized
staff (students’ advocates) will
manage a cohorts of 36. One
advocate will be responsible
for managing the curriculum
dev-elopment, brainstorming
projects, ﬁnding relevant texts,
designing intensive work-
shops, etc. Another advocate
will be responsible for social
work. This could mean any-
thing from knowing a student
is struggling with food se-
curity issues to knowing its
their birthday and throwing
a mini-party for them. And
the ﬁnal advocate will act as a
project manager, helping stu-
dents manage their workload
to ﬁnish projects on time and
under-budget.
This responsibility is further broken down for each Advisory
along three dimensions, translated to three distinct roles which
staff will adopt: curriculum developer, social worker, and project
manager.
Curriculum Developer
The Curriculum Developer (CD) will be responsible for managing
the design and development of activities and seminars for students.
Often working forward from an inspiring book (e.g. Gödel, Escher,
Bach100) or theme (e.g. in Hofstadter’s case, recursion), the CD will
100 Hofstadter, D. (1979). Gödel, Escher,
Bach: an eternal golden braid. New York:
Basic Books
be responsible for developing the activities, collating necessary
materials, and introducing other staff to the necessary skills and
content to ensure their success. This means they’ll be deeply em-
bedded in the professional development process and will constantly
be feeding back on staff’s sense of their cohorts’ interests and ca-
pacities. The CD will be the primary point of contact for managing
the curriculum mapping process, identifying various entry points
to and angles on the particular seminar to ensure broad coverage
options for various students.
Returning to Papert’s Mindstorms
The educator must be an anthropologist. The educator as anthropolo-
gist must work to understand which cultural materials are relevant to
intellectual development. Then, he or she needs to understand which
trends are taking place in the culture. Meaningful intervention must
take the form of working with these trends.
Nowhere will this need to be truer at the SSA than the CD position.
Social Worker
The SSA will aim to have at least one licensed social worker in the
school101 But, each ‘social worker’ (SW) position in Advisory will
101 Among other things, this will
give us the ability to work with local
schools of social work and sponsor
caseworkers doing their ﬁeldwork
certiﬁcation, free of charge.
88
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
not necessarily be a licensed social worker. The intent of this posi-
tion is to put one staff member explicitly in charge of surfacing the
exogenous social, emotional, mental, and physical factors which are
often the primary determinants of student outcomes and bringing
awareness of these into staff discussions and designs.
This doesn’t mean that the SW will be the closest conﬁdant of
every student in their cohort. It does mean that the SW will be re-
sponsible for knowing who that conﬁdant is and helping to estab-
lish one if one doesn’t exist. Whether it’s knowing that someone is
struggling with food security issues at home or remembering it’s
their birthday or knowing that because of a recent obsession with
House a student is newly interested in forensic science, the SW is
explicitly tasked with ensuring the depth and health of students’
human relationships.
This will include some more traditional social work responsi-
bilities, e.g. the SW will also be responsible for coordinating ex-
tracurricular supports for families, e.g. identifying families who are
eligible for SNAP but not receiving beneﬁts. The SW will also be
the primary point person in considering all transfer into and out of
the cohort and be responsible for identifying and articulating social
and emotional growth opportunities throughout the IAP process.
Project Manager
The Project Manager (PM) is responsible for making sure students
ﬁnish their work on time and literally under budget (since students
will be given increasing control over project stipends over their
time). The PM will be focused on helping students develop their
capacity for independent investigation, meaning they will be focused
on students’ executive function and metacognition.
Operationally, this means that they will help decide project scope
and sequence, coordinate with community partners with whom
students are working, introduce time and project management
tools and techniques, and so on. They will be working closely with
the CD to actually implement the documentation of curricular
coverage, and in IAP conversations will be focused on identifying
and articulating opportunities for growth in executive function and
self-management skills.
Autonomy Analysis
Overall, the SSA will have complete autonomy in its hiring and
ﬁring (within the bounds of the MGL and the applicable sections
of the Somerville Teachers Association collective bargaining agree-
ment as eventually negotiated as part of the Innovation Planning
process).
Furthermore, these policies and autonomies—to the extent
they do not contact the eventual, applicable collective bargaining
provisions—will be open to revision by the principal and Board
staffing
89
of Trustees. Staff will be compensated within the same step and
lane system as the STA, but the principal will be given control over
stipend management to ensure that staff are paid a salary at least
proportional to the extended time they’ll be working in comparison
to non-year-round setups.
And of course, staff will retain all legal rights to organize, ﬁle
complaints, join unions of their choice, etc.
Why should we expect this will beneﬁt students?
We know small, mul-
tifunctional teams focused on wraparound services beneﬁt students
and teachers, and that they’re especially important in project-based
environments.102 We also know that implementing computational,
102 Friedman, I. A. (1991). High and
low-burnout schools: School culture
aspects of teacher burnout. The Journal
of Educational Research 84(6), 325–333;
Mergendoller, J. R., T. Markham,
J. Ravitz, and J. Larmer (2006). Per-
vasive management of project based
learning: Teachers as guides and
facilitators. Handbook of Classroom
Management: Research, Practice, and Con-
temporary Issues, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum, Inc; and McPartland, J. M.
and S. M. Nettles (1991). Using com-
munity adults as advocates or mentors
for at-risk middle school students: a
two-year evaluation of project raise.
American journal of education, 568–586
project-based work—especially in a small school environment featur-
ing multidisciplinary work—will require unique backgrounds and
dispositions. In concert with the project management literature103
103 Kannel-Ray, V., P. J. Zeller, W. E.
Laceﬁeld, et al. (2009). Academic case
management: Promising interven-
tions for closing achievement gaps
in multicultural urban settings. ERS
Spectrum 27(3), 19–30; and Bowen,
D. E., G. E. Ledford, and B. R. Nathan
(1991). Hiring for the organization, not
the job. The Executive 5(4), 35–51
and best-practices for small-school design, we have every reason
to suspect that our implementation of project-based team-teaching
will improve student outcomes in the case of students who would
stand to beneﬁt from the small school environment.
What legal affordances will be required?
While the SSA will be able to
consider licensure and background as a competitive advantage in
hiring, no teaching contract with the SSA will require licensure.
We are still in the process of writing up the necessary exemp-
tions and waivers required for this. You can ﬁnd a partial list in
Legal Affordances, but per 603 CMR 48.03(b),
If an innovation plan committee is proposing an innovation plan that
may conﬂict with laws (including regulations) governing other public
schools, the committee shall, before presenting the plan to the school
committee for approval, request approval from the Commissioner
for any provision in the plan that may conﬂict with such laws. The
Commissioner’s approval shall be based on his determination that
the plan is consistent with 603 CMR 48.03 (2) and with the state’s
obligations under the education clause of the Massachusetts Con-
stitution, Mass. Const., pt. II, ch. V, s. II, as deﬁned by a court of
competent jurisdiction, and that the provision in the plan that may
conﬂict with such laws is necessary to advance the mission or educa-
tional programs of the innovation school. If the Commissioner does
not approve the proposed provision in the plan, the innovation plan
committee may ask the Board to review the matter and the Board
shall make the ﬁnal decision.
which means that the full process of articulating points of con-
tact between state laws and regulations and the Innovation Plan as
voted on need not conclude until the School Committee presenta-
tion. As with negotiating necessary affordances in the Collective
Bargaining Agreement to make the Innovation Plan possible, non-
substantive design edits and alterations may be made after the
Innovation Plan Committee vote without triggering a re-start of the
process.104
104 French, D. (2013, August). Personal
communication with dan french.
Regarding voting and editing process
between Innovation Plan and School
Committee votes
Staff Evaluation
Staff evaluation practices at the SSA are inspired by the best prac-
tices of knowledge work organizations like Google105 and Valve,106
105 Mediratta, B. and J. Bick (2007).
The google way: give engineers room.
The New York Times 21; and Girard,
B. (2009). The Google way: How one
company is revolutionizing management
as we know it. No Starch Press
106 (2012). Valve handbook for new
employees
much as student evaluation processes were. This overlap is not
insigniﬁcant; we see staff and students as members of a learning
community with a shared mission. While the topics of their inves-
tigations differ, our intent is that staff come to their work with as
much an investigative mindset as students, working on personal
projects, creating shippable output, etc.
The purpose of this chapter is to layout how the SSA will use
its autonomy in deﬁning its own evaluation processes to effect its
mission. Unlike student evaluations—which focus on students’
development—staff evaluations [which do include questions of per-
sonal development] are focused on the aggregate performance of
their cohort. Advisories are judged as a team with respect to their
students’ performance, no one staff member stands alone. This
means that peer reviews are essential in the process and will ﬁgure
more prominently than those in the student evaluation process. But
like the student evaluation process, there are four dimensions along
which staff themselves are evaluated (skill, productivity, group
contribution, project contribution), though the meaning of those is
a little different (especially in light of staff’s highly differentiated
roles).
Individual Action Plans
The shift from staff’s roles as instructional providers in traditional
contexts to coaches, mentors, and facilitators in Advisory is ac-
companied by a shift in emphasis to framing staff as researchers
exploring how computation can enable the exploration of modeling
and representation across their domains of expertise. This is our
take on the broader emphasis on a shift from teaching to learning
in the design of a school’s activities and evaluative structures.107
107 Huba, M. E. and J. E. Freed (2000).
Learner centered assessment on col-
lege campuses: Shifting the focus
from teaching to learning. Commu-
nity College Journal of Research and
Practice 24(9), 759–766
This transformation of the teacher role into that of researcher is cen-
tral to the lab school model and directly informs the design of the
professional development process.
Just as students go through an IAP process to articulate their
background, aptitudes, interests, strengths, and goals, staff will do
so as well in a process involving their Advisory colleagues and the
SSA principal. This IAP will be regularly revised and will be the
92
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
basis of planning individual staff members’ professional develop-
ment, designing their formative and summative evaluation metrics,
and driving the development of their personal portfolio.
Peer Reviews
In a team teaching environment, peer reviews have been found to
be among the most effective and essential mechanisms in design-
ing an assessment system which judges teams by their collective
performance.108 Because staff will need to cohesively function as a
108 Bernstein, D. J. (2008). Peer review
and evaluation of the intellectual work
of teaching. Change: The Magazine
of Higher Learning 40(2), 48–51; and
Blackmore, J. A. (2005). A critical
evaluation of peer review via teaching
observation within higher education.
International Journal of Educational
Management 19(3), 218–232
team comfortable giving honest and clear feedback, time for feed-
back and reﬂection will be built into the professional development
offerings (speciﬁcally, the work of Kegan109 and Dalio110) and the
109 Kegan, R. and L. L. Lahey (2001).
How the way we talk can change the way
we work: Seven languages for transforma-
tion. Jossey-Bass
110 Dalio, R. (2011). Principles
co-planning time allotment. While the principal will be responsi-
ble for ensuring feedback occurs, the administration will explicitly
not be involved in staff-to-staff feedback sessions. It’s important
that those feedback channels be a safe space to make it possible for
struggles and failures to end up functionally regarded as issues of
management and not individual issues—a substantial shift from
typical evaluation cultures.
Surveys
Families and students are the primary constituents of the SSA.
This means that surveys of family and student satisfaction with
staff will be central to overall staff (and in aggregate, school and
therefore administration) evaluation. Furthermore, surveys of staff
satisfaction itself (partially capturing some of the consistent lessons
of peer reviews) will ﬁgure into staff evaluations as well.
Portfolios
Just as the SSA is intent on its students becoming productive, in-
dependent investigators and wraps this assumption into the eval-
uation structures dedicated to their work, a similar expectation
of teachers means SSA staff will be given the time and support to
develop their own portfolio and reﬂective practice. Inspired by
practitioners like Dan Meyer111 and Bret Victor112, staff’s personal
111 Meyer, D. (2013). dy/dan
112 Victor, B. Up and down the ladder
of abstraction
projects and professional development will be guided, through the
IAP process, to cohere in a portfolio or personal site capturing their
reﬂections and documenting their work over time.
This emphasis on creative output, documentation, reﬂection, and
analysis is essential to offer staff at the SSA long term opportunities
for promotion and advancement. Rather than a typical corporate
or district structure involving promotion out of the classroom,
we want to cultivate a culture more similar to labs at universities,
wherein PI’s gain access to more resources, interesting connections
and collaborators, and are rewarded with increasing prominence
staff evaluation
93
in their chosen ﬁeld (and accompanying autonomy in designing
further research).
Dimensions of Performance
Just as the personalization of the SSA experience for students
means we made a diversity of measures ﬁrst-class citizens in the
evaluation process, the highly differentiated roles and backgrounds
of the staff call for a similar diversity. The same four, basic dimen-
sions of performance apply, though their speciﬁc meaning changes
for staff. Ensuring staff and students have shared language with
which to discuss notions of performance and competence is not
only central to our project of creating a community of learners, but
has been shown to be essential to building effective communities of
practice and professional development as well as securing student
engagement and buy-in to mastery-based frameworks.113
113 McLaughlin, M. W. and J. E. Talbert
(2006). Building school-based teacher
learning communities: Professional strate-
gies to improve student achievement,
Volume 45. Teachers College Press;
and Little, J. W. (1982). Norms of
collegiality and experimentation:
Workplace conditions of school suc-
cess. American educational research
journal 19(3), 325–340
This shared language for the central dimensions of performance
for staff will govern the design and framing of various feedback
activities ranging from performance reviews to peer feedback ses-
sions which will be the basis of primarily qualitative evaluations—
informed by metrics where appropriate.
• skill: The SSA is explicitly looking to hire and cultivate ‘T-
shaped people’114 who have a deep expertise from which they
114 Morgan, J. M. and J. K. Liker (2006).
The Toyota product development system.
Productivity press New York
can derive the natural authority essential to effective, project-
based mentorship.115 Unlike in students’ case though, there will
115 Goodson, I. and I. F. Goodson
(1992). Studying teachers’ lives. Psychol-
ogy Press
be an explicit effort to implement a portfolio management HR
approach wherein we work to ensure breadth in background
and capacity at the organizational level rather than the individ-
ual level. This will happen primarily at the school level, though
at the Advisory level this will occur naturally in the selection
process of the curriculum developer, project manager, and social
worker positions. This dimension will basically attempt to cap-
ture how difﬁcult or unique a set of problems a staff member can
solve. At a higher level, the uniqueness and depth of this skillset
will be considered in the ongoing evaluation process as driven
by the IAP.
• productivity: Because the SSA is actively exploring research
questions and depending on its staff to produce and reﬁne cur-
ricula and professional development materials to sustain the
SSA’s growth, it’s essential that staff member’s productivity be
incorporated into deﬁnitions of success. Concretely, this is sim-
ply a question of how much shippable output—targeting both
students (e.g. curricula) and staff (e.g. reﬂections, writings, pro-
fessional development activities)—does a staff member produce?
Needless to say, this won’t be quantiﬁed, in part to avoid the
pathologies in incentive that you see in industries like academia
where quantity ends up prioritized over quality.116
116 Azoulay, P., W. Ding, and T. Stuart
(2009). The impact of academic
patenting on the rate, quality and
direction of (public) research output*.
The Journal of Industrial Economics 57(4),
637–676
• group contribution: The SSA is a learning community. And
94
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
many of the functions and activities which sustain a community—
especially given the mentorship roles staff will be adopting—
don’t show up on paper. This is why qualitative channels like
peer review are essential, especially for the contributions this cate-
gory is meant to capture, namely how a particular staff member
contributes to group cohesion and operation. Generally, these ac-
tivities trade against individual productivity but are essential to
the health of the organization—cf. participating in hiring, taking
on administrivia, etc.
• project contribution: It is in this category that the struc-
tural similarities between student and staff evaluation structures
mean the least. This is because whereas there is no normative
output for students—their projects and their scope is derived
from their natural interests and backgrounds—for staff there
is a broader mandate focusing on the nature of modeling and
representation and the uses of computation in expanding the
practical explorations of these themes. This means for staff, this
last dimension of performance is focused on how substantial an
individual staff member’s contribution to this broader project
is—whether through toolkits or papers or new curricula, for each
staff member there is some expectation they will explore (and
prototype) learnable representations.
Longitudinal Analysis
As with students, in addition to any formative and summative
measures we install, these are merely policy instruments to achieve
a twofold policy goal: increasing student performance and success
as deﬁned by the SSA’s mission, and cultivating staff increasing
capable of supporting such growth. Longitudinally, this means that
staff’s evaluations will incorporate an expectation of continuing
professional growth. At an organizational level, we will be looking
at retention rates and surveys of staff satisfaction, in addition to the
common exit points and destinations of those staff who do move
on (as well as an ongoing exit interview and follow-up process).
The point of these is not necessarily to reduce turnover (though
there are clearly turnover rates which would indicate a problem) so
much as they are to diagnose organizational issues where the SSA
is failing to provide staff with something it set out to.
Autonomy Analysis
The SSA will have complete autonomy to design and implement its
own staff evaluation system. The SSA is responsible overall for very
clear commitments to student performance and diversity; rather
than having the District or DOE manage the feedback process of
the SSA—which is unique institution in their jurisdiction—we think
it’s important for the SSA to be given sufﬁcient autonomy to effect
its mission. This is doubly true given the widespread dissatisfaction
staff evaluation
95
with the standing evaluation system and the perceived cost/value
proposition of that oversight.
Why should we expect this will beneﬁt students?
Too often, discus-
sions about how to create alternative contexts for struggling stu-
dents focus exclusively on either the what or the how of a school.
At least when it comes to the SSA’s computational, project-based
focus, these are deeply coupled. The research tells us these shifts
in practice toward smaller scale schools, cohesive teams offer-
ing wraparound services, and multidisciplinary projects require
changes in evaluation.117 We’ve worked to embody the best prac-
117 Blackmore, J. A. (2005). A critical
evaluation of peer review via teaching
observation within higher education.
International Journal of Educational
Management 19(3), 218–232; and Van
Kannel-Ray, N., W. E. Laceﬁeld, and
P. J. Zeller (2008). Academic case
managers: Evaluating a middle school
intervention for children at-risk. Jour-
nal of MultiDisciplinary Evaluation 5(10),
21–29
tices and principles of this research in the SSA’s design while creat-
ing a shared language for students and staff that can enable school-
wide discussions about competence, craft, quality, and autonomy:
central themes in the SSA’s mission.
What legal affordances will be required?
The SSA will need exemp-
tion from the state’s evaluation mandate and will need to have
the autonomy to incorporate its own evaluation system into the
hiring/ﬁring considerations subject to the constraints of M.G.L.
Chapter 71, Section 41.
We are still in the process of writing up the necessary exemp-
tions and waivers required for this. You can ﬁnd a partial list in
Legal Affordances, but per 603 CMR 48.03(b),
If an innovation plan committee is proposing an innovation plan that
may conﬂict with laws (including regulations) governing other public
schools, the committee shall, before presenting the plan to the school
committee for approval, request approval from the Commissioner
for any provision in the plan that may conﬂict with such laws. The
Commissioner’s approval shall be based on his determination that
the plan is consistent with 603 CMR 48.03 (2) and with the state’s
obligations under the education clause of the Massachusetts Con-
stitution, Mass. Const., pt. II, ch. V, s. II, as deﬁned by a court of
competent jurisdiction, and that the provision in the plan that may
conﬂict with such laws is necessary to advance the mission or educa-
tional programs of the innovation school. If the Commissioner does
not approve the proposed provision in the plan, the innovation plan
committee may ask the Board to review the matter and the Board
shall make the ﬁnal decision.
which means that the full process of articulating points of con-
tact between state laws and regulations and the Innovation Plan as
voted on need not conclude until the School Committee presenta-
tion. As with negotiating necessary affordances in the Collective
Bargaining Agreement to make the Innovation Plan possible, non-
substantive design edits and alterations may be made after the
Innovation Plan Committee vote without triggering a re-start of the
process.118
118 French, D. (2013, August). Personal
communication with dan french.
Regarding voting and editing process
between Innovation Plan and School
Committee votes
SHS ⇔SSA Interface
From the outset, the SSA has been conceived of as a complement to
Somerville High School, working with those students for whom tra-
ditional contexts haven’t been a good ﬁt. We believe that all other
things held equal, a diversity of options for learners in Somerville
is good. This applies not only to the notion of schools, but we think
at even ﬁner grains—classes, programs, and so on. In that spirit,
we’ve worked hard to ensure that to the extent practicable, the SSA
is permeable and accessible to the rest of the Somerville Public
School system in general and Somerville High School in particu-
lar. This chapter outlines the interface between Somerville High
School (SHS) and the Somerville STEAM Academy (SSA) program-
matically and in the case of transfer students to a level of sufﬁcient
detail that a) it becomes clear that the policies outlined here can be
made to work, and b) the Integration Team will have a sufﬁciently
clear mandate to begin its work.
In general, we have tried to make things free and easy for SHS,
ofﬂoading the cost and effort to the SSA. SHS resources will be
available to SSA students and vice versa. The SSA will pay 110%
of the prorated cost of SSA students partaking of SHS programs
(e.g. sports, classes, and so on) and SHS will pay nothing for its
students to participate in SSA programs. SHS will have complete
autonomy in determining which SSA students to cross-register, and
the SSA must accept interested students from SHS (as long as, in a
given program, SHS students don’t constitute more than 25% of the
enrollment). Similarly, in the case of a transfer student, SSA staff
will take complete responsibility for generating a ﬁnely-grained
transcript at the resolution of individual Common Core items to
make easily moving credits between the two schools straightfor-
ward.
Coordinating Structures
Recognizing that the SSA’s permeability is a new logistical chal-
lenge for the District in general and Somerville High School in
particular, we’ve sketched out two, coordinating structure which
we think, taken together, will be sufﬁcient to ensure the smooth
operation and rollout of the SSA’s policies: an Integration Team
connecting Somerville High School and the SSA, and a possible
liaison between Somerville High School and the SSA.
98
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Integration Team
Finer grained implementation details and policy
than sketched out here will be ﬂeshed out by an Integration Team
comprising one staff member and one administrator from SHS and
SSA respectively, to be convened after the approval of the SSA to
look more closely at and establish policies and procedures to sup-
port the interface between the SHS and SSA. Because no eighth
graders from the SSA will be eligible for cross-registration into
or participation in SHS activities, the Integration Team will have
over two years to hash out the necessary details. This should be
more than enough time to work through the implementation de-
tails. In addition to cross-registration details, the Integration Team’s
responsibility will be to identify opportunities for professional de-
velopment, mentorship, and community outreach overlap so as to
prevent duplication of effort and take advantage of the different
characters and offerings of each institution. Pending an assessment
of the coordination load by SHS, there are tentative plans to create
a liaison position to interface between the two schools’ operations.
This person would be responsible for ﬁguring out logistical issues
that arise in the course of the schools’ interactions and collabora-
tions without unduly burdening either institution.
SHS ⇔SSA Liaison
Because not every implementation detail will
be able to be predicted—even with a two-person integration team
and a two-year headstart—it may also end up being a good idea to
establish a part time liaison at Somerville High School whose job it
is to coordinate the interface of cross-registration and participation
in extracurriculars. City Hall has indicated its support for establish-
ing such a position, but looking at the necessity of and scope for
such a position will be one of the primary tasks of the Integration
Team (again, taking advantage of its sizable lead time to perform a
full analysis).
Financial Relationship
We would like to unbundle SHS and SSA offerings and open them
up—as much as logistics permit—to students and staff in both
organizations. This goal of openness is what drives all of these
designs and considerations, and this section attempts to outline in
reasonable detail, what the programmatic and ﬁnancial interface
between the SSA and SHS could look like. The tentative, broad
strokes of the ﬁnancials of this arrangement—subject to the work of
the Integration Team–follows.
The SSA will make its offerings freely available119 to all SHS stu-
119 modulo material costs that scale per
student and a maximum SHS cohort of
25% in a given offering
dents and staff, covering any transportation or logistics costs nec-
essary to ensure students and staff can conveniently reach the SSA,
wherever it may be.
On a monthly basis, the SSA will compile the offerings (work-
shops, ﬁeld trips, tutoring hours, etc.) which it can clearly and
meaningfully make available to SHS students. These offerings will
shs ⇔ssa interface
99
be listed on its website, translated into appropriate languages,
printed up as ﬂiers, and provided to SHS teachers, guidance, and
administration. These offerings will also be sent out to Somerville
High School parents.
For a given program or service at SHS, if SSA students would
like to participate, the SSA will compensate SHS. Just under one-
third120 of the per-pupil allocation for Somerville High School is
120 32.7%, FY2012
actually budgeted to Somerville High School. The remaining two-
thirds of district expenditures are funneled through centralized
programs like Art, Music, SPED, Guidance, etc. We break apart
the setups for ﬁnancial compensation along similar, school/district
lines.
Professional Development
We think the fact that the SSA has been design to complement the
offerings at SHS means that there will be similarly complementary
professional development opportunities. We’re very excited for
these opportunities to act as a seed from which to grow a commu-
nity crossing traditional disciplinary and institutional boundaries—
especially given how common complaints of feeling silo’ed can be
in public school systems.121
121 D’amour, D. and I. Oandasan
(2005). Interprofessionality as the
ﬁeld of interprofessional practice
and interprofessional education:
An emerging concept. Journal of
interprofessional care 19(S1), 8–20
While the new and different aspects of the SSA involve some
risk, we also think it offers signiﬁcant opportunities for sharing and
learning with teachers throughout Somerville. The SSA would love
to e.g. host workshops and events targeting the needs and interests
of Somerville High School teachers wherein not only are Profes-
sional Development Points offered, but SHS staff have a chance to
explore incorporating ﬁelds like rapid prototyping, computation
and simulation, and STEAM-ly project-based learning into their
own programs, learning from the mistakes and experiences of SSA
staff. Reciprocally, we expect the experience of SHS staff with the
Common Core, with Somerville families’ unique issues and needs,
and their own professional development expertise to be an excit-
ing set of resources to open up to SSA staff, assuming interest and
bandwidth on SHS teachers’ parts.
Clarifying the scope and nature of the co-professional develop-
ment opportunities that make sense for SHS and the SSA will be
one of the central tasks of the Integration Team.
Deﬁning Good Standing
The SSA will deﬁne its own analogue of Somerville High School
and Full Circle/Next Wave’s notions of a ‘student in good stand-
ing.’ e.g. at Somerville High School, there is a 20-credit minimum
for participating in school sports. At FCNW, a combination of the
earned credit model and staff input deﬁnes good standing. At the
SSA, the core of this deﬁnition will rely on our curriculum mapping
framework through the Common Core/MCAS STE. The Integra-
100
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
tion Team will use this to deﬁne a minimum velocity through the
Common Core/MCAS STE standards analogous to SHS’s 20-credit
minimum. This will be used to determine whether SSA students
are eligible for cross-registration into activities and classes at SHS.
One wrinkle: because the SSA’s earned credit model may mean that
there are some traditionally extracurricular activities which we may
award credit for, the calculation will simply focus on the question,
“If this student were to cross register into this option at SHS, would
they fall below the minimum velocity deﬁning ‘good standing?”’
Academic Cross-Registration
Inevitably, there will be a class with a favorite English teacher or
with your sibling (or crush) or on a topic that the SSA doesn’t cover
that can be found only at SHS. These are natural opportunities for
collaboration—staff bandwidth and interest permitting. The SSA
will accommodate whatever cross-registration process SHS employs
to enroll its students in other institutions. The SSA will accept any
SHS student who wishes to enroll in its seminars for free, with
the caveat that the the SHS-enrollment of any SSA program not to
exceed 25% of the program size. Because the SSA’s schedule will be
so different from SHS’s, it will almost certainly not be possible for
every SHS student to cross-register in every SSA offering.
If applicable (as in the case of a course or ﬁeld trip), a minimum
of two weeks before the starting date of the offering, SSA staff will
provide SHS staff a list of students interested in taking part in their
offering. These SHS staff will have the option to meet and freely
choose to accept any, all, or none of the interested SSA students and
work out the details of their credit exchange. All materials costs
and any costs that scale marginally on a per capita basis will be
covered in full by the SSA. In addition to this, the SSA will pay a
per-student fee equal to 110% the prorated, per capita cost of the
FTEs required to provide said program. The SSA will pay 50% of
this before the ﬁrst day of the program and 50% before the last day
of the program or within thirty days of the receipt of an itemized
invoice, whichever is later. If a student drops out of the program,
the cost will be prorated and the appropriate party (SHS or SSA)
will reimburse the other (SSA or SHS) within thirty days.
Extracurricular & Sports Participation
SHS has many strong, extracurricular activities (e.g. its theater pro-
gram) that the SSA isn’t looking to duplicate. As with sports and
classes, the SSA can guarantee students the scheduling ﬂexibility to
participate in these extracurriculars and the logistical/transportation
support to make these opportunities meaningfully available. For
programs within SHS, the school and headmaster can grant SSA
students permission to participate. For MIAA athletic programs,
which have external standards regarding team and league mem-
shs ⇔ssa interface
101
bership, there are provisions for cooperative teams between schools
and districts who partner to create eligible teams. Alternatively,
the SSA may also function under a Superintendent’s waiver as Full
Circle/Next Wave does.
The SSA will not have its own sports program, and its extracur-
riculars are expected to map closely into the seminars and projects
undertaken by students. That said, staff and students will of course
be able to organize their own extracurricular clubs and activities,
and any of those which are meaningfully accessible to SHS students
and staff will be made available in the same manner as the SSA’s
academic cross registration opportunities.
Community Partnerships
Both SHS and SSA have connections to community partners which
drive a variety of school support activities like tutoring, remedia-
tion, and co-ops/internships. The SSA will be setting up a variety
of its own programs targeting, e.g. MCAS and SAT prep. These
programs will be opened up to SHS just like any other academic
cross-registration opportunity. At an organizational level, any and
all community partners we develop we’d gladly connect SHS to in
the context of particular projects or students.122
122 We’ve already secured support from
local companies including Google,
VMWare, EchoNest, and Wolfram Re-
search in addition to local universities
like MIT, Tufts, and Harvard.
Credit Mapping
The SSA will take complete responsibility for generating sufﬁciently
ﬁnely-grained transcripts for SSA students transferring into SHS to
give SHS the necessary credit-hour descriptions of their history via
our curriculum mapping process. We will also take responsibility, in
the case of any students transferring from SHS, to evaluate students
to generate our own, internal transcripts for students coming into
the SSA. In other words, the SSA will take responsibility for ensur-
ing that—when it comes to paperwork—SSA students will appear
as any other school’s students to SHS.
Working out the details of credit mapping and transfer between
the two institutions will be a primary responsibility of the integra-
tion team, but given the viability of transfers not only from generic
alternative schools but speciﬁcally Full Circle Next Wave, it’s clear
that there is some process which can be made to work, especially
given the unusually ﬁnely grained credit mapping within the SSA.
Transfers
Transfers from and to each institution will be handled just as
though any other school were involved. Somerville High School
has its own policies and procedures for receiving students, and the
SSA’s infrastructure for transfers, transcripts, and supporting stu-
dent transitions is well-documented. In particular, the SSA will be
102
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
in a position to offer much more ﬁnely grained and gradual tran-
sition support services for students transferring between SHS and
SSA, working with staff on either side to identify gaps in student
preparation and setting up tutoring and other relationships to ease
the transition (in addition to the straightforward transcript prepa-
ration process described elsewhere). Notably, transfers into the SSA
will only be a guaranteed option in the eighth grade; however, we
will gladly consider transfers at other ages, subject to our equity
commitment considerations and a one-off process of looking at
transfer students’ backgrounds and timeline to determine whether
the SSA can offer them meaningful and useful development.
Safety, Transportation, & Discipline
Students who cross-register between the two schools will be ex-
pected to follow the rules of the campus they are at. If there is an
incident, the institution at which the incident occurs will follow
its own policy in the immediate handling of the situation. Longer
term follow up will be the responsibility of the student’s home in-
stitution. If students are at neither institution (e.g. in the case of
walking between the two campuses), the disciplinary policy of the
institution whose staff was responsible for overseeing the students
at the time will apply. Deﬁnitions of infractions will be the same
between the two institutions; however, consequences for those in-
fractions will be left up to the respective principals of each school
as qualiﬁed by the SSA’s legal affordances.
The SSA will be totally responsible for handling (and funding)
the transportation and logistics needed to make SSA and SHS op-
portunities meaningfully available to Somerville students.
Autonomy Analysis
The primary autonomies required to implement the efforts outlined
in this section overlap with the SSA’s ability to deﬁne and award
credit autonomously and open up its campus for student travel and
to students from outside the SSA.
Why should we expect this will beneﬁt students?
No one school can
serve every student equally well. A diversity of options is a good
thing. Just as dual enrollment and cross registration make it pos-
sible to meet individualized student needs more effectively, our
efforts to make the SSA more permeable are meant to both increase
student choice and importantly reduce redundancy so that the SSA
can focus narrowly on what we think we have uniquely to offer
without duplicating efforts wastefully.
What legal affordances will be required?
We are still in the process of
writing up the necessary exemptions and waivers required for this.
shs ⇔ssa interface
103
You can ﬁnd a partial list in Legal Affordances, but per 603 CMR
48.03(b),
If an innovation plan committee is proposing an innovation plan that
may conﬂict with laws (including regulations) governing other public
schools, the committee shall, before presenting the plan to the school
committee for approval, request approval from the Commissioner
for any provision in the plan that may conﬂict with such laws. The
Commissioner’s approval shall be based on his determination that
the plan is consistent with 603 CMR 48.03 (2) and with the state’s
obligations under the education clause of the Massachusetts Con-
stitution, Mass. Const., pt. II, ch. V, s. II, as deﬁned by a court of
competent jurisdiction, and that the provision in the plan that may
conﬂict with such laws is necessary to advance the mission or educa-
tional programs of the innovation school. If the Commissioner does
not approve the proposed provision in the plan, the innovation plan
committee may ask the Board to review the matter and the Board
shall make the ﬁnal decision.
which means that the full process of articulating points of con-
tact between state laws and regulations and the Innovation Plan as
voted on need not conclude until the School Committee presenta-
tion. As with negotiating necessary affordances in the Collective
Bargaining Agreement to make the Innovation Plan possible, non-
substantive design edits and alterations may be made after the
Innovation Plan Committee vote without triggering a re-start of the
process.123
123 French, D. (2013, August). Personal
communication with dan french.
Regarding voting and editing process
between Innovation Plan and School
Committee votes
Community Interface
The SSA is intent on making the walls separating it from Somerville
at large as permeable as possible. Somerville’s an incredible city.
Dense enough to have many of the challenges and opportunities
of urban education, small enough to be remarkably agile, sitting
at the nexus of institutions like MIT, Tufts, and Harvard, second
only to New York in artists per capita—the list goes on and on.
But many fewer of those resources and connections intercalate into
the public educational process than many want, mostly because
of the mismatch between the structures and aims of a traditional
classroom and the capacity of the community at large. Tutoring,
CTE internships, Biogen sponsorships—SPS leverages many of
the community connections which ﬁt into traditional classroom
settings. And while it’s clear that there’s a District-level role for
devoting more time and attention to prospecting, coordinating,
and managing these community connections, the SSA will begin
building and leveraging a small network of community partners to
begin stitching student experience and student work into the real
world.
In many schools, this type of outreach is spearheaded and coor-
dinated by parents—hence programs like NuVu at Beaver County
Day or Newton North’s robotics programs. As the provenance
of both of those examples might suggest, schools whose fami-
lies aren’t wealthy or don’t have the time or inclination to engage
deeply in school can’t take advantage of this design pattern. That
means that Somerville Public Schools need a different approach
and different type of infrastructure to leverage these types of com-
munity resources.
The purpose of this chapter is to set out the broad structure
and uses of the community interfaces the SSA will develop and
rely on. For each of them, we’ve established at least three, concrete
examples of partners ostensibly ready-to-commit.
Collaborative Relationships
From the point of view of staff and students at the SSA, there is a
broad spectrum of opportunities for involvement of community
members ranging from ‘simple’ volunteerism plugging into the ba-
sic logistics of the SSA’s operation all the way to the co-op and in-
ternship partners who in many ways, at their most involved, will be
106
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
ç
sprout
& co.
SSA
music
internship
research
workshop
dance
food
curricula
art
tutoring
Somerville and its surroundings are chock-
full of incredible (but largely unleveraged) 
resources.  These will be central to SSA’s 
strategy for developing new kinds of 
educational opportunities.
Figure 13: Somerville is chock-
full of amazing people, compa-
nies, and organizations. Rather
than focus on “preparing”
students for the real world,
the SSA is focused on engaging
students with it, leveraging
community resources to get
students out of the classroom
and into real projects with
real people. This is a partial,
Somerville-centric take on the
tight community integration
central to projects like North
Star or the Harlem Children’s
Zone.
peer to SSA staff in terms of their impact on and responsibility for
student experience. We’ve worked hard to embody the best prac-
tices of community organizing and volunteer management124 and
124 Brudney, J. L. (1999). The effective
use of volunteers: Best practices for the
public sector. Law and Contemporary
Problems 62(4), 219–255; Furco, A.
(1996). Service-learning: A balanced
approach to experiential education.
Expanding boundaries: Serving and
learning 1, 1–6; and Henderson, A. T.
(2007). Beyond the bake sale: The essential
guide to family-school partnerships. New
Press
arrived at this graded spectrum of clear structures for involvement
after working through a rough census of community resources and
talking to a variety of experienced community organizers and pub-
lic institutions known to do an especially good job of leveraging
volunteer effort (e.g. 826 Boston).
Importantly, while other staff and administrative support for
managing volunteers will be provided at the administrative level,
in every single one of these species of relationship, there is a single
SSA staff member responsible for managing the relationship.
Volunteer
At the least complex level, the SSA will look to local college stu-
dents, families, and professionals for participation in a variety
of the school support activities with which the SSA is conﬁdent
many, non-expert adults can step in to lend a hand. These activi-
ties include things like MCAS and SAT tutoring, help editing and
drafting college admissions essays, job and college interview prac-
tice, and writing feedback. It is also at this level which we will
open up opportunities for volunteer and student co-teaching, espe-
cially for individual seminars and workshops where we can intelli-
gently match volunteer background and disposition to class need.
Prospecting and coordinating these volunteers will be one of the
community interface
107
primary responsibilities of the principal, though close management
responsibility will depend on the context for their volunteering.
We also plan to train our own [small] cohort of substitute teach-
ers, given the unique constraints and useful backgrounds in the
SSA’s context. Managing the substitute teachers will be one of the
responsibilities of the curriculum developer.
Mentor
The SSA’s emphasis on projects that are not necessarily construed
in terms of their discipline (i.e. the expected dearth of ‘math projects’)
and which are deeply connected to real world questions and con-
cerns means that there will be tremendous opportunity and hunger
for mentors who are equipped to offer ongoing advice and critique
to students and staff in three, primary capacities:
1. student mentorship: One of the basic themes behind the
SSA’s design is the re-integration of many of the specialized roles
which have been identiﬁed by large school districts over time.
The importance of a single, supportive adult relationship cannot
be overstated.125 The SSA wants to bring the sensibilities and
125 McPartland, J. M. and S. M. Nettles
(1991). Using community adults as ad-
vocates or mentors for at-risk middle
school students: a two-year evalua-
tion of project raise. American journal
of education, 568–586; and Merriam,
S. (1983). Mentors and protégés: A
critical review of the literature. Adult
Education Quarterly 33(3), 161–173
power of programs like YearUp, Big Brothers Big Sisters, and the
Harlem Children’s Zone within the school’s wheelhouse. If a stu-
dent is looking for a strong father ﬁgure or is especially excited
about the military or is just getting interested in law—each of
those situations suggest natural dimensions of performance for
a potential mentor with whom a regular, unprogrammed meet-
ing can do wonders. There are many forms these meetings can
take, but at least one we’ve begun ﬂeshing out is a regular lunch:
we’ve already found four local establishments happy to offer
free meals to mentors coming in for lunch with an SSA student.
Identifying and managing these relationships will be one of the
primary responsibilities of the social worker in the student’s
Advisory.
2. project support: For every signiﬁcant project that students
take on, they will be expected to both identify what success looks
like for their project (i.e. what dimensions of performance matter
to them) and what type of people would be a good audience to
provide critique in formative and summative capacities. e.g. if a
student is undertaking a computational art project, a computer
scientist, artist, or a computational artist would be a natural
choice. These positions may sometimes be ﬁlled by peers, some-
times by staff, but especially as students get older, we expect
that more and more of their projects’ focuses will turn outward
sufﬁciently that bringing in adults in advisory and critical capac-
ities will become a central mentor function. Prospecting these
relationships will be one of the primary responsibilities of the
principal; managing these relationships will typically fall to the
project manager in students’ Advisory.
108
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
3. partner liaison: At the extreme of project involvement is
being a project liaison—rather than ‘just’ offering ongoing ad-
vice and critique for a student project, a project liaison is acting
as project client or manager in some meaningful capacity. The
internship/co-op model is the obvious inspiration for this type
of relationship, but as opposed to an ongoing, organizational
relationship this will be limited to a single project. This may be
something as simple as a student developing a web page for a
community organization.
Expert
Because of the novelty of the SSA’s approach, there will be many
instances where we’ll need to go out of the SSA to solicit support
and advice in the design and implementation of projects and semi-
nars. Sometimes these may be domain experts at local universities,
professionals with relevant backgrounds, or staff at local schools
of education. In each of these cases, the expert will be working
directly with a staff member on a speciﬁc project, typically the de-
sign of a project or curricular unit. Prospecting and coordinating
these relationships will be one of the primary responsibilities of the
principal.
Partner
Becoming a partner institutionalizes the ongoing relationship as
partner liaison—rather than limiting the collaboration with Google
to a single project, Google would become an ongoing partner and
voice in not only reliably taking students on for individual projects,
but longer term internship and co-op style relationships. This
would enable much larger scale and longer term projects to have
a home within local organizations, accommodating turnover in stu-
dents working on the project without limiting the scale of projects
of which the SSA could take ownership.
Sponsor
And ﬁnally, there’s an intense but well-established relationship be-
tween sponsors and schools. Not only for basic fundraising, dona-
tions of old equipment, and so on, but for ongoing projects where
the SSA’s interests align with that of another organization. For ex-
ample, the Tufts Center for Engineering Education and Outreach
relies on research grants for its continued operation. The number
of lab schools open to the ﬂexibility and character of collaborations
the SSA will be able to consider is miniscule. Taking advantage of
this to set up long term sponsorships and relationships with local
institutions is not only a good idea for procuring more resources for
students, but will ﬁgure prominently in our approach to longitudi-
nal data collection and analysis, as well.
community interface
109
Collaborators
Each of the species of relationship outlined so far has said nothing
about with whom these relationships might be cultivated. This is in-
tentional. Some great experts might be freelancers, others might be
researchers. That said, the channels for accessing different commu-
nity resources depends nearly entirely on who they are, not what
they might do for the SSA. We’ve identiﬁed four such groups, each
of which will both be represented on the SSA’s Board of Trustees.
Cultivating relationships with each will be among the principal’s
primary responsibilities given their central mandate to procure and
make available the necessary resources to Advisories.
Families
The most obvious but often overlooked community interface in a
school is its families. These are the people who know our students
best and care about them most. They will be central not only in
helping to deﬁne success for students, but in supporting them in
their postsecondary endeavors. A structural acknowledgment of
this shows up immediately in the SSA’s notion of the Individual
Action Plan.
The IAP process—inspired by a mix of the performance review
and IEP processes at their best–is an ongoing conversation among
students and the important adults [especially family members] in
their life. Managing and facilitating these conversations will be a
primary responsibility of the social worker in students’ Advisories.
Going beyond conversations between staff, families, and their
students will be SSA efforts to connect families to one another,
especially along lines of common concern. e.g. Families whose
children have IEPs have repeatedly told us how central advice from
people who have been through what you’re going through is to
their success and sanity. We want the SSA to take a central role
in facilitating and managing these connections, especially across
cultural and socioeconomic lines.
Businesses
Already, many Somerville businesses are involved in supporting
co-op and internship relationships with the local school system. Re-
cently, the change of the Somerville High School schedule mitigated
one of the primary obstacles to deeper collaborations historically
(the rotating block schedule).
Going even further, we’d like to open up conversations with
some of these partners—especially outside of the traditional trades—
as to what type of preparation or demonstration of competence
would be required to let them consider a high school student for
an entry level position. Building a network of companies who have
long term relationships with students well in advance of their ma-
triculation is a central strategy both in building the support net-
110
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
work the SSA needs to intercalate student projects into real world
contexts and to ensure the necessary support to make its ambitions
to diverse and extensive transitional services possible.
A natural starting point for these conversations is going to local
businesses for support in designing and implementing the inten-
sive workshops which will serve to develop fundamental ﬂuencies
at the SSA. Whether that’s reaching out to organizations like dan-
ger!awesome to run videography workshops or bocoup for web
development workshops, greater Boston is chock-full of exciting
partners for these collaborations.
Organizations
The SSA is intended to be a connector, stitching together commu-
nity resources, mentors, and services to meet individual student’s
needs. Inspired not only by the individual attention of programs
like Harlem Children’s Zone and their Academic Case Management
model, but the general shift in public institutions towards an em-
phasis on wraparound service provision126, the SSA partnerships
126 Burchard, J. D., E. J. Bruns,
and S. N. Burchard (2002). The
wraparound approach. Community
treatment for youth: Evidence-based
interventions for severe emotional and
behavioral disorders 2, 69–90; and
VanDenBerg, J. E. (1996). Individual-
ized services and supports through the
wraparound process: Philosophy and
procedures. Journal of Child and Family
Studies 5(1), 7–21
with community organizations is central to our approach.
In general, we expect the principal to prospect connections and
partners in response to student needs and interests as identiﬁed
by their Advisory. That said, we already know our top three fo-
cuses in our planning and implementation year: social work, special
education, and English language learners/Sheltered English Immer-
sion. For each of these, we’ve either identiﬁed127 or will identify
127 Speciﬁcally: Northeastern and
Boston University’s Schools of Social
Work, two staff members at Boston
Arts Academy’s SPED program
(referred to us by Tom Hehir), and
Centro Presente.
three partner organizations who will both provide professional de-
velopment for SSA staff and begin developing relationships with
enrollees as soon as they are identiﬁed.
Institutions
Boston has a higher number of college students per capita (and
colleges) than anywhere in the world. This academic and educa-
tional industry gives rise to a whole constellations of research and
educational institutions. Each of which, by the very nature of their
mission, often has something to offer local high schools structured
to spare the bandwidth to reach out to them and nurture a relation-
ship.
In particular, bringing these institutions into the picture as early
as possible is central to making sure that the transition to colle-
giate postsecondary options is effected smoothly for students and
colleges both. That involves both bringing in professors and ad-
missions ofﬁcers to the SSA to acquaint them with the unusual
background and context from which students will be coming and
establishing ongoing, programmatic relationships broadly inspired
by mechanisms like Dual Enrollment and the Undergraduate Re-
search Opportunity Program at MIT. As students approach the end
of their time at the SSA, this will transition to college tours, lunches
with college students, conversations with professors in relevant
community interface
111
ﬁeld, etc..
e.g. Cambridge Public Schools cross-registers students into Har-
vard, for free. Not only will the SSA be looking to establish sim-
ilar programmatic relationships, but we’ll be starting with much
smaller, one-off setups involving undergraduate research oppor-
tunities, individual professors receptive to the SSA angle, etc. If
there’s one lesson we’ve learned from four years of working with
community partners through the greater Boston area, it’s that the
best relationships grow from something small involving tiny com-
mitments and clear successes.
Autonomy Analysis
Ultimately, the SSA will be signiﬁcantly blurring the line between
teacher, mentor, coach, facilitator, and community member. To
effect this we need stafﬁng and curricular autonomy and the neces-
sary procurement and ﬁnancial autonomy to implement these types
of relationships and iterate on them.
Why should we expect this will beneﬁt students?
Wraparound ser-
vices, community integration, service learning—even before we
get to the necessary steps to implementing a deeply project-based
(as opposed to problem based or inquiry driven) curriculum, the
research on the effect of such community engagement and its pos-
itive effects on student outcomes piles up.128 The rub, as always,
128 Jacobson, R. and M. J. Blank (2011).
Expanding the learning day: An
essential component of the community
schools strategy. New directions for
youth development 2011(131), 55–67;
McPartland, J. M. and S. M. Nettles
(1991). Using community adults
as advocates or mentors for at-risk
middle school students: a two-year
evaluation of project raise. American
journal of education, 568–586; Merriam,
S. (1983). Mentors and protégés: A
critical review of the literature. Adult
Education Quarterly 33(3), 161–173; and
Henderson, A. T. (2007). Beyond the
bake sale: The essential guide to family-
school partnerships. New Press
is making sure the school’s structure actually accommodates the
necessary time, energy, and resources to make these relationships
real. In traditional settings, because the classroom is designed to be
able to function without any of these relationships, the day-to-day
operating reality of the school understandably takes precedence,
systematically biasing the school against external collaborations
despite the best of intention
What legal affordances will be required?
The SSA will, in addition
to the stafﬁng, curricula, and ﬁnancial ﬂexibilities outlined else-
where, need to be able to author and award its own Professional
Development Points and deﬁnition of student learning time to ac-
commodate the broader set of parties and activities this type of
deep, community integration will involve.
We are still in the process of writing up the necessary exemp-
tions and waivers required for this. You can ﬁnd a partial list in
Legal Affordances, but per 603 CMR 48.03(b),
If an innovation plan committee is proposing an innovation plan that
may conﬂict with laws (including regulations) governing other public
schools, the committee shall, before presenting the plan to the school
committee for approval, request approval from the Commissioner
for any provision in the plan that may conﬂict with such laws. The
Commissioner’s approval shall be based on his determination that
the plan is consistent with 603 CMR 48.03 (2) and with the state’s
112
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
obligations under the education clause of the Massachusetts Con-
stitution, Mass. Const., pt. II, ch. V, s. II, as deﬁned by a court of
competent jurisdiction, and that the provision in the plan that may
conﬂict with such laws is necessary to advance the mission or educa-
tional programs of the innovation school. If the Commissioner does
not approve the proposed provision in the plan, the innovation plan
committee may ask the Board to review the matter and the Board
shall make the ﬁnal decision.
which means that the full process of articulating points of con-
tact between state laws and regulations and the Innovation Plan as
voted on need not conclude until the School Committee presenta-
tion. As with negotiating necessary affordances in the Collective
Bargaining Agreement to make the Innovation Plan possible, non-
substantive design edits and alterations may be made after the
Innovation Plan Committee vote without triggering a re-start of the
process.129
129 French, D. (2013, August). Personal
communication with dan french.
Regarding voting and editing process
between Innovation Plan and School
Committee votes
Part III
How We’ll Get It Done
Programmatic Student Supports
The SSA’s focus on struggling students drives our commitment to
personalizing support for the many places from which students
are coming when they struggle. We know that most of the reasons
students struggle are not academic per se, even if they show up as
academic issues.
Overall, our emphasis on small settings, wraparound services,
the elevation of people over protocol, and individualized attention
is the rule. This goes back directly to the inspiration of the Harlem
Children’s Zone. Everyone has all sorts of issues, the fundamen-
tal premise of the SSA is that a smaller school given the ﬂexibility
to pay attention to individual student needs will be able to be re-
sponsive in ways that address the underlying issues which have led
to struggles in traditional contexts. That said, it is worth speciﬁ-
cally calling out the most common sources of issues for struggling
students and how the SSA will both uniquely meet these needs
and ensure the availability of at least the same level of service the
District currently offers.
The basic theme tying all of these together is simple: the SSA’s
current plan introduces a number of autonomies, among those
budgetary. That budgetary autonomy has been designed to make
it possible for the SSA to access and pay for (functionally buy-
ing back) District services which are traditionally bundled. The
design—which we’ve ﬂeshed out with the help of Pat Durette
(Somerville Public Schools Director of Finance) at Central Ofﬁce—
is intended to provide for the SSA’s operational ﬂexibilities while
ensuring that if those ﬂexibilities are not leveraged in the case of
a particular, centralized District service, that the SSA can access
those services without double dipping and pulling resources away
disproportionately.
District Supports
Even though people talk about schools’ per capita allocations, the
way budgeting actually works is signiﬁcantly more complex. In
particular, the lines between the City, the District, and individual
schools is quite blurry. Individual schools do not receive an allo-
cation they freely spend. The mechanics of municipal and District
ﬁnance are outside our scope, but the SSA team has worked with
Pat Durette to sketch out the broad strokes of a setup which will
116
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
both be legally workable and achieve the ends outlined in this plan.
Furthermore, we’ve talked through the setup with the Department
of Elementary and Secondary Education and Executive Ofﬁce of
Education and the broad strokes have passed muster with those
staff as well. Basically, the setup is intended to achieve three objec-
tives:
1. Meet the statutory requirement in the Innovation School legisla-
tion that the SSA “shall receive each school year from the school
committee the same per pupil allocation as any other district
school receives.”
2. Provide this per pupil allocation in a ﬂexible, “one bucket” setup
that enables the SSA to spend its allocation autonomously, in
accordance with best practices for small schools targeting strug-
gling students.130
130 Hehir, T. and L. I. Katzman (2012).
Effective inclusive schools: Designing
successful schoolwide programs. John
Wiley & Sons
3. All while guaranteeing SSA students will maintain access—at a
minimum—to the same set of District services as are available at
other Somerville schools without disproportionately or unduly
pulling away resources from other initiatives to achieve this
ﬂexibility.
The basic outline of this setup is simple. The SSA team combed
through Somerville Public Schools’ budget, looking speciﬁcally at
Somerville High School expenditures, and done three things:
• Set aside at least as much per ELL & SPED pupil as Somerville
High School.
• Identiﬁed centralized costs which do not scale per student or
per class for Somerville High School (e.g. the Superintendent’s
salary, debt service, etc.) and subtracted those out of our bud-
geted allocation.
• And found a legal procurement process whereby the City will
periodically (likely quarterly) give the SSA its allocation in a
single bucket to spend and audit.131
131 The precise details of this—
speciﬁcally with regards to the
necessary lines of credit, the City’s
involvement in non-academic expen-
ditures like building maintenance, and
a few other subtleties—remain to be
worked out. But in conversations with
Pat Durette, staff at DESE/EOE, and
staff at the Massachusetts Inspector
General, we’ve conﬁrmed that there’s
some arrangement within the current
outlines which will make this possible.
Overall, the point of all this is to establish infrastructure which
makes it possible to ﬂexibly spend the SSA’s per pupil allocation
while also making it possible to buy-back appropriate District ser-
vices to ensure that the SSA is able to ﬂexibly spend its budget
without disproportionately pulling funds from existing initiatives.
This ﬂexibility is necessary not just as a general design principle
and best practice for small, agile organizations,132 and not just for
132 Otley, D. (1994). Management
control in contemporary organiza-
tions: towards a wider framework.
Management accounting research 5(3),
289–299
small schools implementing novel, project-based environments,133
133 Blumenfeld, P., B. J. Fishman, J. Kra-
jcik, R. W. Marx, and E. Soloway
(2000). Creating usable innova-
tions in systemic reform: Scaling up
technology-embedded project-based
science in urban schools. Educational
Psychologist 35(3), 149–164
but because there are a variety of ways in which the very new-ness
of the SSA’s model means that the balance sheet looks different.
For example, there are many aspects of the types of programs and
environment you’ll ﬁnd at the SSA which are very well-matched to
students who have struggled with issues like language based learn-
ing disabilities (LBLDs), ADD/ADHD, and spectrum disorders.134
134 Filippatou, D. and S. Kaldi (2010).
The effectiveness of project-based
learning on pupils with learning
difﬁculties regarding academic perfor-
mance, group work, and motivation.
International journal of special educa-
tion 25(1), 17–26; Armstrong, T. (1996).
A holistic approach to attention deﬁcit
disorder. Educational leadership 53(5),
34–36; and Mitchell, S., T. S. Foulger,
K. Wetzel, and C. Rathkey (2009). The
negotiated project approach: Project-
based learning without leaving the
standards behind. Early Childhood
Education Journal 36(4), 339–346
programmatic student supports
117
But the variety of spending patterns and programs necessary to
implement such an environment would not show up on the SSA’s
balance sheet as SPED line-items necessarily.
Community Supports
In the past four years of working with institutions and companies
throughout greater Boston, one of the most consistent themes we’ve
heard regarding why community partners do/do not work with
the Somerville Public Schools is that of ﬂexibility. This shows up
in a variety of ways: “Schools always just want you to come in and
tutor. We never get to do anything we’d be interested in.” or “The
rotating block schedule makes it impossible for my employees to
do anything meaningful with them.” or “There’s never any money
for interesting projects. I’m happy to donate my time, but I can’t
afford to pay for a class set of tools.” or “The District wanted us
to work with all the schools at once. Maybe that could make sense
one day, but I want to start small.” or “I tried reaching out to the
administration, but they never got back to me. I wish I could just
work with a single teacher.” This list goes on and on, but the basic
theme is clear: traditional classroom environments are not ﬂexible
enough to accommodate working with many community partners.
This is not only true of local companies and universities, but even
the very advocacy organizations which may speciﬁcally focus on
the concerns of SPED, ELL, or low-income students.
Somerville and greater Boston are incredibly dense with exciting
people, companies, organizations, and universities. Designing a
school which doesn’t need any of them means you end up with
a design that isn’t set up to match their needs and constraints.
The SSA’s ﬂexibility not only makes it easier to match these needs
(e.g. affording scheduling ﬂexibility or project budgets), but will
be designed around using community partners as a measure of
ﬁrst rather than last resort. Concretely, beyond the community
partnerships and internships discussed elsewhere, three of the
partnerships we’ll set up immediately deserve speciﬁc mention, but
are representative of the SSA’s broader, intended approach:
• schools of social work: Once the SSA has a licensed social
worker on staff, we’ll be able to pull in a number of social work
students through ﬁeldwork internships funded by their schools’
programs. We have already established Boston University and
Northeastern University’s schools of social work would be up for
participating in a collaboration where we pair their social work
students with individual Advisories to support the SSA social
worker staff members.
• young somerville advisory group: Throughout the SSA
planning process, people have consistently pointed us to the
Young Somerville Advisory Group (YSAG) as an underleveraged
group of young people in Somerville excited to get involved in
118
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
the community. Talking to a few YSAG members, we’ve found
some frustration with the relative shallowness of the YSAG’s
organizing—focus groups, surveys, and meetings only go so
far—and excitement about concrete opportunities for small-batch
volunteer effort. Whether supporting families with IEPs in the
IEP process as note-takers or tutoring MCAS prep or. . . YSAG
is a great example of an unleveraged resource for SPS which is
even sometimes construed as a burden or threat (given YSAG’s
largely professional membership).
• mit public service center et al.: At MIT, Tufts, and Har-
vard, our conversations with the various, community-facing staff
responsible for coordinating volunteerism and other collabora-
tions with the institutions have all been very excited by the SSA’s
willingness to design opportunities around the interests and ap-
titudes of their students and faculty. e.g. inspired by programs
like PROMYS and RSI, extending undergraduate research and
mentorship structures to the high school level, involving SSA
students—especially once they’ve developed basic ﬂuencies in
programming—in introductory college offerings in the same
subjects, teaming up to offer adult education or permeable dual
enrollment programs, etc. In each case, being able to assuage in-
stitutions’ concerns about the hassle or constraints that typically
come with public school district collaborations was essential to
being able to move the conversation forward.
Low-Income Students
There is no stronger correlate of student test performance—among
all the data the Massachusetts DOE collects—than your district’s
median household income. Much of what’s exciting about the
project of public education is mitigating this vicious cycle.
Concretely, the SSA’s focus on reducing the number of cracks
in service provision to reduce the number of students who fall
through those cracks means that the social worker in each student’s
Advisory will be taking on responsibility for ensuring that those
students and their families are connected to the necessary services
based on their socioeconomic background. In eleventh grade this
will mean coordinating FAFSA workshops where staff visit families
in their homes to help them ﬁll out the necessary paperwork. At
enrollment time it may mean sitting down with families to ﬁll out
the necessary paperwork to participate in SNAP or ﬁle for afford-
able housing or get energy assistance or. . .
One of the ﬁrst programmatic supports we’ll be putting in place
for many low-income families will be targeting those families who
either don’t have wireless connectivity at home or whose parents
don’t have cell phones. Because of the importance of connectiv-
ity not only in supporting students in the SSA but ensuring open
channels of communication, the SSA will take on ensuring complete
programmatic student supports
119
connectivity and offer subsidized phones to ensure we can reach
every SSA student’s family as part of our technology infrastructure
development.
Needless to say, there will be many more small projects like this,
some of which will be developed and coordinated by the social
worker in each student’s Advisory, some of which may be taken on
as schoolwide projects pulling together student effort, as well.
English Language Learners
11.4% of Somerville High School’s enrollment are English Lan-
guage Learners (ELLs). In addition to the additional effort this
typically requires in core classes, ELLs bring with them needs for
language instruction and immersion. And of course, entering high
school as an ELL is correlated to other issues covered in this sec-
tion, especially low income and immigrant status. Organizations
in Somerville like the Parent Information Center (PIC), Somerville
Family Learning Collaborative (SFLC), Liaison Interpreters Pro-
gram of Somerville (LIPS), and the District’s ELL services (headed
by Dr. Davila) are all essential resources in addressing ELL stu-
dent needs. The social worker in each student’s Advisory will be
in charge of bringing these resources to bear appropriately and re-
sponsively. For some of the services featuring heavily in logistics or
communications with parents (e.g. LIPS and translation services),
the SSA will organize additional support through its family and
community partner networks.
Every staff member at the SSA will be proﬁcient in at least one
language germane to the SSA’s student population in addition to
English. While this will be a factor in hiring, we are budgeting for
intensive, summer immersion programming via organizations like
the Boston Language Institute. This integration will ensure always-
on support for ELL issues, in addition to providing very healthy
contexts for deﬁning students’ relationships to teachers in non-
academic, culturally enriching and empowering contexts. This will
be in addition to applicable RETELL/SEI endorsements and related
training.
In addition to the thorough staff support for ELL, there is a body
of research demonstrating the utility of project-based learning to
ELL students. The multimodal, divergent curricula emphasize in-
formal, conversational communication and experiential learning135
135 Dewey, J. (2007). Experience and
education. Free Press; Gardner, H.
(1985). Frames of mind: The theory of
multiple intelligences. Basic Books (AZ);
and Duckworth, E. R. (2001). " Tell
me more": Listening to learners explain.
Teachers College Press New York
and both in our own experiences running programs focused on
computational thinking and in a nascent body of research136, com-
136 Gibbons, P. (2002). Scaffolding lan-
guage, scaffolding learning: Teaching sec-
ond language learners in the mainstream
classroom. Heinemann Portsmouth,
NH; and Goode, J. (2010). Connecting
k-16 curriculum & policy: making
computer science engaging, accessible,
and hospitable for underrepresented
students. In Proceedings of the 41st ACM
technical symposium on Computer science
education, pp. 22–26. ACM
puters have been used to work through and around many of the
traditional academic weaknesses faced by English language learn-
ers. In particular, to the extent that a programming language is in
fact, a new language for all involved, there is a much more equal
playing ﬁeld.
120
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Special Education Students
It is no coincidence that the pedagogies and communities around
art-based therapy, special needs pedagogy, and project based learn-
ing are so similar. In Massachusetts, fully 85%137 of students
137 Hehir, T., T. Grindal, and H. Ei-
delman. Review of special educa-
tion in the commonwealth of mas-
sachusetts; and Deninger, M. and
R. O’Donnell (2009, March). Special
education placements and costs in
massachusetts. Education research
brief, Massachusetts Department of
Elementary and Secondary Education,
http://www.doe.mass.edu/research/
with special needs did not have a physiological disability. Tradi-
tional schedules and classroom environments—often emphasizing
structure and stability and demanding a great deal of students’
attention—are especially challenging for these students. Further-
more, those students with developmental or speciﬁc learning
disabilities often require degrees of differentiation impossible to
accommodate in traditional classrooms.
Project-based learning’s emphasis on divergent work and self-
pacing—not to mention learner autonomy—is very well-matched
for many students with special needs. In sprout’s experiences run-
ning programs, these contexts mitigate signs of dysfunction, espe-
cially with language based learning disabilities, attentional issues
like ADD/ADHD, and spectrum disorders.138 In short, because
138 Filippatou, D. and S. Kaldi (2010).
The effectiveness of project-based
learning on pupils with learning
difﬁculties regarding academic perfor-
mance, group work, and motivation.
International journal of special educa-
tion 25(1), 17–26; Armstrong, T. (1996).
A holistic approach to attention deﬁcit
disorder. Educational leadership 53(5),
34–36; and Mitchell, S., T. S. Foulger,
K. Wetzel, and C. Rathkey (2009). The
negotiated project approach: Project-
based learning without leaving the
standards behind. Early Childhood
Education Journal 36(4), 339–346
students needn’t march in lockstep from one carefully managed
class to another, there’s much less friction created by the differ-
ences in style and capacity which come with special needs status.
These experiences are corroborated by a large body of research 139
139 Bell, S. (2010). Project-based learn-
ing for the 21st century: Skills for
the future. The Clearing House 83(2),
39–43; Gardner, J. E., C. A. Wissick,
W. Schweder, and L. S. Canter (2003).
Enhancing interdisciplinary instruction
in general and special education the-
matic units and technology. Remedial
and Special Education 24(3), 161–172;
and Warschauer, M., D. Grant, G. D.
Real, and M. Rousseau (2004). Promot-
ing academic literacy with technology:
Successful laptop programs in k-12
schools. System 32(4), 525–537
exploring and substantiating the value of more ﬂexible, art-based,
project-driven environments for special needs students.
Overall, after reading through nearly a dozen books looking at
the design of alternative, special education programs (especially
the opportunities and challenges that come with a project-based
environment), we’ve settled on Tom Hehir’s140 Effective Inclusive
140 Hehir was previously Director of
Special Education at the U.S. Depart-
ment of Education 1993–2000, and is
now faculty at the Harvard Graduate
School of Education as an expert in
the area of policies and programs for
the education of disabled children.
During his tenure at the DOE, his
primary statutory responsibility was
the implementation of the Individ-
uals with Disabilities Education Act
(IDEA). Prior to his work with the
DOE, he directed the special education
programs for the Chicago (1990–1993)
and Boston (1983–1987) public school
systems.
Schools: Designing Successful Schoolwide Programs141 as our primary
141 Hehir, T. and L. I. Katzman (2012).
Effective inclusive schools: Designing
successful schoolwide programs. John
Wiley & Sons
guide. Fortunately, Hehir is local and will be helping us with the
design of the SSA’s SPED-speciﬁc elements, especially with regard
to project-based environments. Needless to say, the Somerville
Department of Special Education will be a close partner in advising
us on the design and implementation of these efforts.
Going beyond the contact points between SSA design, curric-
ula, and SPED issues, the SSA will also introduce a variety of new
programmatic supports. Because the SSA is expecting somewhere
between 6–10 students in its entire enrollment each year to have
an IEP, it’s feasible for family engagement with each of these pro-
grammatic supports to be managed by the social worker in each
student’s Advisory.
Reviewing Student IEPs Upon Enrollment
Because the SSA will be a
signiﬁcantly different environment, we expect that it will behoove
us to sit down and review students’ IEPs with parents upon enroll-
ment. At that point, we expect most families will have had some
exposure to the project-based style environment through our en-
rollment outreach, but if not, we’ll organize introductions and tours
for families so that the conversation about their child’s situation
programmatic student supports
121
can be properly contextualized. Families will then have the option
to sit down, review, and potentially revise their child’s IEP given
the unique concerns and opportunities attendant to an environ-
ment like the SSA. We’ll be working with Tom Hehir and a variety
of contacts from sprout’s previous work with schools focused on
students with special needs to design the details of this IEP review
and counseling process in the intervening year between the SSA’s
approval and enrollment.
Supporting Parent Connection
A consistent theme in conversations
with SPED specialists, school leaders, and parents—not to mention
the research142—is an emphasis on the importance of parental sup-
142 Harry, B. (1992). Cultural diversity,
families, and the special education system:
Communication and empowerment.
Teachers College Press
port networks. This is fantastic for parents equipped with the band-
width and inclination to develop and leverage such networks, but
the SSA is intent on building in support for exactly these types of
functions within the school. Many families in Somerville (especially
whose children struggle in traditional academic environments)
for reasons ranging from language and culture to disposition and
means—are not in a position to implement best practices for SPED
advocacy.
Working with the Special Education Parents Advisory Council
(SPEDPAC), the SSA will begin curating a list of parents (turning to
the District for help tracking down families of alumni) and reaching
out to various institutions into which Somerville families are com-
monly outplaced to seed a group of potential advisors and mentors
for SPED families in the SSA. In ongoing conversations about stu-
dents’ IAPs and IEPs at the SSA, staff will surface potential issues
which the social worker in the student’s Advisory will be respon-
sible for translating into an actionable responses, with a particular
eye toward making connections with other families with relevant
experience. This will be in addition to things like connecting the
family to an appropriate expert or ﬁnding relevant professional
development opportunities for that student’s project manager.
Sometimes this might be as simple as a cc on an email thread, but
often it may require arranging for dinner or an in-person introduc-
tion and facilitated relationship depending on the family of the SSA
student.
Establish Legal & Psychological Advisory
We’ve also begun track-
ing down lawyers, doctors, and psychiatrists whom the SSA will
stitch together in a similar, pro bono advisory group. The goal of this
group isn’t to provide free, extended support, but to make the sim-
ple act of asking a question or getting a pointer or second opinion
on a next step easy and free—for both SSA families and SSA staff.
We already have two lawyers, one doctor, and one family counselor
excited to join such a consortium providing pro bono support and
advice to families, teachers, and administrators.
122
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Notetaker Corps
Inspired by the LIPS program and feedback from
SPED families about the IEP and advocacy process, we’ll also be
setting up a small group of volunteers explicitly dedicated to at-
tending meetings with families and acting as a designated note-
taker to keep minutes from each meeting to help families keep
everything straight and documented.
Archival Support
Related to the notetaker corps, the SSA itself
will also act to support SPED families with an archive for records
and communications related to their child, offering help to parents
organizing and maintaining records of conversations with doctors,
SSA staff, relevant papers and research, etc.
Handling Unexpected Costs
Discussing ‘average’ Special Education
costs is somewhat misleading because of the incredible spread pos-
sible depending on the nature and severity of students’ issues. This
is doubly true because of the increased variance expected as a result
of the SSA’s small size—resulting in an expected SPED enrollment
of 6–10 students annually. That said, in conversations with Debbie
Connell, we’ve conﬁrmed our budgetary estimate of ≈$20, 000 as
an appropriate target for SPED per capita spending.143 Going be-
143 Connell, D. (2013, November).
Personal communication with debbie
connell
yond this, we’ll also be taking advantage of Massachusetts’ pooled
risk and zero-interest loan programs to guard against extraordinary
SPED costs negatively impacting either Somerville SPED or the
quality of service we can provide SSA SPED students.
Speciﬁcally, under MGL Chapter 71B, Section 5B, the SSA will
be authorized to participate in a pooled risk program off-setting
extreme SPED costs,
Districts [and district-like bodies, which in our case will include the
SSA by virtue of our legal status—e.g. this same program is available
to individual charter schools] may submit claims for payment not to
exceed 75 per cent of the amount by which the district’s current year
total special education expenses exceed 110 per cent of the district’s
average total special education expenses of the prior three years. For
the purposes of this section, total special education expenses shall
include instructional costs and private school tuition costs but shall
not include transportation costs. Claims shall be subject to review
and approval by the commissioner. Approved claims shall be paid
from the trust fund.
Additionally, the SSA will participate in a related, zero inter-
est loan program for extraordinary costs which we expect will be
mitigated over the course of the loan period (likely through matric-
ulation of other students). Under MGL Chapter 71B, Section 5C will
be eligible for zero-interest loans to cover extraordinary SPED costs,
Districts [and district-like bodies, which in our case will include the
SSA by virtue of our legal status—e.g. this same program is available
to individual charter schools] may apply for zero interest loans to
cover any portion of the amount by which the current year’s total
special education expenses are expected to exceed 110 per cent of
the district’s average total special education expenses of the prior
programmatic student supports
123
three years. For the purposes of this section, total special education
expenses shall include instructional costs, private school tuition costs
and premiums paid to the risk pool trust fund established in sec-
tion 5B, but shall not include transportation costs. Loan applications
shall be subject to review and approval by the commissioner. Ap-
proved loan amounts shall be paid from the trust fund established in
subsection (c).
Collectively, these programs offer a reasonable guarantee of the
usefulness of our budgeting procedure here, which is easily robust
to the 10% margin provided for by the combination of the pooled
risk and loan programs.
Immigrant Families
Setting aside the ELL-speciﬁc concerns covered elsewhere in this
chapter which often accompany immigrant status, there are two
problems speciﬁc to immigrant families which the SSA will speciﬁ-
cally and separately address:
• The ﬁrst is the incredible strain and opacity involved in being
undocumented. This is an issue that makes the provision of all
social services much more challenging, especially in cases where
there isn’t the necessary trust within the family to even open
up the conversation. The SSA will be working with the PIC and
Centro Presente to sit down one-on-one with families who have
undocumented members. The goal of these sessions is twofold:
1) ﬁrst and foremost, develop a rapport with the family and
connect them to a knowledgeable immigrant mentor family in
the community, and 2) connect the family to friendly legal help
through the school. Families need to come to see the SSA as a
resource and protector, not as a threat.
• Related, the Advisory social worker will speciﬁcally pull in pro
bono immigration law and service support in their process of
identifying gaps in service (e.g. healthcare). The social worker
will also have time set aside to speciﬁcally touch base with the
family’s immigrant mentor in addition to the default menu of
mentorships and community connections to which every SSA
student will be connected.
Gender- and Ethnicity-Speciﬁc Supports
The SSA’s small size means that it will be important to ensure that
students’ various intersectionalities—whether LGBTQ, Latino,
Hmong, etc.—are not only respected, but supported. In larger con-
texts like Somerville High School, this can show up naturally in the
form of student organizations. When each class is only three dozen
students, it’s not obvious that that will be workable. Instead, the
SSA will focus on three vectors of support:
124
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
• connecting students to existing cultural and support organi-
zations both as individuals and by bringing those organizations
into the SSA as part of projects, workshops, and regular events.
• mentor choice and development offers a clear lever for
ensuring students develop relationships with role models that
can reinforce and develop aspects of their identity which in
larger contexts might be cause for social denial and ostracism.
• tailoring and guiding project development to encour-
age and develop students’ connections to those dimensions of
identity.
There are a wide variety of relevant advocacy organizations and
programs throughout greater Boston who could make for great
partners. But because we see these relationships as driven by indi-
vidual students and their backgrounds, these may not show up as
structural programs within the SSA. e.g. Centro Presente’s commu-
nity organizing programs or MIT’s Society of Women Engineers are
likely to be among our partners in supporting speciﬁc students, but
their involvement will be responsive to individual students’ projects
and contexts.
Autonomy Analysis
Most schools are designed to survive total insularity. This ends up
biasing a lot of the communication, funding, and stafﬁng struc-
tures in a way that make it less likely that community partners will
become an integral part of students’ experiences. While this is a
very common organizational pattern144 (and not just in schools, ei-
144 Lipham, J. M. (1981). Effective
Principal, Effective School. ERIC;
and March, J. G. (1978). American
public school administration: A short
analysis. The School Review 86(2),
217–250
ther145), the SSA will be intent on avoiding this by casting staff and
145 Fountain, J. E. (2001). Building the
virtual state: Information technology
and institutional change. Brookings
Institution Press
the school overall as ﬁrst and foremost infrastructure for connect-
ing and surfacing community resources and constructing contexts
which render those resources educational. This in and of itself
doesn’t cut against any traditional limits or structures in school,
but it shows up as a design principle across questions of curricu-
lum, budgeting, scheduling, stafﬁng, operations—every aspect of
the school. And in each of those categories, new autonomies are
required (which are laid out, in their broad strokes, in this plan).
Why should we expect this will beneﬁt students?
The design of the
SSA works very hard to ensure that we can focus on our relation-
ship with students. Sometimes, the issues a student is dealing with
require particular expertise to be brought to the table. Just as the
school system houses a variety of expertise that can’t be reasonably
expected to be located within a single teacher, the community at
large offers the exact same beneﬁt. To take advantage of this, it’s
necessary for small schools to set themselves up relying on com-
munity partners as ﬁrst class collaborators,146 and when they do so
146 Goos, M., D. Lincoln, A. Coco,
S. Frid, P. Galbraith, M. Horne, L. Jolly,
A. Kostogriz, T. Lowrie, T. Short, et al.
(2004). Home, school and community
partnerships to support children’s nu-
meracy. Department of Education,
Science and Training Canberra; and
Battistich, V., D. Solomon, M. Watson,
and E. Schaps (1997). Caring school
communities. Educational Psycholo-
gist 32(3), 137–151
they’re able to implement wraparound services which can dramati-
cally improve student outcomes.147
147 McPartland, J. M. and S. M. Nettles
(1991). Using community adults
as advocates or mentors for at-risk
middle school students: a two-year
evaluation of project raise. American
journal of education, 568–586
programmatic student supports
125
What legal affordances will be required?
This chapter covers a strat-
egy more than any particular provision; the various ﬂexibilities
in licensure, scheduling, budgeting, et al. have been covered else-
where.
We are still in the process of writing up the necessary exemp-
tions and waivers required for this. You can ﬁnd a partial list in
Legal Affordances, but per 603 CMR 48.03(b),
If an innovation plan committee is proposing an innovation plan that
may conﬂict with laws (including regulations) governing other public
schools, the committee shall, before presenting the plan to the school
committee for approval, request approval from the Commissioner
for any provision in the plan that may conﬂict with such laws. The
Commissioner’s approval shall be based on his determination that
the plan is consistent with 603 CMR 48.03 (2) and with the state’s
obligations under the education clause of the Massachusetts Con-
stitution, Mass. Const., pt. II, ch. V, s. II, as deﬁned by a court of
competent jurisdiction, and that the provision in the plan that may
conﬂict with such laws is necessary to advance the mission or educa-
tional programs of the innovation school. If the Commissioner does
not approve the proposed provision in the plan, the innovation plan
committee may ask the Board to review the matter and the Board
shall make the ﬁnal decision.
which means that the full process of articulating points of con-
tact between state laws and regulations and the Innovation Plan as
voted on need not conclude until the School Committee presenta-
tion. As with negotiating necessary affordances in the Collective
Bargaining Agreement to make the Innovation Plan possible, non-
substantive design edits and alterations may be made after the
Innovation Plan Committee vote without triggering a re-start of the
process.148
148 French, D. (2013, August). Personal
communication with dan french.
Regarding voting and editing process
between Innovation Plan and School
Committee votes
School Improvement Plan
This School Improvement Plan is only a draft. The Board of Trustees
will undertake designing and voting on an ofﬁcial School Improve-
ment Plan each year, to be ﬁled with the School Committee as an
addendum to the Innovation Plan.
The Somerville STEAM Academy—if it is approved—will exist
to change people. To transform students into independent investi-
gators. It is easy, when thinking about school, to focus wholly too
much on the inputs into the school . . . things like the budget or the
number of computers per student or students per teacher. And of
course, inputs are important. But inevitably, schools and school dis-
tricts are responsible for their outputs. Ultimately, this is a changed
person. And of course, there’s a great deal of contention around
what a “changed student” looks like. MCAS score? SAT? Happi-
ness index? Starting salary? But it’s clear that if you do not plan
where you’re going, you won’t end up where you want to. And
that’s what this chapter sets out to do: describe the measures of
performance outside of the SSA that will be monitored to ensure we
accomplish our mission (including, of course, those we are legally
required to, e.g. PARCC/MCAS.)
Our efﬁcacy is deﬁned by our mission: cultivating learners’ sci-
entiﬁc curiosity and the hands-on capacity for creative, independent in-
vestigation and engineering required to follow through on that curiosity.
Our interest is the growth and development of students as inves-
tigators and citizens; however, as with all measurement, it is not
only impossible to measure something without perturbing it, it is
largely impossible to measure anything but those things correlated
to the phenomenon of interest. We think that sticking as close to
that phenomenon—deep inquiry—as possible is essential.
Formatively, our assessment strategy will focus on deep, hard
projects and the capacity of students to imagine, iterate, manage,
reﬂect, and share these. Capturing the data necessary for these
assessments will be driven primarily by the project management
staff, project advisory boards, and Board of Trustees. One of the
primary upshots of a computationally focused and technologically
enabled curriculum is that the process of capturing, reviewing, and
collating student work becomes tractable on previously impossible
scales. This output will be stitched together into a combination of
a personalized archive and portfolio and mapped back onto the
Common Core and MCAS/PARCC learning objectives to act as the
128
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
base from which to derive everything from students’ transcripts
to credit unit equivalents. These formative data will be compiled
annually for presentation to the School Committee and quarterly
for the Board of Trustees.
Summatively, the SSA’s assessment strategy will focus on the
ﬁdelity and efﬁcacy with which students transition from the SSA
to their next step—whether that’s the workforce or college. The
SSA has very explicitly not included college admission or gradu-
ation rates in its deﬁnition of success because we think that just
as one size does not ﬁt all in high school, one path does not ﬁt all
after high school. The process of surfacing and articulating what
“success” means for an individual student is one of the primary
responsibilities of the social worker in each cohort. Furthermore,
the SSA’s longitudinal support means that our summative measures
of performance will be much broader than typical, including but
not limited to starting salaries, student satisfaction surveys, letters
of recommendation and assessment from professors and employers,
and so on. These summative data will be compiled annually for
presentation to the Board of Trustees and School Committee.
These results ultimately exist solely outside of the SSA; i.e., it is
learners’ future selves and successes by which the SSA should be
judged, not the amount of effort the SSA invests. Everything within
the SSA is nothing more than an input.
Of course, that is not enough to manage a school by. Recogniz-
ing that most of the outcomes which matter to the SSA can’t be
captured in a single number, we will collate a variety of metrics
and measures by which to manage and improve its performance.
While some of these—e.g., average hours spent on a project—will
be quantitative, the majority will be qualitative. Increasing the
depth and ﬁdelity of qualitative assessments (and using the good
judgment of staff and board members to transform these into num-
bers) is the basic seed of our assessment strategy. All other inputs
(e.g., staff satisfaction, attendance rate, and so on) will be measured
as indicators to track progress, but will not deﬁne success on their
own.
The STEAM Trustees will oversee the results of the school
itself, monitoring student, staff, and family satisfaction along
with markers of academic success like PARCC scores and post-
secondary achievement. This board will submit annual reports
to the Somerville School Committee, documenting school perfor-
mance, and will be responsible for establishing annual metrics
towards which the school will strive each year in order to achieve
its mission.
The Advisory Board will monitor and evaluate the depth and
quality of student work within the SSA. This will include reviewing
student projects and internship outcomes as well as the ongoing
development of relationships with local experts and businesses to
serve as potential resources to future SSA students and projects.
This board will submit quarterly reports to The STEAM Trustees,
school improvement plan
129
including an overview and evaluation of student work completed
during the quarter, reviews of relationships with community mem-
bers and organizations, as well as any open questions and sugges-
tions.
Organizational Priorities
Especially in the design and opening of a new school, metrics like
attendance rates and test scores woefully underspecify a clear
and effective management strategy. The SSA’s Board of Trustees
will expand and revise a version of this chapter for our inaugural
School Improvement Plan, but the design team thought it prudent
to sketch out the broadest strokes for consideration by the Innova-
tion Plan and School Committees.
In the year between the SSA’s approval and projected opening in
Fall 2015, our top three organizational objectives will focus on the
people who will be in the room. Many other details—ranging from
the curriculum mapping process to the build out of the facility—
will need to be handled as well. But those elements which are nat-
urally urgent will be taken care of. The elements essential to con-
sciously prioritize are those which are important but not naturally
urgent: enrollment outreach, hiring, and community development.
Comprehensive, effective enrollment outreach
The core of the design of the SSA is built around the notion that
there are families whose students struggle in traditional envi-
ronments and would beneﬁt from a STEAM-ly opportunity. That
means the onus is on the SSA to do the outreach required to gener-
ate sufﬁciently broad and diverse interest among families, to many
of whom words like “computation” or “modeling and representa-
tion” or “project-based” don’t mean much (and not just because of
language barriers). We’ve sketched out the broad strokes of a multi-
tiered outreach process spanning a range of engagement from infor-
mational session all the way to full-time summer camp. Operating
at all the local schools and collaborating with a variety of families
and community organizations is a lot of moving parts, especially
for a new organization. Making sure we develop the organizational
capacity to manage that process competently and smoothly is es-
sential, but the ultimate success of the outreach process will be
judged by two measures:
• its comprehensiveness—of the ∼350 rising seventh graders, how
many participated in each level of enrollment outreach? Measur-
ing this is a simple matter of counting.
• its efﬁcacy—on the individual level, how thoroughly is the nature
of the SSA, its staff, and its overall aims and philosophy com-
municated to parents by experiential workshops? Measuring
130
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
this will require the implementation of pre- and post-surveys for
parents, or perhaps less formally, straight testimonials.
Smoothly operating, high ﬁdelity hiring process
The SSA is unusual. This means that the staff we’ll be hiring will
also be unusual. Which in turn pushes us to consider an unusual
hiring pipeline. By building in the testing of potential hires as a
basic function of the enrollment outreach process, we’ll be using the
highest ﬁdelity information available to us—working directly with
people—to make the essential, inaugural hires. But unfortunately,
the enrollment outreach process can only handle the involvement of
a few dozen candidates, at most. Which means we need to establish
other pipelines for references and general applications. We have
some of the basic skeleton of this (e.g. speciﬁc professors, institu-
tions, and companies whose work or disposition are a good match
for helping to ﬁlter candidates), but managing a hiring process
working with hundreds of people is something we’ve never done
before and has many moving parts. Especially because we’ll be
continually hiring for ﬁve years, it’s important to set up an ongoing
process that can function smoothly at the get go.
Unfortunately, we can only look at the inputs to this process
to assess it—the quality of the hires won’t be known until we see
students’ experience ﬁrsthand. This means that we’ll need to con-
tinually feedback to tweak the process, but at the get-go we’ll be
looking at two measures in particular:
• How much time organizing and implementing hiring ended
up being devoted per hired candidate? Is this sustainable for
the principal (who will have the primary responsibility for hir-
ing) moving forward? We expect the principal to spend about
one-third of their time organizing and implementing the hiring
process. This is simple to measure.
• Are we processing enough people to a sufﬁcient level of detail
such that the questions of hiring feel clear and easy? If not, then
we are either processing too few people (i.e. not ﬁnding the right
candidates) or too shallowly (i.e. not surfacing sufﬁcient infor-
mation to differentiate candidates). This will be assessed through
a writeup of the nine top candidates for the three positions by
the SSA. This writeup will describe and justify the decision and
present this to the Board of Trustees.
Cultivated student support networks
The SSA’s community integration is central to its design. But as
we know from four years of running an organization incorporating
volunteer effort, managing people is expensive. And the more nu-
merous your partners, the higher your switching and integration
costs. This will be offset by the scale of the SSA, but the prominence
of the community in curricular work, ELL services, SPED support,
school improvement plan
131
and so on means that in the planning year we not only want to
identify and conﬁrm partners, but begin working with them as
soon as possible in two capacities: professional development of our
staff and cultivation of our student body.
Regarding professional development: in the best cases, we’re
working with a community partner not simply because the SSA
doesn’t have the time, but because we won’t the best experts on
everything. This means that our staff have something to learn from
all of our community partners—whether the subtleties SPED ad-
vocacy or test-taking skills. We’ve found that the sooner and more
slowly you can cultivate a real relationship with volunteers, the
more effective and reliable the partnership. As we develop the var-
ious interfaces outlined in this plan, we’ll also be setting up small
workshops for SSA staff.
Regarding the cultivation of our student body: even though
students won’t be enrolling until Fall 2015, that doesn’t mean we
can’t start developing relationships with interested families—and in
this context, trying out these community relationships—in advance
of that date.
Taken together, this suggests two measures for this objective:
• the breadth of our concrete, conﬁrmed community partners, eas-
ily measured by number.
• and the depth of those collaborations, as measured by the raw
time they’ve spent working with the SSA.
The remainder of this chapter is devoted to sketching out
the performance metrics legally required by the Innovation School
legislation (subject to yearly revision by the Board of Trustees in the
drafting of the School Improvement Plan). While those measures
capture a necessary minimum, they do not represent a plan.
No matter how innovative or compelling the SSA’s design or cur-
riculum, it’s necessary to commit to traditionally regarded results:
improvement on the MCAS/PARCC and in graduation rates. That
said, no one’s seen a school like the SSA before. The DOE offers a
DART Analysis for all districts, which selects a comparable cohort
of districts against which performance on the MCAS and gradu-
ation rate metrics can be contrasted. For the DOE, “comparable”
is deﬁned by a combination of school size and percentages low in-
come, SPED, and ELL students. In Somerville High School’s DART
cohort, Worcester Technical High (WTH) was the highest perform-
ing school in 2011 and 2012. We’ve set that as our near-term goal.
Growth rate targets were derived by interpolating between
Somerville High School’s current performance (rounded down)
and Worcester Technical High School’s performance with the
goal of reaching WTH performance in ﬁve years. WTH is the best-
performing school in SHS’s DART analysis. Where possible, SGP is
used. For some, only CPI data are available (these ﬁgures appear in
blue-green in Table 1).
132
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
These metrics will be revised and re-approved by the Board of
Trustees every year after the ﬁrst ﬁve years, during which the SSA
will provide data for the School Committee’s review.
Student Attendance
The SSA’s unexcused absence rate will decrease a cumulative aver-
age of 1% per year for at least eight years, beginning with an initial
goal of 90% the ﬁrst year. Because of the SSA’s ﬂexibility in deﬁning
structured learning time, the meaning of ‘attendance’ is not strictly
deﬁned. During the planning year, we will deﬁne a ﬁner grained
metric incorporating velocity through the Common Core/MCAS
STE which will attempt to weight attendance measures to appropri-
ately account for student productivity and development as well.
Student Discipline and Safety
The SSA in-school suspension rate will decrease a cumulative av-
erage of 1.75% per year for at least eight years, beginning with an
initial goal of 15% the ﬁrst year. The SSA out-of-school suspen-
sion rate will decrease a cumulative average of 0.75% per year for
at least eight years, beginning with an initial goal of 8% the ﬁrst
year. During the planning year, the SSA will also prototype a ba-
sic survey and sentiment analysis system149 which will be used to
149 Pang, B. and L. Lee (2008). Opin-
ion mining and sentiment analysis.
Foundations and trends in information
retrieval 2(1-2), 1–135
put together the ﬁrst iteration of our student happiness and safety
dashboard. This will be the basis for deﬁning new metrics for the
measurement of student safety and happiness which will be incor-
porated into future School Improvement Plans.
Student Promotion, Graduation, and Dropout Rates
The SSA grade retention rate will decrease a cumulative average
of 0.5% per year for at least eight years, beginning with an initial
goal of 5% the ﬁrst year. The SSA’s graduation rate will increase a
minimum of 1.5% per year for at least eight years, beginning with
an initial goals of 84% for its ﬁrst cohort. Because the SSA will not
be age-segregated, we will also be deﬁning measures of grade re-
tention and promotion based on a combination of student velocity
through the curriculum mapping process and IAP iterations.
MCAS & PARCC
The SSA cumulative average MCAS SGP for 10th grade ELA and
Mathematics will increase a minimum of one percentile point per
year for at least eight years, beginning with an initial goal of 53.0.
The Board of Trustees will set the SSA’s PARCC performance goals
in 2015, when PARCC’s ﬁeld-testing and score calibration is com-
plete.150
150 Achieve, I. Parcc ﬁeld test adminis-
tration and timeline
school improvement plan
133
Progress in Areas of Academic Underperformance
The SSA cumulative average CPI for 10th grade ELA will increase a
minimum of one percentage point per year for at least eight years,
beginning with an initial goal of 89.0%. The SSA cumulative av-
erage CPI for 10th grade Mathematics will increase a minimum of
two percentage points per year for at least eight years, beginning
with an initial goal of 81.0%. The SSA cumulative average CPI for
10th grade Science and Technology/Engineering will increase a
minimum of two percentage points per year for at least eight years,
beginning with an initial goal of 80.0%.
Progress Goals Among Subgroups of Students
Subgroup
Graduation rate (%)
Grade 10 MCAS
(SGP, CPI)
4-year
5-year
ela
math
sci/tech/eng
Low income
88.0 + 1.54/y
86.0 + 2.34/y
53.0 + 2.69/y
56.0 + 2.86/y
77.0 + 1.16/y
Limited English
78.0 + 2.04/y
68.0 + 3.42/y
69.0 + 3.48/y
58.0 + 2.52/y
61.0 + 2.24/y
Special education
80.0 + 3.02/y
81.0 + 2.70/y
37.0 + 1.90/y
43.0 + 3.20/y
62.0 + 0.90/y
Table 1: Year-over-year im-
provement goals among stu-
dent subgroups
Narrowing the Achievement Gap
The SSA is speciﬁcally targeting students who have struggled in
traditional contexts. Though a priori it’s not clear that this struggle
need be racially, socioeconomically, or culturally situated, it’s a de-
pressing fact of modern American [especially urban] education. As
part of our general civic commitment and speciﬁc policy commit-
ment to ensuring the SSA complements and does not compete with
existing options, we will incorporate data-driven measures of in-
equality and the achievement gap into our ongoing governance and
reporting process. This section outlines two broad approaches for
deﬁning such measures; setting speciﬁc goals will not happen until
these measures are calibrated and ﬂeshed out during the planning
and implementation year.
Measuring the Achievement Gap
Cumulative share of people from lowest to highest incomes
100%
Cumulative share of income earned
100%
Line of Equality (45 Degree)
A
Lorenz Curve
B
Figure 14: To understand why
the Gini coefﬁcient is a good
measure of inequality, let’s
look at how it works in the
case of income. The “Lorenz
curve” represents what per-
centage y of the total income
everyone from the 0th–xth per-
centile have. In a perfectly
equal society, the Lorenz curve
is a straight line. The Gini co-
efﬁcient is the area under the
observed Lorenz curve (B) and
the area under the curve in this
perfectly equal case (A).
The Gini coefﬁcient is a measure of statistical dispersion commonly
used in assessing the income distribution of nations.151 The SSA
151 Pyatt, G. (1976). On the inter-
pretation and disaggregation of
gini coefﬁcients. The Economic Jour-
nal 86(342), 243–255; and Yitzhaki, S.
(1979). Relative deprivation and the
gini coefﬁcient. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 321–324
will adapt the Gini coefﬁcient as a general measure of inequality
in general and achievement gaps in particular for all metrics of
performance which can be quantiﬁed (MCAS scores, dropout rates,
etc.). The metrics need not be one dimensional, as we’ll construct
a generalized Gini coefﬁcient as well. This setup only makes sense
for an independent variable which is continuous (e.g. household
income).
134
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
When people discuss the achievement gap, they often have in
mind the gap between two categories of student—e.g. black and
white, ELL and native speaker, SPED and mainstream. The Gini-
coefﬁcient measure of the achievement gap doesn’t accommodate
such categories. To deﬁne a measure of inequality or achievement
gap for such categories, the SSA will deﬁne a cross correlation met-
ric based on a principal component analysis (PCA)152 of the SSA’s
152 Jolliffe, I. (2005). Principal component
analysis. Wiley Online Library
various [again, quantiﬁable but not necessarily one-dimensional]
metrics.153
153 Digging into the details of calibrat-
ing the PCA is outside the scope of our
discussion; however, we will set mid-
term goals in the language of this PCA
by situating Somerville in its DART
cohort and extrapolating reasonably
ambitious percentile improvements.
Operations
The purpose of this chapter is to lay out the broad strokes of our
approach to operations (e.g. food, ﬁnancial controls, scheduling,
etc.) and the necessary autonomies required to implement them.
A school is full of details. Much of what makes an effective
school is what makes a smoothly operating school. In a more ﬂexi-
ble, project-based environment, attention to operations and logistics
must be redoubled. However, the structures and policies that work
for traditional classroom settings don’t necessarily make sense for
the SSA. In keeping with our acknowledgment that you cannot sub-
stantively change the what of a school without changing the how we
have worked very hard to sketch out the operations of the SSA in
sufﬁcient detail—often by emulating successful, alternative models’
operational innovations—such that the planning and implementa-
tion year will offer sufﬁcient runway to a) nail down all the details,
and b) prototype and practice our operational capacities during the
enrollment outreach process, giving us the opportunity to ramp up
even more slowly than our raw enrollment numbers would suggest.
Financials, Supplies, Services, & Procurement
The SSA will be a community of learners and researchers, and its
staff will more often be acting as advocates, mentors, and coaches
than instructors per se. Just as the ﬂat organizational chart of the
SSA embodies our belief in putting the authority and control of
the school into staff’s hands—those who know the needs of learn-
ers best—the budget is structured to make case-by-case decision-
making and spending by staff and learners simple, systematically
favoring ﬂexibility and responsiveness over rigid planning and
comprehensiveness.
This means that beyond organizational priorities like offer-
ing a competitive salary for teachers (nearing the 90th percentile
nationally154), there is a strong emphasis on technology (which
154 Clotfelter, C. T., H. F. Ladd, and J. L.
Vigdor (2010). Teacher labor markets,
segregation and salary-based policies
to combat inequity across schools.
Society for Research on Educational
Effectiveness
allows for dramatically increased managerial and curricular au-
tonomy), project stipends for students and staff, and a la carte ser-
vice provisioning for ELL, SPED, and other subsets of the school
population—just to name a few. To enable these priorities and ﬂex-
ibility, the SSA will have complete autonomy in the dispensation of
its funds. It will be in charge of—and adopt all legal exposure for—
its procurement, payroll, and other ﬁnancial functions, establishing
136
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
40 students, $13,842/student
$605,680/y
Facilities
75 ft2 per student, $15 per ft2
$1.50 per ft2 utilities & upkeep
$48,000
Food
$8.30/day/FRL student, $6/day average
$43,680
Staff
3 staff at a maximum of $80K/y
1 principal at $40K/y
+26.2% fully burdened
$353,360
Tech.
$109/y tablet, $480/y phone, $333/y laptop
$36,920
ELL & SPED
$6,419/SPED capita, $3,967/ELL capita
$62,252
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
6%
7%
8%
10%
10%
58%
Student
stipend
$61,600
$1,540 per student per year
+ $1,300/student via MA DOE ELT
1 principal at $40K/y
Figure 15: The SSA’s budget
has been designed to mini-
mize impact on SPS—we went
through SHS’s end-of-year
audit and subtracted out our
proportional share of central-
ized costs—and to guarantee
sufﬁcient spending ﬂexibility
(via the “one bucket” small
school budget pattern) to im-
plement and iterate on a heav-
ily project-based model. We’ve
taken care to ensure as much
or more spending per SPED
and ELL student as Somerville
High School so that through
the buying back of district
services we can guarantee the
provision of the same level of
service by default. The details
of City/District jurisdictional
breakdown and the speciﬁc
timing of allocation allotment
remain to be determined.
and maintaining proper accounting records and internal control
procedures in the process with help from the Inspector General’s
ofﬁce. This is largely to make possible the “one bucket” approach
which has emerged as the consensus best practice for small schools
targeting struggling students implementing ﬂexible curricula.155
155 Hehir, T. and L. I. Katzman (2012).
Effective inclusive schools: Designing
successful schoolwide programs. John
Wiley & Sons
The SSA will be exempt from MGL procurement laws including
Chapters 30B, 30§39M, and 149.
The SSA will design and implement its own procurement,
ﬁnancial controls, and budgeting ofﬁce. We went through the
Masachusetts Certiﬁed Public Purchasing Ofﬁcial Program’s pro-
curement and school seminars to develop a basic ﬂuency with the
ﬁnancial controls and procurement landscape. We’ll be working
with Amy McConnell, Associate General Counsel in the Legal Divi-
sion of the Massachusetts Inspector General’s Ofﬁce, to design the
full system with complete protocols in concert with Pat Durette at
the District level and Ed Bean at City Hall. We’ve veriﬁed through
conversations with the DOE and Massachusetts IG that the ﬂexi-
bilities we’ll be seeking are both plausible and precedented, and
indeed are well-supported by best practices for small schools efﬁ-
cacy and efﬁciency.156
156 Bell, L. (1988). Local ﬁnancial
management in schools: efﬁciency,
economy and administration. School
Organization 8(2), 121–129; and Morse,
A. (2011). Oversight of ﬁnancial man-
agement in local authority maintained
schools
The structure of the school is such that the roles of staff members
and community stakeholders require a rethinking of traditional
approaches to compensation. Because teachers will be working in
such a dynamic environment and serving multiple roles as teacher,
mentor, and administrator, and will be working year-round the SSA
operations
137
will offer higher entry pay for teachers, but within the lane and
step system of the STA. The principal will have complete authority
over the deﬁnition and dispensation of stipends and will minimally
cause all employees to be compensated proportional to what would
be their hourly compensation in the traditional lane and step sys-
tem. Other staff positions will be created in the form of community
members acting as mentors to students and local experts acting as
project advisers.157
157 Odden, A. and C. Busch (1998).
Financing Schools for High Performance:
Strategies for Improving the Use of
Educational Resources. The Jossey-Bass
Education Series. ERIC
Of course, in a resource-limited world, these emphases and ﬂex-
ibilities come at the price of other functions. Per the Innovation
School statute,158 the SSA will be receiving the same per capita al-
158 (2013). Massachusetts general law -
part i - title xii - chapter 71 - section 92
location as other district schools. Some of this will be paid back to
offset administrative costs and secure a la carte services on a pro-
rated basis. Regardless, the SSA will be completely solvent using
only the per capita allocation (though of course, other fundraising
and development will be deployed to the beneﬁt of learners and
staff).
Physical Plant
One of the open questions in the design of the SSA is its location.
We’ve found ﬁve properties in Somerville which meet our budget
constraints and space needs which are also within ﬁfteen minutes
of Somerville High School.159 Of course, while we’ve gotten prelim-
159 Massachusetts General Law deﬁnes
‘walking distance’ as 1.5 miles, but the
Innovation Plan Committee decided
to focus on the important element
in easing the logistical burden of
integration with Somerville High
School: transportation time.
inary quotes for build-out in each of these spaces, these are neither
ﬁnal nor have we signed a lease for any space. Fortunately, the
SSA’s timeline (Fall 2015) provides ample time to ﬁnd space—our
initial search was meant to establish the viability of the SSA’s bud-
geting and space requirements. In that initial search we aimed for
∼75 ft2 per student, $15 per ft2 triple net, and $1.50 per ft2 utili-
ties and upkeep. These ﬁgures are well within accepted bounds for
school design and cost160 Anything more than 55 ft2 is viable,161
160 Kats, G. and E. Capital (2003). Green
building costs and ﬁnancial beneﬁts. Mas-
sachusetts Technology Collaborative
Boston, MA; Meyer, M. A., J. E. Cross,
Z. S. Byrne, B. Franzen, and S. Reeve
(2013). Green school building success:
Innovation through a ﬂat team ap-
proach. Constructing Green: The Social
Structures of Sustainability, 219; and
Bello, M. A. and V. Loftness (2010).
Addressing inadequate investment in
school facility maintenance
161 Weinstein, C. S. (1979). The physical
environment of the school: A review
of the research. Review of educational
Research 49(4), 577–610
and trading space price against raw square footage means we can
afford up to ∼$25 per ft2 triple net. This is less than the average
square footage per high school student in Massachusetts; however,
this difference is more than explained by a few, signiﬁcant differ-
ences in the SSA’s physical plant requirements:
• We won’t have signiﬁcant square footage devoted to hallways,
instead opting for more open plan layouts in the module and
pod design seen in many industrial and co-op spaces, which
have been supported by research focused on the architectural
needs of project-based environments.162
162 Higgins, S., E. Hall, K. Wall,
P. Woolner, and C. McCaughey (2005).
The impact of school environments: A
literature review. The Centre for Learn-
ing and Teaching, School of Education,
Communication and Language Science,
University of Newcastle. Accessed online
on 10, 04–08; and Tanner, C. K. (2000).
The inﬂuence of school architecture
on academic achievement. Journal
of Educational Administration 38(4),
309–330
• The SSA won’t have a traditional cafeteria, gym, media center, or
footprint associated with administration. Each of these functions
will be addressed through a mix of technology (in the case of the
media center), community partnerships (in the case of the gym),
or ﬂexible use of classroom and studio space (in the case of the
cafeteria). There is signiﬁcant precedent for the viability of this
138
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
approach in small schools.163
163 Barker, R. G. and P. V. Gump (1964).
Big school, small school: High school
size and student behavior. Stanford
University Press; Stables, G. J., E. M.
Young, M. W. Howerton, A. L. Yaroch,
S. Kuester, M. K. Solera, K. Cobb, and
L. Nebeling (2005). Small school-based
effectiveness trials increase vegetable
and fruit consumption among youth.
Journal of the American Dietetic Associ-
ation 105(2), 252–256; Latrobe, K. H.
(1998). The emerging school library media
center: Historical issues and perspectives.
Libraries Unlimited; and Craver, K. W.
(1994). School library media centers in
the 21st century: Changes and challenges.
Libraries Unlimited
• The SSA’s extensive community partnerships and focus on co-
op and internship experiences means that the average square
footage load per student will be lower in part because as stu-
dents get older, it will be likely that they are placed in organi-
zations like Artisan’s Asylum and INDUSTRY LAB and will be
spending more and more time in the community at large.
These unique aims and constraints means that just as we’ll have
autonomy in deﬁning and dispensing food services, the SSA will
have complete autonomy in the management and build out of
the physical plant. Pending the selection of a site, we will work
out with Pat Durette, Ed Bean, et al. the appropriate municipal ﬁ-
nance provisions and procedures to ensure the separation between
academic and operational budgetary responsibilities which the
Somerville ordinances mandate City Hall and the District maintain.
Conversations with Pat Durette, EOE/DESE, and the Massachusetts
Inspector General has made it clear that there is a workable so-
lution to be found which ensures the autonomies listed in this
chapter in particular and this plan throughout.
Technology
The SSA will have complete autonomy in funding, developing,
and managing its technological infrastructure. This autonomy cuts
across many other domains—including ﬁnancial, budgetary, record-
keeping, procurement etc. Because of the SSA’s computational focus
and emphasis on design, modeling, and representation, many of
the logistical and design tasks typically relegated to IT can and will
be productively brought into the wheelhouse of the SSA’s students
and staff. For example, given that every student and staff member
will have a laptop, tablet, and phone (with low income student fam-
ilies guaranteed internet connectivity and device subsidies), whole
new swathes of solutions to common logistical and pedagogical
problems arise, e.g.
• Maintaining attendance records can be automated via geo-
fencing.
• The cost and logistics of tracking, handling, and returning
marked-up student work becomes far easier.
• Making ﬁnancial auditing dead simple through the incorporation
of transparency and reconciliation services like Xero (doubly
important given our plans to give students increasing control
over project stipends).
• Enabling the use of traditional project management, CRM, and
productivity tools like Asana, Highrise, and Basecamp for the
management of student and staff work and records (signiﬁcantly
easing the process of curriculum mapping)
operations
139
• . . . the list goes on and on . . .
But to implement this, the SSA needs complete purchasing and
management autonomy in order to develop its own solutions to
issues like content ﬁltering (the bane of every technical afterschool
program), IT provisioning and repairs, etc.
Scheduling
For the SSA, project-based learning, the nature of knowledge work,
and the growing importance of self-management and collaboration
require a shift in our frame of mind about schooling. Rather than
thinking about school as a collection of facts and skills that prepare,
the SSA is focused on supporting learners’ transition from student
to independent investigator, which involves active practice man-
aging yourself and thinking about your learning process. This in
turn requires shifts in how scheduling is handled. To accommodate
this shift for both students and staff, the SSA will have complete
autonomy in its scheduling. We will be emulating the design of the
Generation Schools model, described by their principal as,
1. to reduce class size â ˘a¸s we have “all hands on deck” at
key times. — Nearly 90% of our full-time professional staff teach
classes. As a result, we cut core class size in half without needing
more staff than a typical school. We strategically provide the other
necessary non-teaching services and responsibilities by creating
dual roles for most staff.
2. to expand the school year â ˘a¸s we stagger teacher va-
cations. — All teachers still work the same number of days as
in any public school â ˘AˇT just not all at the same time. As a result,
students beneﬁt from a 200-day school year and teachers from
more than 20 days of high caliber training annually.
3. to expand the day â ˘a¸s we trade “time for time.” — We
offset longer school days with somewhat shorter training days:
trading time for time. The total work hours balance out to be the
same as in any school. As a result, it does not cost more.
The principal goes on to detail out the efﬁcacy of breaking ‘in-
struction time’ into foundation seminars, studio time, and fully
immersive intensives, as the SSA plans to do.
The SSA will be rifﬁng on the basic Generation Schools model,
in particular offering a signiﬁcantly expanded and more ﬂexible
schedule and our own takes on the intersession/intensive work-
shop model. So while the SSA will be year-round like Gener-
ation Schools, we will use the staggered schedule and founda-
tion/studio/intensive breakdown as a starting point. But to address
issues of equity in home support, students won’t be expected to do
homework outside of the daily 10A-5P schedule.
In order to accommodate the ﬂexible design of the curriculum,
the SSA’s schedule will look different from that of a traditional
high school. The SSA will operate on a year-round schedule with
vacations staggered throughout the year for both students and
140
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Generation
Schools
10%
Teaching FTEs
90%
2 months
1 months
2 months
1 months
1 months
2 2/3 months
January
December
Typical
Intensive
Intensive
Vacation
Typical
Typical
Yearly
170 minutes
45 minutes
180 minutes
Morning
Afternoon
}
}
Foundation
classes
Studio
time
Lunch
Daily
Teaching days
Vacation days
30
90
150
210
270
60
60
60
60
60
270
210
150
90
30
Staggered vacations
Figure 16: Emulating the suc-
cessful Generation Schools
model, the SSA will operate
on a year-round model with
ﬂexible vacation policies for
students and staff, subject to
a minimum velocity as de-
termined by our curriculum
mapping process and the logis-
tics of maintaining minimum
student:teacher ratios. We’ll
be designing our own take on
their species of time and stag-
gered schedule, but the basic
principles will be the same.
staff. The school day will begin and end later, running from 10AM–
5PM, to better match the biology of teenagers, who need to sleep
longer than younger children and naturally wake up later.164 This
164 Carskadon, M. A., C. Acebo, and
O. G. Jenni (2004). Regulation of ado-
lescent sleep: implications for behavior.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sci-
ences 1021(1), 276–291; Wolfson, A. R.
and M. A. Carskadon (1998). Sleep
schedules and daytime functioning in
adolescents. Child development 69(4),
875–887; and Wolfson, A. R. and M. A.
Carskadon (2003). Understanding
adolescent’s sleep patterns and school
performance: a critical appraisal. Sleep
medicine reviews 7(6), 491–506
ﬂexibility will be paired with auxiliary services to enable morning
drop-off.
This schedule will be punctuated by intensive, cohort-wide
workshops exploring topics relevant to the work of the whole
group, ranging from language immersion programs to skill de-
velopment seminars. These seminars will serve as community-
building, retreat-like events and focus on topics like website design,
computer programming, data visualization, and other ﬂuencies nec-
essary for students to succeed in designing, executing, reﬂecting on,
and documenting their work well.
The skills needed to be successful and self-directed, like time and
project management, however, need to be grown and cultivated. For
this reason, learners’ autonomy will gradually grow in their inves-
tigations over the course of their time with the SSA. In their ﬁrst
years, students will spend proportionally more time participating
in guided, project-based seminars, developing “foundations” skills
through writing, presenting, and communicating about their work,
and in preparing for the MCAS. In later years, students will spend
an increasing portion of their time on individual or small-group
projects, internships, and other self-directed endeavors.
operations
141
Because the SSA’s schedule is such that students will not have a
traditional high school schedule around which to structure things
like summer jobs and internships, the SSA will provide a signiﬁcant
support structure to help place students in paid positions within
the structure of the school year. By developing relationships with
local companies and small businesses, SSA staff will work with
students to ﬁnd employment possibilities that suit them and make
those possibilities ﬁnancially and logistically feasible.
Years
Over ﬁve years with the SSA, learners will spend an increas-
ing share of their time on independent projects and internships.
This will be governed by their Advisory Leaders (the three staff
responsible for their cohort), who will consider their holistic aca-
demic, social, and emotional performance in gradually opening up
a learner’s schedule.
Months
The basic tempo of the SSA year will be loosely structured
around three-month terms with one-month intersessions. Vacations
will be ﬂexible and open for student and family design. Staff vaca-
tions will be staggered, a la the Generation Schools model. These
intersession periods will be used for a combination of focused aca-
demic work for those ‘catching up’ on vacation work and a variety
of intensive seminars and group collaborations, taking inspiration
from the university intersession model.
Weeks
Weeks will be the basic unit for project management and
for the intensive workshops provided for by the SSA. An average
of one week per non-intersession quarter will be such an intensive
workshop.
Days
Structured seminars will happen for the equivalent of four
days per week, the ﬁfth day (different for different students) will be
a focused studio day for working on a given project. One night a
week will offer communal dinners, movie screenings, and outings.
Hours
Every day will begin with a communal breakfast/check-
in, structured around learners’ advisory groups. There will be a
communal lunch provided however, many learners may choose to
eat off campus.
Sample Schedules
These sample time budgets are rough and are meant to be evoca-
tive; e.g. they do not include lunch or pre-school services. Our
year-round schedule ensures that we’ll have more than enough time
for the curricular coverage we’re committing to. The essential as-
pects of these time budgets are the rough reasonableness of various
time commitments we’ve made for staff and students, and in the
142
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
case of comparing the days of an 8th and 12th grader, the shift in the
texture of their days.
In these time budgets, foundation time is devoted to struc-
tured seminars and intensive workshops (see Species of Time for
more details) which are framed around organizing questions (e.
g. For “Signs of Life” ⇒“What does it mean for something to be
alive?”) which will be accompanied by structured project prompts
and support. studio time is devoted to personal projects of vary-
ing degrees of open-endedness and sophistication, resulting from
facilitated planning and conversations with students’ Advisory.
10AM
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
11AM
Foundation 1
12PM
Foundation 1
Foundation 2
Foundation 1
Foundation 4
Foundation 3
1PM
Foundation 2
Foundation 4
2PM
SHS Track
3PM
SHS Track
MCAS
Studio Time
MCAS
Studio Time
4PM
MCAS
Foundation 3
CAE Spanish
Studio Time
5PM
MCAS
Foundation 3
CAE Spanish
Figure 17: Scaffolding the
transition from a traditional
classroom environment to a
project-based environment is
the implicit focus of students’
ﬁrst year at the SSA. This
means eighth graders’ days of-
fer many structured activities,
which we’ll slowly back off of
over the course of their time
with us.
10AM
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
11AM
12PM
Foundation 1
Foundation 2
Foundation 1
1PM
Studio Time
SHS Band
2PM
SHS Track
SHS Band
3PM
SHS Track
Studio Time
Studio Time
4PM
Studio Time
Studio Time
Studio Time
Studio Time
5PM
Studio Time
Graphic Design
6PM
Internship
7PM
Figure 18: By the time some-
one is seventeen or eighteen,
we expect for many students
that they’ll be spending most
of their time in their commu-
nity co-ops, internships, and
projects of their personal de-
sign. This will be reﬂected in
signﬁcantly more autonomy,
but this will come gradually
as their Advisory helps them
scope appropriate projects and
problems to work on.
operations
143
8AM
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
9AM
Co-Planning 
Co-Planning 
Co-Planning 
Co-Planning 
Co-Planning 
10AM
Time
Time
Time
Time
Time
11AM
Foundation 1
12PM
Foundation 1
Foundation 2
Foundation 1
Foundation 4
Foundation 3
1PM
Foundation 2
Foundation 4
2PM
3PM
Personal 
Role-Specific
Work
Personal 
4PM
Projects
Role-Specific
Work
Role-Specific
Work
Projects
5PM
Figure 19: The staff’s time
is where the rubber hits the
road. SSA staff will be working
longer hours more of the year
than most teachers ofﬁcially
do—though unfortunately,
we all know most teachers
work much longer hours than
what shows up in their col-
lective bargaining agreement.
The most essential time for
the administration to protect
will be staff’s co-planning
and personal project time, as
these are two species of staff
time which are integral to
small-school, project-based
models but which can easily be
compromised in favor of the
emergency of the day.
Wellness
Originally, we located this section on wellness in the chapter on
curricular content. It seemed like the obvious place, given health
class and gym time and extracurricular sports. But the more we
thought about it, the more it seemed appropriate to treat wellness
as a central, raw ingredient in the operation of the school. It’s what
motivates our autonomy in scheduling—so we can enable students
and staff to work on a schedule that’s right for them. It’s what mo-
tivates our autonomy in food services, so we can make sure that
food is not just nutritious, but involve students and families in
designing healthy lifestyles. It has important contact points with
social services when we consider teen pregnancy, the realities of
sexually transmitted diseases, the vicissitudes of health insurance,
etc. Eventually, we realized that just as wellness is a central oper-
ations concerns in HR departments, it should be a central, uniﬁed
concern across staff and students. This requires that the SSA have
complete autonomy in handling the health and wellness of its stu-
dents and staff.
Overall, the point of the SSA’s health and wellness efforts is to
promote the health and wellness of its students. This sounds tau-
tological, but following it through to its logical conclusion means
that the SSA will be designed not only to assess, but feed back on
students’ health and wellness. This means, for example, that rather
than requiring a certain number of hours of physical education,
the SSA will be focused on the health and wellness goals deﬁned
in students’ IAP and their provision. During the planning and im-
plementation year, we will deﬁne metrics of health and wellness in
collaboration with local physicians which we’ll incorporate into our
School Improvement Plan. Similarly, the SSA will pull in commu-
nity services via each Advisory’s social worker and put together a
144
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
small group of local
The remainder of this section ﬂeshes out some of the concrete
affordances and programs we’ll be developing. We’ve been sig-
niﬁcantly inspired by successful community health centers165 and
165 Rooney, A. L. and P. R. Van Osten-
berg (1999). Licensure, accreditation,
and certiﬁcation: approaches to health
services quality. Center for Human Ser-
vices, Quality Assurance Project; and
Underhill, P. and C. Link (2013). Keep-
ing the community and its economy
healthy. Communities
social medicine efforts in urban contexts166 in the design of these
166 Park, K. (2009). Park’s textbook of
preventive and social medicine. Bhanot
programs. The social worker in each cohort will be responsible for
managing many of these elements for individual students, but the
SSA will be relying on signiﬁcant community resources as well to
effect the programming.
Food
How people eat is one of the ﬁrst places that the scale and
intimacy of a school show up. We’re intent not only on offering
healthy, real food to students (some of which we intend to garden
ourselves), but on using a mix of family-style meals, community
events, and local establishments to set a humane and adult tempo
for the day. Students and staff will eat lunch together, and the SSA
will offer breakfast. We also expect food and cooking to be tied
into a variety of the SSA’s curricular offerings (e.g. via seminars
in molecular gastronomy and gardening167) as well as to put on
167 Blair, D. (2009). The child in the
garden: An evaluative review of the
beneﬁts of school gardening. The
Journal of Environmental Education 40(2),
15–38
regular community events focused on food, inspired by sprout’s
spaghetti dinner series (which itself originated in the festivals and
spaghetti dinners of Great Small Works). This means the SSA will
require complete autonomy in deﬁning and implementing its food
services program, which while subject to the constraints of the Na-
tional School Lunch Program (applicable to the extent that federal
funding for free and reduced lunch is relied upon), requires fur-
ther autonomy from state and district policies to unpack some of
the issues attendant to school lunch that small schools are in an
especially good position to address.168
168 Levine, S. (2010). School lunch poli-
tics: The surprising history of America’s
favorite welfare program. Princeton
University Press; and Winson, A.
(2008). School food environments and
the obesity issue: content, structural
determinants, and agency in canadian
high schools. Agriculture and Human
Values 25(4), 499–511
Sports & Exercise
Details of cross-registration with SHS are cov-
ered elsewhere, but in addition to these options, students will be
able to use a physical education allowance to sign up for programs
and classes in the community—whether that’s O2 Yoga or the box-
ing at Redline Fight Sports or simply a gym membership. Given
appropriate critical masses of student interest, the SSA may also
prospect for speciﬁc programs that aren’t offered institutionally lo-
cally, but the breadth of service providers is astounding, especially
given the chance to piggyback on top of local university programs.
These community ﬁtness programs have a great track record with
small, urban schools169 leveraging their metropolitan context to
169 Sheldon, S. B., M. G. Sanders, B. S.
Simon, and K. C. Salinas (2008). School,
family, and community partnerships: Your
handbook for action. Corwin-volume
discounts
overcome issues of space and funding. Because the SSA itself won’t
be offering physical education (or indeed, have a gym), these sup-
plements are essential, given the clear connection between physical
activity and everything from academic performance170 to long term
170 Strong, W. B., R. M. Malina, C. J.
Blimkie, S. R. Daniels, R. K. Dishman,
B. Gutin, A. C. Hergenroeder, A. Must,
P. A. Nixon, J. M. Pivarnik, et al.
(2005). Evidence based physical
activity for school-age youth. The
Journal of pediatrics 146(6), 732–737
health171 to simple happiness.172 To facilitate this process, the SSA
171 Haskell, W. L., I. Lee, R. R. Pate,
K. E. Powell, S. N. Blair, B. A. Franklin,
C. A. Macera, G. W. Heath, P. D.
Thompson, A. Bauman, et al. (2007).
Physical activity and public health:
updated recommendation for adults
from the american college of sports
medicine and the american heart
association. Medicine and science in
sports and exercise 39(8), 1423
172 Strauss, R. S., D. Rodzilsky, G. Bu-
rack, and M. Colin (2001). Psychosocial
correlates of physical activity in
healthy children. Archives of Pediatrics
& Adolescent Medicine 155(8), 897
will organize ongoing demos and workshops where these service
providers come into the SSA to pitch various activities. To the ex-
tent logistically practicable, interested staff will also organize times
operations
145
when SSA students and staff can participate together.
Medical Support
In addition to the social worker’s responsibilities
in their Advisory to maintain awareness of extra-academic stu-
dent and family issues, the SSA is intent on ensuring that we take
advantage of our small scale to provide a functional equivalent
to complete wraparound services in analogue with the recent re-
form efforts of social and family medicine. Except in the SSA’s case,
rather than bringing all those functions in house, we’ll be taking ad-
vantage of our small scale to centralize awareness and decentralize
service provision. Concretely, this means that while the Advisory
social worker will be responsible for ensuring we know, for exam-
ple, whether every family has dental care, we will be working with
local dentists and community health organizations to address gaps
in service. This is why, similar to our setup with SPED students
wherein a small coterie of doctors and counselors will be providing
on-demand, pro bono support, the SSA will cultivate a similar, small
network of mental and physical health care providers. The intent
is not for these providers to become family’s doctors (though that
would be a bonus), but to instead have the necessary connections
and expertise on hand to implement the Harlem Children’s Zone
model of academic and non-academic case management.173
173 Page, E. E. and A. M. Stone (2010).
From harlem children’s zone to
promise neighborhoods: Creating
the tipping point for success. George-
town Public Policy Institute, Washington,
DC
Autonomy Analysis
Why should we expect this will beneﬁt students?
Operational capacity
and policies are where the rubber hits the road in school design.
We think people consistently underestimate how much not only
the what and how of schools are coupled, but how much of what
we expect school to look and feel like is the consequence of the
control systems put in place to manage people’s time, money, and
autonomy.
Inspired by the managerial transition in handling knowledge
work beginning in the 1980s174, the SSA’s approach to small school
174 Newell, S., M. Robertson, H. Scar-
brough, and J. Swan (2009). Managing
knowledge work and innovation. Palgrave
Macmillan
design emphasizes student and staff autonomy, pushing the scale
of control and management structures down to students and staff
at the Advisory level and putting the administration in a more
traditional oversight and guidance role. Years of managerial theory
and recent research into small school design all corroborate these
principles.175
175 Hehir, T. and L. I. Katzman (2012).
Effective inclusive schools: Designing suc-
cessful schoolwide programs. John Wiley
& Sons; Meier, D. (2002). The power
of their ideas: Lessons for America from a
small school in Harlem. Beacon Press;
Otley, D. (1994). Management control
in contemporary organizations: to-
wards a wider framework. Management
accounting research 5(3), 289–299; and
Van Kannel-Ray, N., W. E. Laceﬁeld,
and P. J. Zeller (2008). Academic case
managers: Evaluating a middle school
intervention for children at-risk. Jour-
nal of MultiDisciplinary Evaluation 5(10),
21–29
The SSA’s financial autonomy is essential to being able to
ﬂuidly implement a new approach. The balance sheet of a school
tells you a lot, not just about its efﬁciency, but about its organiza-
tional structure, communication hierarchy, oversight mechanisms,
etc. 176 That means that a different school will need to have a differ-
176 Bell, L. (1988). Local ﬁnancial
management in schools: efﬁciency,
economy and administration. School
Organization 8(2), 121–129
ent ﬁnancial controls system. Taking advantage of the SSA’s small
size, the one-bucket control system combined with a thoroughly
transparent auditing and recordkeeping system and our exemption
146
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
from traditional procurement strictures provides for a much more
agile setup that has been shown to beneﬁt students and staff.177
177 Odden, A. and C. Busch (1998).
Financing Schools for High Performance:
Strategies for Improving the Use of
Educational Resources. The Jossey-Bass
Education Series. ERIC
Especially given the SSA’s focus on students’ executive function
and project management skills, many of the operational details of
implementing divergent project designs for individual students
require this level of ﬂexibility.
The SSA’s physical plant is undecided at the moment; however,
the emphasis on open ﬂoor plans, multipurpose spaces, and small
scale social gathering areas is drawn directly from best practices
for creative workplaces for adults and project based schools for
children.178
178 Tanner, C. K. (2000). The inﬂuence
of school architecture on academic
achievement. Journal of Educational
Administration 38(4), 309–330; and
Boys, J. (2010). Towards creative learning
spaces: Re-thinking the architecture of
post-compulsory education. Routledge
The SSA’s technology setup is central pedagogically and man-
agerially to its success. The basics of staff-level ﬂuency and au-
tonomy have been known since nearly the earliest one-to-one pro-
grams179—the newest wrinkle is the capacity for students and staff
179 Silvernail, D. L. and D. M. Lane
(2004). The impact of maine’s one-to-
one laptop program on middle school
teachers and students. Maine Education
Policy Research Institute (MEPRI),
University of Southern Maine
to build central technologies for the school and to incorporate these
activities into the curriculum. This is something that’s effectively
been done in many vocational education context for years (machine
shop students fabricating infrastructure for the rest of the school),
but for a variety of reasons, the computational analogue has yet
to be ﬂeshed out in practice as far as we know. Fortunately, the
private sector has for the past decade been actively incorporating
this strategy into its IT approach.180 The same research and princi-
180 Mediratta, B. and J. Bick (2007). The
google way: give engineers room. The
New York Times 21
ples underlying the success of initiatives like service learning and
general project-based environments are expected to apply here as
well.
The SSA’s schedule is ﬂexible and year-round and mimics the
type of schedule many students will encounter when they enter
the working world, taking jobs that require they work full-time and
full-year. In this way, the schedule is designed around the needs
of people doing real work, designing and executing on projects
that require interaction with people outside of the school commu-
nity and so can’t be artiﬁcially constrained by the arbitrary length
of “ELA Unit 4.” In addition to allowing for more seamless com-
munity relationships within the SSA, this schedule will also foster
students’ project and time management skills as they balance their
own schedules and project timelines with those of their classmates,
teachers, and others they need to work with to accomplish their
goals.
In order to accommodate the ﬂexible design of the curriculum,
the SSA’s schedule will look different from that of a traditional
high school. The SSA will operate on a year-round schedule with
vacations staggered throughout the year for both students and
staff. The school day will begin and end later, running from 10AM–
5PM, to better match the biology of teenagers, who need to sleep
longer than younger children and naturally wake up later.181 This
181 Carskadon, M. A., C. Acebo, and
O. G. Jenni (2004). Regulation of ado-
lescent sleep: implications for behavior.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sci-
ences 1021(1), 276–291; Wolfson, A. R.
and M. A. Carskadon (1998). Sleep
schedules and daytime functioning in
adolescents. Child development 69(4),
875–887; and Wolfson, A. R. and M. A.
Carskadon (2003). Understanding
adolescent’s sleep patterns and school
performance: a critical appraisal. Sleep
medicine reviews 7(6), 491–506
operations
147
ﬂexibility will be paired with auxiliary services to enable morning
drop-off.
This schedule will be punctuated by intensive, cohort-wide
workshops exploring topics relevant to the work of the whole
group, ranging from language immersion programs to skill de-
velopment seminars. These seminars will serve as community-
building, retreat-like events and focus on topics like website design,
computer programming, data visualization, and other ﬂuencies nec-
essary for students to succeed in designing, executing, reﬂecting on,
and documenting their work well.
The ﬂexibility of the schedule will allow for increased adult at-
tention as students move between large and small group as well as
individual work time. It will allow for personalized MCAS instruc-
tion on a day-to-day and week-to-week basis but will also allow for
participation in longer-term programs like multi-week language
immersion programs for ELL students, that would not be possi-
ble within a traditional school setting. This ﬂexibility will allow
the SSA to exercise agility in its design and execution of curricula,
trying new things and iterating quickly with students and staff.
Extended learning time will also provide more raw time devoted
to foundational communication and literacy skills like reading,
writing, and presentation.
In this way, students will be given more responsibility for orga-
nizing their own time, allowing them—with the guidance of caring
but rigorous adults—to create their own milestones and deadlines.
This ﬂexibility will avoid the premature end and evaluation of un-
ﬁnished projects simply because it is time to move to the next part
of the curriculum, making room for failure as part of the process
of working and learning. They will develop self-management skills
and a sense of autonomy in organizing and executing their own
work. They will develop persistence and grit182 and nurture a deep
182 Tough, P. (2012). How children
succeed: Grit, curiosity, and the hidden
power of character. Houghton Mifﬂin
Harcourt (HMH)
relationship to craftsmanship and good work that will stay with
them long after they graduate from the SSA.
The SSA’s approach to wellness is inspired by successful so-
cial medicine and community health centers around the country,
all of which—including their educational variants like the Harlem
Children’s Zone—have arrived at the basic principle that caring
people in the loop trump protocols every time. Somerville’s re-
sources and challenges as the sixteenth densest city in the United
States are unique, and the SSA’s community-driven approach to
implementing a mastery-based model of physical education is de-
signed to match that closely. And given the incredible prominence
of wellness in determining student outcomes,183 we think devoting
183 Strong, W. B., R. M. Malina, C. J.
Blimkie, S. R. Daniels, R. K. Dishman,
B. Gutin, A. C. Hergenroeder, A. Must,
P. A. Nixon, J. M. Pivarnik, et al.
(2005). Evidence based physical
activity for school-age youth. The
Journal of pediatrics 146(6), 732–737
this much time and attention is not only completely reasonable, but
backed up by research.184
184 Strauss, R. S., D. Rodzilsky, G. Bu-
rack, and M. Colin (2001). Psychosocial
correlates of physical activity in
healthy children. Archives of Pediatrics
& Adolescent Medicine 155(8), 897
What legal affordances will be required?
We are still in the process of
writing up the necessary exemptions and waivers required for this.
148
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
You can ﬁnd a partial list in Legal Affordances, but per 603 CMR
48.03(b),
If an innovation plan committee is proposing an innovation plan that
may conﬂict with laws (including regulations) governing other public
schools, the committee shall, before presenting the plan to the school
committee for approval, request approval from the Commissioner
for any provision in the plan that may conﬂict with such laws. The
Commissioner’s approval shall be based on his determination that
the plan is consistent with 603 CMR 48.03 (2) and with the state’s
obligations under the education clause of the Massachusetts Con-
stitution, Mass. Const., pt. II, ch. V, s. II, as deﬁned by a court of
competent jurisdiction, and that the provision in the plan that may
conﬂict with such laws is necessary to advance the mission or educa-
tional programs of the innovation school. If the Commissioner does
not approve the proposed provision in the plan, the innovation plan
committee may ask the Board to review the matter and the Board
shall make the ﬁnal decision.
which means that the full process of articulating points of con-
tact between state laws and regulations and the Innovation Plan as
voted on need not conclude until the School Committee presenta-
tion. As with negotiating necessary affordances in the Collective
Bargaining Agreement to make the Innovation Plan possible, non-
substantive design edits and alterations may be made after the
Innovation Plan Committee vote without triggering a re-start of the
process.185
185 French, D. (2013, August). Personal
communication with dan french.
Regarding voting and editing process
between Innovation Plan and School
Committee votes
Governance
The role of proper governance structures is to ensure that the SSA’s
policy and procedural autonomy does not violate Somerville stu-
dents’ best interests. No matter what goes on within the SSA it is
beholden to exactly two boundary conditions:
1. We must have good reason to suspect the SSA has improved
outcomes for its students relative to other options available to
them. This means that the SSA will be responsible to the families
of the SSA for meeting its MCAS/PARCC and graduation goals,
set yearly.
2. The SSA must not harm other Somerville students’ experiences.
This means that the SSA will be responsible to the School Com-
mittee for demonstrating that its enrollment is in fact targeting
those students who have struggled historically and that its on-
going student body reﬂects its 50/50 enrollment mechanism
focused on struggling and representative cohorts, respectively.
Outside of this, the SSA will have complete policy and procedu-
ral autonomy. In other ﬁelds, this setup is commonly described
through a distinction between policy goals and policy instru-
ments.186,187
186 May, P. J. (1992). Policy learning and
failure. Journal of public policy, 331–354
187 The point of view that we take on
the governance of the SSA—which is
not entirely reﬂected in the Innovation
School legislation’s language—is
that ultimate authority attendant to
community impact should rest with
the School Committee, but ultimate
authority attendant to individual
students’ experience should rest with
parents. So e.g. the SSA’s success in
meeting its equity commitments (and
the responsibility for overseeing and
enforcing those) should ultimately rest
with the School Committee. But we
think that structures should be put
in place to put the ultimate authority
for responding to questions like
graduation rate or MCAS performance
into parents’ hands. e.g. Some parents
think the MCAS is a poor indicator,
some think it is an essential one.
While the MCAS is a reality of public
education, its role in governance at the
school level seems most appropriately
parent-centric.
The SSA will be a public school, operated under a this Inno-
vation Plan, which although approved by the School Committee,
will operate independently of the School Committee. The SSA will
be operated and managed by its Board of Trustees independent
of the school committee. The Board of Trustees, upon approval of
this Innovation Plan, shall be deemed to be public agents autho-
rized by the commonwealth to supervise and control the SSA. This
chapter outlines what that entails; although, the particular proce-
dures should be considered a draft subject to the convening and
self-determination of each governing body.
At any time, if the School Committee determines that the SSA
has failed to meet the necessary goals as laid out in the even-
tual school improvement plan, it has the capacity to limit the au-
tonomies granted under this plan. Related, the School Committee
has the chance to refuse authorization renewal after the initial ﬁve
year period. But we wanted to go further in embodying our com-
mitment to results.
If the SSA fails to meet its MCAS goals . . .
150
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
School
Committee
Superintendent
evaluations
annually
Trustees
principal
quarterly
evaluations
metrics, goals
quarterly
Project Advisors
project 
reviews
rolling
metrics, goals
semi-annually
evaluations
quarterly
metrics, goals
semi-annually
evaluations
quarterly
Staff
Association
staff 
surveys
rolling
Family
Association
family 
surveys
rolling
learner
staff
parent
business
college
STEAM
alum
The SSA’s constituents are its students, their 
families, and our staff.  Their success & 
satisfaction is the ﬁrst priority.  The Board of 
Trustees oversees that priority.  The SSA also 
has a broader civic responsibility to the 
community to a) maintain our demographic 
and socioeconomic equity commitments, and 
b) improve MCAS performance.  This is 
where the School Committee comes in.
Figure 20: The SSA is respon-
sible for exactly three things:
1) improving student’s MCAS
performance, 2) ensuring our
civic and equity commitments
are met and 3) satisfying stu-
dent, staff, and family. A Board
of Trustees and Project Advi-
sory Boards will provide our
mission-motivated oversight,
ensuring projects are deep,
challenging, and that students
are growing into the indepen-
dent investigators the SSA set
out to nurture. The School
Committee will be in charge of
ensuring we hit our MCAS and
equity goals.
1. . . . two years in a row ⇒The SSA Parent Teacher Association
(PTA) will have the option to—by majority vote—require the
principal to convene an investigative team including one SSA
parent, one school commitee member, and one SSA staff member
to manage the creation of a report explaining the slippage. This
report will be presented to the PTA and released publicly.
2. . . . three years in a row ⇒The SSA PTA will have the option of
putting the principalship to a parent referendum, with two thirds
vote required for recall and a minimum 50% participation among
parents.
3. . . . ﬁve years in a row ⇒The SSA PTA will have the option of
putting the principalship to a parent referendum, with a majority
vote required for recall and a minimum 50% participation among
parents.
If the SSA fails to meet its equity commitment . . .
1. . . . two years in a row ⇒School Committee will have the option
to—by majority vote—require the principal to convene an inves-
tigative team including one parent of a student who registered
interest and either attrited or was not selected for enrollment,
one school commitee member, and one SSA staff member to
manage the creation of a report explaining the slippage. This
governance
151
report will be presented to the School Committee and released
publicly.
2. . . . three years in a row ⇒The School Committee will have the
option of putting the principalship to a community referendum,
with a majority vote required for recall and no minimum partici-
pation.
3. . . . ﬁve years in a row ⇒The School Committee will have the
option of putting the school’s authorization to an immediate
community referendum, with a majority vote required for recall
and no minimum participation.
School Authorization
The SSA’s Innovation Plan authorization can be extended no more
than ﬁve years at a time. This initial authorization is intended for
ﬁve years. The only mechanism by which the school’s authorization
can be revoked outside of non-renewal is if the SSA fails to meet its
equity commitment ﬁve years in a row.188
188 which is nearly impossible outside
of truly atrocious attrition which
cannot be compensated for year-over-
year
School Autonomies
The autonomies secured in this Innovation Plan are granted at the
leisure of the School Committee. If the SSA fails to meet either the
two boundary conditions described in this chapter or the minimum
set of goals required by the Innovation School legislation,189 then
189 (i) student attendance; (ii) student
safety and discipline; (iii) student pro-
motion and graduation and dropout
rates; (iv) student achievement on
the Massachusetts Comprehensive
Assessment System; (v) progress in
areas of academic underperformance;
and (vi) progress among subgroups
of students, including low-income
students as deﬁned by chapter 70,
limited English-proﬁcient students and
students receiving special education;
(vii) reduction of achievement gaps
among different groups of students.
the School Committee will have the option to:
(i) limit 1 or more components of the innovation plan; (ii) suspend
1 or more components of the innovation plan; or (iii) terminate the
authorization of the school; provided, however, that the limitation or
suspension shall not take place before the completion of the second
full year of the operation of the school and the termination shall
not take place before the completion of the third full year of the
operation of the school.
Principalship
The inaugural principal of the SSA will be Alec Resnick. Each year,
the Trustees will review the principal’s performance and make the
decision whether to recommend re-hire. The position of principal
will be exempt from all state licensure requirements; however, the
Board of Trustees will take licensure into account in making re-
hiring recommendations and future hiring decisions. Furthermore,
a majority of the Trustees or a 25% vote of all SSA families or 25%
vote of all SSA staff can put the principalship to a referendum
among the combined staff and family voting body at any time.
152
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Board of Trustees
The Trustees will be seven members representing the interests of
colleges, businesses, parents, learners, staff, and STEAM.190 Each
190 The College partner will be an
employee (active or emeritus) of a
college or university. The Business
partner will be a local employee or
employer. The Parent will, of course,
be an SSA parent and the Learner
will be an SSA learner (whose parent
cannot be on the Trustees). The Staff
Partner will be an SSA staff member
who has not been employed with the
SSA for more than ﬁve years or fewer
than two years (excepting the ﬁrst
two years of operation). The STEAM
Partner will be someone who in their
active employment (or past career, if
retired) regularly brought artistic and
scientiﬁc concerns together to make
something. The Principal will be an ex
ofﬁcio, non-voting member.
The Trustees will be chosen by the
principal; however, a two-thirds vote
of the SSA’s PTA can veto any Trustee
appointment.
representative will be tasked with articulating the interests and
concerns of their constituency as they pertain to the design, opera-
tion, and assessment of the SSA. Quarterly, the Trustees will meet
to evaluate the Principal and to approve the Principal’s metrics
and goals for the next quarter. The Trustees will also be respon-
sible for compiling these evaluations into a quarterly report for
the Superintendent and a semi-annual report on the SSA’s metrics
and goals. Annually, the Trustees will seek recommendations and
amendments from the School Committee in a school improvement
planning process whose procedural details will be deﬁned after
approval.
Project Advisory Boards
The Project Advisory Boards will primarily be tasked with review-
ing and locating reviewers to oversee student and staff work to en-
sure its quality and integrity. Each Advisory will be able to approve
and appoint members to appropriate Project Advisory Boards. The
project reviews and work summaries generated by the Advisory
Board will be a primary assessment input for the Trustees, in addi-
tion to the aggregate statistics and summary the principal submits
quarterly.
Autonomy Analysis
Peter Drucker, the father of modern management wrote in 1985,
For the existing business to be capable of innovation, it has to create
a structure that allows people to be entrepreneurial. [. . . ] This means,
ﬁrst, that the entrepreneurial, the new, has to be organized separately
from the old and existing. Whenever we have tried to make an ex-
isting unit the carrier of the entrepreneurial project, we have failed.
[. . . ]
The new always looks so puny—so unpromising—next to the reality
of the massive, ongoing business. The existing business, after all,
has to nourish the struggling innovation. But the “crisis” in today’s
business has to be attended to as well. The people responsible for
an existing business will therefore always be tempted to postpone
action on anything new, entrepreneurial, or innovative until it is too
late. No matter what has been tried—and we have now been trying
every conceivable mechanism for thirty or forty years—existing units
have been found to be capable mainly of extending, modifying, and
adapting what already is in existence. The new belongs elsewhere.
[. . . ]
The best, and perhaps the only, way to avoid killing off the new by
sheer neglect is to set up the innovative project from the start as a
separate business. [. . . ] The innovative effort and the unit that carries
it require different policies, rules, and measurements in many areas.
governance
153
Inevitably, this governance structure will change and evolve over
time. But at the moment, it’s our best stab at incorporating the best
practices and wisdom of designing incentive, business, and over-
sight structures—focusing on outputs rather than inputs, thinking
carefully about which outputs matter to which constituents, and
letting those constituents apply pressure to relevant leaders (rather
than micromanage policy) to achieve the results to which they com-
mitted.191
191 Ulrich, W. and N. McWhorter
(2011). Business Architecture: The Art
and Practice of Business Transformation.
Meghan-Kiffer Press; Daily, C. M.,
D. R. Dalton, and A. A. Cannella
(2003). Corporate governance: Decades
of dialogue and data. Academy of
Management Review 28(3), 371–382;
and Bingham, L. B., T. Nabatchi, and
R. O’Leary (2005). The new gover-
nance: Practices and processes for
stakeholder and citizen participation
in the work of government. Public
administration review 65(5), 547–558
Why should we expect this will beneﬁt students?
Because ultimately,
if this structure works, then it has been entirely designed to ensure
student beneﬁt as deﬁned by the SSA’s mission, its responsibil-
ities to its stakeholders, and the goals it has laid out for itself in
this Innovation Plan. The goal of governance is insure that incen-
tives are aligned as tightly as possible among stakeholders while
preserving a clean separation between responsibility for outcomes
(policy goals) and authority for design and implementation (policy
instruments).
What legal affordances will be required?
Upon approval of the In-
novation Plan by the School Committee, the Somerville STEAM
Academy shall be regarded as a body politic and corporate with
all powers necessary or desirable for carrying out its program.
Notwithstanding section 59C of the MGL, the internal form of gov-
ernance of the SSA shall be determined initially by this Innovation
Plan and in an ongoing capacity by the SSA’s Board of Trustees.
Powers necessary or desirable for the SSA’s operation include but
are not limited to:
• adopt a name, seal, and other effects of logo and brand identity
• sue and be sued, but only to the same extent and upon the same
conditions that a municipality can be sued—the Somerville
School Committee and public school District will be indemni-
ﬁed outside of any explicit oversight responsibilities described in
this Innovation Plan
• acquire real property, from public or private sources, by lease,
lease with an option to purchase or by gift, for educational use
• receive and disburse funds for school purposes
• make contracts and leases for the procurement of services, equip-
ment and supplies
• incur temporary debt in anticipation of receipt of funds; pro-
vided that notwithstanding any general or special law to the con-
trary, the terms of repayment of the SSA’s debt shall not exceed
the duration of the Innovation Plan’s term without the approval
of the School Committee
• solicit and accept grants or gifts for school purposes
154
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
• have such other powers available to a business corporation
formed under chapter 156B of the MGL that are not inconsis-
tent with the Innovation School legislation as modiﬁed by the
approval of the terms in this Innovation Plan
For the purposes of chapter 268A of the MGL: the SSA shall be
deemed to be a state agency; and the appointing ofﬁcial of a mem-
ber of the Board of Trustees of the SSA shall be deemed to be the
commissioner. Members of the Board of Trustees must comply with
the disclosure and other requirements of said chapter 268A. The
form of the disclosure shall be prescribed by the state ethics com-
mission and shall be signed under penalty of perjury. Such form
shall be limited to a statement in which members of the Board of
Trustees shall disclose any ﬁnancial interest that they or a member
of their immediate families, as deﬁned in section 1 of said chapter
268A, have in the SSA or with a person doing business with the
SSA.
Individuals or groups may complain to the SSA’s Board of
Trustees concerning any claimed violations of the provisions of
the Innovation Plan. Individuals or groups who believe their com-
plaint has not been adequately addressed may at any time submit
their complaint to the School Committee, which shall investigate
such complaint and make a formal response only after the Board of
Trustees has completed its investigation and made a formal state-
ment.
We are still in the process of writing up the necessary exemp-
tions and waivers required for this. You can ﬁnd a partial list in
Legal Affordances, but per 603 CMR 48.03(b),
If an innovation plan committee is proposing an innovation plan that
may conﬂict with laws (including regulations) governing other public
schools, the committee shall, before presenting the plan to the school
committee for approval, request approval from the Commissioner
for any provision in the plan that may conﬂict with such laws. The
Commissioner’s approval shall be based on his determination that
the plan is consistent with 603 CMR 48.03 (2) and with the state’s
obligations under the education clause of the Massachusetts Con-
stitution, Mass. Const., pt. II, ch. V, s. II, as deﬁned by a court of
competent jurisdiction, and that the provision in the plan that may
conﬂict with such laws is necessary to advance the mission or educa-
tional programs of the innovation school. If the Commissioner does
not approve the proposed provision in the plan, the innovation plan
committee may ask the Board to review the matter and the Board
shall make the ﬁnal decision.
which means that the full process of articulating points of con-
tact between state laws and regulations and the Innovation Plan as
voted on need not conclude until the School Committee presenta-
tion. As with negotiating necessary affordances in the Collective
Bargaining Agreement to make the Innovation Plan possible, non-
substantive design edits and alterations may be made after the
Innovation Plan Committee vote without triggering a re-start of the
process.192
192 French, D. (2013, August). Personal
communication with dan french.
Regarding voting and editing process
between Innovation Plan and School
Committee votes
Open Questions & Concerns
When beginning something new, it’s impossible to plan every detail
or preempt every problem. The past eighteen months have been
dedicated to surfacing as many questions and concerns as reason-
able from as many stakeholders as possible: parents, DESE, SPS,
SHS, other school innovators and designers. Bringing together the
concerns of these stakeholders with our own experience as educa-
tors and the expertise gained from other initiatives and researchers,
we have drafted this plan for the Somerville STEAM Academy.
Keep in mind that, while this plan is ambitious, it will not all come
to life at once. Instead, it will grow slowly, beginning with ∼36
eighth graders and increasing in size and complexity year-by-year.
The goal of this plan is thus not to articulate every detail of the
SSA’s future operation, but to lay out an evocative set of design
principles and boundary conditions to which we will stay true after
approval as we ﬁnish planning and begin to build and operate the
SSA.
This section will act as a repository where we can articulate the
major areas to which we will need to direct our attention post-
approval. Of course, this listing is not comprehensive, but is instead
meant to ensure that questions, concerns, warnings, and priorities
that folks suggest we make sure to attend to are not forgotten.
Fortunately, the SSA’s Fall 2015 start date should give us plenty of
time to address all of these concerns competently and comfortably.
1. curriculum mapping process: Students at the SSA will par-
ticipate in interdisciplinary seminars and follow curiosity-driven
paths in working on projects of their own design. The curricular
content of seminars will be largely known, though it will not
necessarily map directly onto traditional classes. The curricular
coverage of an individual project, however, will need to be as-
sessed and retrospectively mapped back onto the common core
in order to document the work of students. The exact protocol
by and structure within which this mapping will happen and
how it will be documented and archived remain to be hashed
out. We expect to take signiﬁcant inspiration from ﬁnely grained,
project-based mappings in curriculum design like the Interactive
Mathematics Program and other integrated curricula.193
193 Drake, S. M. and R. C. Burns (2004).
Meeting standards through integrated
curriculum. ASCD
2. transcript generation: While the curriculum mapping pro-
cess will happen on a rolling basis, the generation of transcripts
156
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
will happen only when students need a transcript in order to
make their learning legible to outside institutions (e.g. for SHS, a
college, employer, or extracurricular program). Based on a bevy
of conversations with SPS folks, other schools who use a project-
based approach, as well as the example of FCNW within SHS,
we are certain that the precise details of how to convert students
work at the SSA into meaningful grade/unit equivalents will be
tractable. However, the technical toolchain, nature for customiza-
tion of the transcript on a case-by-case basis, and feedback from
postsecondary institutions has yet to be explicitly designed.
3. ssa governance & accountability structures: The gov-
ernance chapter of this plan gives a bird’s eye view of the re-
porting relationships and accountability structures by which the
SSA will operate. The speciﬁc protocols to be followed, includ-
ing any templates or best practices for reports, evaluations, and
recommendations to be generated remain to be speciﬁed. After
the approval of the plan, we’ll begin soliciting drafts of the char-
ter for the various governing bodies among folks like the school
committee, superintendent, and aldermen for feedback.
4. standardized test preparation plans: Preparation for
standardized tests like the MCAS/PARCC, SAT, and ACT will
consist of regularly administered diagnostic tests followed by
individual and small group prep based on student needs. This
prep will be kept explicitly separate from students’ other aca-
demic responsibilities at the SSA and will be based on proven
models by the MATCH School, Veritas Tutors, and Kaplan Test
Prep who have agreed to stay on as advisors in the event of our
approval to help us develop, document, and tweak our approach
to ensuring high test performance. But we have yet to design
these speciﬁc prep programs or ﬂesh out the necessary profes-
sional development for staff training.
5. post-graduation programming: This plan lays out an am-
bitious plan for post-graduation communication, information
gathering, and direct involvement of alumni as TAs, mentors,
and advisors to current students. This will be a huge project, but
fortunately, one that will not begin until more than ﬁve years
into the SSA’s operations. We’ll begin working on the design
of this infrastructure after the conclusion of the ﬁrst year of the
SSA’s operation.
6. physical location: Many discussions have focused on physi-
cal location of the SSA, but until this plan is approved we cannot
take meaningful steps to sign or secure a lease or get full build-
out quotes. Many of the speciﬁc logistical questions—especially
with respect to the interface to Somerville High School—will
become much more concrete once this location is chosen.
7. city funding for facilities & operations: An offshoot of
this space-related ambiguity is a related question regarding the
role of Somerville city funding behind the SSA’s future facilities
open questions & concerns
157
and operations. The SPS budget deals with the costs associated
with staff, students, and educational materials; the city foots the
bill for operational costs (e.g. those associated with school build-
ings and their maintenance). Without clarity as to the precise
location of the SSA, some of these ﬁnancial workﬂow questions
cannot be fully answered.
8. precise per student allocations: The Innovation Schools
statute guarantees an Innovation School the same per pupil al-
location as other schools in the same district. However, the way
district budgeting actually works makes many of those lines
blurry and fuzzy since there is not actually ever a check cut by
the district on a per pupil basis. Whether it’s centralized district
functions like SPED and ELL or municipal ﬁnancial roles like
debt service, many different sources and contexts contribute to
the ostensibly simply ﬁgure of “per pupil allocation.” For this
reason, we’ve worked closely Pat Durette, Director of Finance
for SPS, to do two things: 1) sketch out the broad strokes of how
we’ll break down and work the logistics of the SSA’s funding,
and more importantly 2) verify that our estimate of $13,842 per
SSA pupil was a fair and reasonable number to plan around in
budgeting the SSA. After the approval of this plan, we’ll be able
to sit down and work with City Hall et al. to actually set up the
necessary ﬁnancial controls and commitments moving forward.
In this context, the SSA’s 2015 start date will be essential to give
us the ﬂexibility to plug into the municipal and district budget-
ing timelines.
Part IV
The Appendices
Socioeconomics of Somerville Public Schools
We’re still typesetting this data; however, we’ll be using a mix of
data from the 2013 DESE Proﬁle data, demographic data from the
2011 American Community Survey, and socioeconomic data from
the 2007–2011 American Community Survey.
It is essential that we understand the socioeconomic and de-
mographic trends in Somerville if we are to design an enrollment
process and performance goals which actually achieve our goals of
equity. Because of racial and economic stratiﬁcation over time—not
to mention the prominence of non-family residents in Somerville—
the population of Somerville High School is signiﬁcantly different
from that of Somerville at large. This section lays out the assump-
tions and data underlying our picture of Somerville, and speciﬁ-
cally Somerville High School.
This picture of Somerville drives our equity goals and enroll-
ment process. For a variety of reasons (including rising property
prices and a public perception of the Somerville Public School sys-
tem’s weakness) the median family at Somerville High School looks
different than most of Somerville socially, economically, demo-
graphically, and geographically.
The socioeconomic weightings for our lottery will be deﬁned
by a combination of income and geography. Unfortunately, those
data don’t exist at the granularity and comprehensiveness we’d
like. Fortunately, we’ve been able to cobble together a compelling
substitute: a combination of the American Community Survey
offering data on the distribution of poverty levels by children’s age,
a complete map of property value in Somerville (which combined
with established econometric methods can proxy for income), and
the District’s free- and reduced-lunch data.
The American Community Survey (ACS) is an ongoing statistical
survey by the U.S. Census Bureau and is the largest survey other
than the decennial census that the Census Bureau administers.
The ACS reaches a quarter of a million households monthly. And
with it, we have access to ﬁnely grained information about levels
of poverty by resident age in Somerville. This dataset194 forms the
194 Speciﬁcally, “AGE BY RATIO OF
INCOME TO POVERTY LEVEL IN
THE PAST 12 MONTHS”
backbone of the economic weighting of the lottery governing the
SSA’s enrollment process.
But, this data includes those families who do not send children
to Somerville High School. In general, we expect these families
162
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
to be wealthier than average. To overcompensate for this, we will
subtract the number of children in Somerville sent to private school
uniformly from the average income decile of the private school
population.
Unfortunately, the ACS dataset groups all families at 5× the
poverty threshold into a single bin. But, there is more ﬁnely grained
information available about the income levels of families in Somerville,
though not broken down by age. Together, these two datasets will
be the primary source for the distribution of income to which the
SSA’s lottery process will adhere.
Income does not wholly define someone’s socioeconomic
status. Debt, housing, and other factors come into play. These will
not be known perfectly, but we can borrow an econometrician’s
method 195 and use Somerville property values and occupancy
195 Mimura, Y. (2008). Housing cost
burden, poverty status, and economic
hardship among low-income fami-
lies. Journal of Family and Economic
Issues 29(1), 152–165; and Stern, S.
(2001). Valuing housing subsidies in a
new measure of poverty: A statistical
match of the american housing survey
to the current population survey. Hous-
ing and Household Economics Statistics
Division, Working Paper, US Census
Bureau
rates to deﬁne a geographical distribution of wealth. This allows
us to get a rough sense for a family’s income simply by soliciting
their address. This data will inform the weighting of the lottery
for the SSA’s enrollment and allow us to estimate whether we have
generated sufﬁcient interest to even execute the lottery and achieve
the statistical ends deﬁned by our equity goals.
The ﬁnal check and success condition, of course, is the District’s
own data: does one half of the SSA’s enrollment match the distribu-
tion of economic qualities tracked by the District—namely, 72% free
and reduced lunch?
Demographics of Somerville Public Schools
We’re still typesetting this data; however, we’ll be using the 2013
DESE Proﬁle data for general demographics and SIMS Reports 6
and 7 for SPED data.
Budget of Somerville Public Schools
We’re still typesetting this budget; however, we’ll be using SPS’s
2012 End of Year Audit, SPS FY2012 Budget, and the 2013 SPS
Stafﬁng Plan. If this plan goes on for consideration by the School
Committee, we’ll update the numbers to reﬂect the 2013–2014 bud-
get.
The Somerville Public School system receives funding from
three primary sources: City appropriations for education (∼$50
million in FY12), city funding (∼$35 million in FY12) for non-
educational activities, and federal/state/miscellaneous programs
(∼$15 million in FY12). This means that overall, the Somerville
Public School system spends nearly one hundred million dollars
yearly. Of that, nearly $10 million goes to almost ﬁve-hundred
out-of-district students. This means that the average, per-student
expenditure within Somerville is ∼$17,500.
The SSA’s focus on equity means that we will be providing—
either by purchasing back services a la carte from the District or
otherwise—for all the needs Somerville High School satisﬁes for
students who have struggled within the public school system. And
we will be focusing on skills and domains (programming, rapid
prototyping, and so on) that require more capital investment than
typical curricula. We will accept students with all levels of need,
regardless of SPED or ELL issues. And we believe we can do this
with a per capita allotment of $13,842.196
196 Because of the split between fed-
eral/state/other, district, and city
appropriations, we haven’t yet ﬁnal-
ized the budget numbers, but have
gotten assurances from Central Of-
ﬁce that the respective District/City
breakdown of $8,924 and $4,918 is
reasonable to plan around.
To derive the appropriate per-student allocation for the STEAM
Academy we must consider the respective roles of the district,
city, and federal/state sources. While it is tempting to go, item-by-
item, through the district’s end-of-year audit and ask whether the
STEAM Academy will need those funds, that’s the wrong frame for
this question. To see this, consider “Series 3510 – Athletic Services.”
Last year, Somerville spent $526,171.55 in this category. Now, the
STEAM Academy won’t be directly providing an athletic services.
Through relationships with Somerville High School and a student
stipend, students will have the option to pay to participate in ev-
erything from varsity football to boxing to ballroom dance. Some
students may decide to spend $60 per month on their athletics, oth-
ers might join a free running club. How should we accommodate
this in the budgeting and planning process?
We’ve taken a simple approach: the STEAM Academy’s per
166
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
pupil budget will be proportional to the costs incurred by the dis-
trict for per pupil services (curriculum, instruction, psychological
services, etc.) Some of this budget will be paid back to the Dis-
trict via a la carte offerings and services. Put differently, if you be-
gin with the ∼$17,500 per capita budget and subtract those costs
that do not provide direct pupil or family services and instead
are centralized or district-wide costs, you’ll arrive at the STEAM
Academy’s budget. Broadly, the STEAM Academy will not be re-
ceiving any proportional monies associated with District Leader-
ship and Administration (Series 1000), Debt Retirement and Ser-
vice (Series 8000), or Programs with Other School Districts (Series
9000)—these are costs that should be shared equally by the entire
district.
Much of that allocation we expect to return to the district through
a variety of mechanisms—buying back services from Somerville
High School, paying for a la carte psychological services, and so on.
But to provide personalized instruction and support, it is essential
that SSA have the autonomy to decide how to best manage these
funds for its students.
English Language Learner Support at Somerville High School
Somerville spent a total of $2, 814, 907 on English Language Learner
programs in 2012. The overwhelming majority of that (over 95%)
goes to ELL staff salaries, with the remainder going to opera-
tions and minor grants. Somerville High School spends a total
of $577, 125 on a mix of English as Second Language (ESL) and
Sheltered English Immersion Program197 (SEIP) staff.
197 via SPS ELL: “The Sheltered English
Immersion Program (SEIP) is a K-
12 program for students who speak
languages other than English. The
educational program includes English
as a Second Language (ESL) and
content instruction (math, science, and
social studies) aligned to grade-level
standards. Instruction is primarily in
English. Teachers use sheltered content
instructional techniques in order to
make lessons understandable and
meaningful to students as they become
proﬁcient in English.”
Because all staff will be bilingual and trained in a second lan-
guage, there is no distinction between SEIP costs and staff costs
within the SSA. Without those costs, Somerville High School
spends $343, 949 on ELL support staff, or $2365 per Limited En-
glish Proﬁcient (LEP) student. Of course, there are costs other than
staff—but even if we assume they are evenly distributed across
grade level198—this adds $167 per LEP student for Somerville High
198 Unlikely, given the prominence of
SEIP & programs like Unidos in K–8
School. Meaning en toto Somerville High School spends $2, 532 per
LEP student per year.
The SSA has budgeted $3, 315 per LEP student per year. This is
enough for two months of intensive English language immersion
through organizations like the Boston Language Institute; a full,
two month immersion program (≈$2, 800 via the BLI) for every
staff member; and an inaugural two weeks abroad (at ≈$1, 000 per
week via organizations like The Center of Bilingual Multicultural
Studies) for for every student and staff member (part of our cultural
literacy efforts).
budget of somerville public schools
167
Special Education Support at Somerville High School
Despite these advantages, we’ve budgeted conservatively, matching
Somerville High School’s per capita spending on SPED. Because
of how nonlinear spending on special needs is (i.e.,most students
are not especially costly, but a few students are very costly), it’s
necessary to carefully trace out how we arrived at our per pupil
ﬁgure of $6, 625.
977 students (≡19.84% of Somerville pupils) have an Individual
Education Plan (IEP); i.e.,they are special education (SPED) stu-
dents. In FY12, Somerville spent $15, 908, 875 on special education,
but only $9, 284, 715 was spent on direct services to students in the
district, in public day programs.199 This works out to a bit over
199 The rest went to administration,
out-of-district schools, residential
programs, private schools, and so on.
9, 500 per student. Of that $9, 500, 68% is spent on instruction; the
remainder goes to textbooks, guidance, and so on. Somerville High
School spends $5, 012 on instruction per SPED student. The District
as a whole spends an average of $1, 408 on everything other than
instruction per SPED student. This brings Somerville High School’s
spend on SPED to $6, 420 per SPED student per year.
Which brings us to the Somerville STEAM Academy’s bud-
get: $6, 420 per SPED student per year. We expect this to be much
higher than needed because such a large proportion of the SPED
needs of students we expect to be addressed through the more
ﬂexible, project-driven environment, but we think it would be irre-
sponsible to plan around that.200
200 Notably, the Circuit Breaker funds
will provide for 75% of any student
whose calculated cost would exceed
four times that of the average foun-
dation budget (see MGL.c71B§5A)
This affordance is meant to ensure that
the dramatic nonlinearities in special
education student costs don’t derail
budgeting efforts like ours.
Free & Reduced Lunch Budgets in SPS
We’re still typesetting this data; however, it is currently available in
the DOE Proﬁle for Massachusetts, which we’ll be combining with
National School Lunch data.
SSA Enrollment Outreach Budget
$0
$75,000
$150,000
$225,000
$300,000
LEGAL, ACCOUNTING
STAFF
CAMP
EVENTS 400 students; 20 families 
& 10h per event; $400/event
OUTREACH
= $160,000
40 students for a full-day camp 
over 8wk @ $125/wk/student
6m flexibility; 65ft  per student;
40 students @ $25 NNN
2
SPACE
AFTERSCHOOL 80 students, 3 sessions 
per wk, 2 months; $75/wk
2 full-time staff to coordinate outreach & 
recruitment @ $45,000/year  
6m flexibility hiring 2 staff, 
$50,000/y
= $40,000
= $56,000
= $30,600
= $13,400
12 prospective staff on contract basis
4 camp positions, $3,000 each
8 afterschool positions, $1,000 each
Figure 21: We pulled together
a very conservative budget
when we began fundraising for
the planning and implementa-
tion year. Our target scenario
is $100,000, with our worst
case scenario (for which we
secured support) is $300,000.
This will insure we can knock
the enrollment outreach pro-
cess out of the park and focus
on getting the inaugural cul-
ture right.
We’ve secured up to $300, 000—beginning with an award of
$100, 000—to establish the inaugural enrollment outreach process.
Our best-case-scenario budget for this process is $100,000 the ﬁrst
year, with our worst being $300,000. This process will be ongoing
and year-round and will not need continued funding after the SSA’s
inaugural year. But, we think it is essential to get the process right
the ﬁrst year, and we’ll be doing it for the ﬁrst time. After the SSA
is up and running, we’ll have the advantage of three factors which
will dramatically reduce the cost and complexity of the process:
• an existing network of [hopefully satisfied] families:
Even though the SSA will be small, the outreach capacity of
our thirty-six parents will ﬁgure prominently in identifying
interested families for following years. One of the principal’s
responsibilities will be opening up ongoing conversations with
172
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
these families to begin prospecting interested and appropriate
students for the following year.
• active staff and students in a living, breathing school:
The whole point of the outreach process is to give families and
students an experience which is more instructive than informa-
tional materials about “computational, project-based.” In our
inaugural year, we have to create this somewhat artiﬁcially in
the form of after- and in-school programming. Once we’re up
and running, we’ll not only have experiences and examples on
hand we can point to, but we’ll have students and staff whose
design and implementation of outreach programs can double as
academic and professional development.
• a credit line: With the capacity to establish a credit line, our
ability to ﬂoat or front money for staff who need to be hired
immediately (outside of our enrollment cycle)—a signiﬁcant cost
in our budgeting for the enrollmetn outreach process—will be
entirely mitigated because we’ll be in a position to ﬂoat staff at
lower-than-normal pay during their transition period and pay
back that debt as they ramp up to their appropriate pay.
Legal Affordances
This chapter summarizes some of the points of contact between the
vision for the Somerville STEAM Academy, an Innovation School
proposal in Somerville, MA, and the MGL and CMR. Because the
Innovation School legislation gives explicit power to School Com-
mittees to design proposals which require legal ﬂexibility, i.e.
An Innovation School shall operate in accordance with the law regu-
lating other public schools, except as the law conﬂicts with this section or
any innovation plans created thereunder.
we’ve developed this appendix to document each point of contact
which requires a waiver. However, this listing is not yet compre-
hensive. Fortunately, the listing need not be comprehensively ar-
ticulared in full until the School Committee’s vote, per 603 CMR
48.03(b), viz.
If an innovation plan committee is proposing an innovation plan that
may conﬂict with laws (including regulations) governing other public
schools, the committee shall, before presenting the plan to the school
committee for approval, request approval from the Commissioner
for any provision in the plan that may conﬂict with such laws. The
Commissioner’s approval shall be based on his determination that
the plan is consistent with 603 CMR 48.03 (2) and with the state’s
obligations under the education clause of the Massachusetts Con-
stitution, Mass. Const., pt. II, ch. V, s. II, as deﬁned by a court of
competent jurisdiction, and that the provision in the plan that may
conﬂict with such laws is necessary to advance the mission or educa-
tional programs of the innovation school. If the Commissioner does
not approve the proposed provision in the plan, the innovation plan
committee may ask the Board to review the matter and the Board
shall make the ﬁnal decision.
but we’ve included this rough draft of exemptions as we develop
the ﬁnal version in collaboration with staff from DESE and EOE.
In preliminary conversations with DESE, they’ve indicated their
support for the waivers listed herein.
Basically, these waivers are driven by a single desire: we are
happy to be accountable for results and issues (i.e.,to commit to
‘what’), but would like to have autonomy in the how of the conduct
of students, teachers, and administrators. In general, we would
prefer oversight and accountability to management.
Concretely, this ended up shaking out into three categories:
• Outdated laws which happen to be on the books but which no
one would or does enforce
174
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
• Active laws endowing the school committee and/or district with
certain powers over schools we’d like to see waived. Some of
these are in direct conﬂict with the current draft of the Innova-
tion Plan for the SSA, some are matters of managerial disposi-
tion.
• And ﬁnally, laws which directly apply to schools which either
conﬂict with the Innovation Plan as currently drafted or the
SSA’s managerial disposition.
Each point of contact has been linked to the MGL and we’ve
provided a short description of why we’d like a waiver or revision.
Many of these are handled by the speciﬁc autonomies afforded by
the Innovation School statute. This means that any laws or regula-
tions referring to the authority of the School Committee are alter-
able by the Innovation Plan (whose authority per the Innovation
School legislation), takes precedence over the MGL).
via MGL.I.XII.C71.§92: . . . An Innova-
tion School shall operate in accordance
with the law regulating other public
schools, except as the law conﬂicts with
this section or any innovation plans
created thereunder. . . .
Massachusetts General Law
1. Such schools shall be taught by teachers of competent ability
and good morals, and shall give instruction and training in or-
thography, reading, writing, the English language and grammar,
geography, arithmetic, drawing, music, the history and constitu-
tion of the United States, the duties of citizenship, health educa-
tion, physical education and good behavior. Instruction in health
education shall include, but shall not be limited to: consumer
health, ecology, community health, body structure and function,
safety, nutrition, ﬁtness and body dynamics, dental health, emo-
tional development, safe and healthy relationships with a focus
on preventing sexual and domestic violence and training in the
administration of ﬁrst aid, including cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion.
This may fall under the curricular autonomy provided under
the Innovation School legislation; however, we’d like complete
control—assuming the school’s performance goals are being
met—over the curriculum. In particular, this means that the choice
to offer health education (or instruction in the duties of citizenship
or orthography or. . . ) should be ours. While we are of course
sympathetic to the spirit of this requirement, we’d like to design
and implement our own curriculum, subject to the performance
goals and metrics deﬁned by this Innovation Plan.
2. In all public elementary and high schools American history and
civics, including the constitution of the United States, the dec-
laration of independence and the bill of rights, and in all public
high schools the constitution of the commonwealth and local
history and government and a program relating to the ﬂag of the
United States of America, including, but not limited to, proper
etiquette, the correct use and display of the ﬂag, the importance
of participation in the electoral process and the provisions of 36
legal affordances
175
U.S.C. 170 to 177, inclusive, shall be taught as required subjects
for the purpose of promoting civic service and a greater knowl-
edge thereof, and of ﬁtting the pupils, morally and intellectually,
for the duties of citizenship.
Related: we think the content and intent of this statute is reason-
able, but we’d like control over and autonomy in deciding how
and when to do this. Too often, the history and civics and good
citizenship classes prompted by something like this are godawful.
As it stands, public engagement with these issues and ideas is at
an all-time low, and we think that wasting time pretending to ad-
dress this with a social studies class does a disservice to learners
as a whole.
3. Section 93. Every public school providing computer access to
students shall have a policy regarding internet safety measures
to protect students from inappropriate subject matter and ma-
terials that can be accessed via the internet and shall notify the
parents or guardians of all students attending the school of the
policy. The policy and any standards and rules enforcing the
policy shall be prescribed by the school committee in conjunction
with the superintendent or the board of trustees of a common-
wealth charter school.
Nearly every time sprout & co has run a program in a school,
we’ve had issues with their internet. It’s gotten to the point that
we bring our own laptops and 3G hotspot so we can provide our
own connection. Whether issues of speed—or more frequently,
ﬁltering—when you’re running a program using something like
Scratch, where students will frequently venture online to ﬁnd me-
dia or look for help, it’s an enormous obstacle to need to maintain
the illusion that you can contain and curate an “appropriate In-
ternet.” This is especially true given how naive it is to assume that
school can make a dent in the relative access or exposure to “inap-
propriate subject matter and materials.” We think it is much more
important to nurture students’ healthy relationships to this tech-
nology and those cultural issues. And this means—uncomfortable
as it may be for some—dealing with the consequences of “the
Internet” being freely available.
4. A change may be made in the school books used in the public
schools by a vote of two thirds of the whole school committee at
a meeting thereof, notice of such intended change having been
given at a previous meeting.
This may be guaranteed by the curricular autonomies the SSA
is pursuing; however, we’d like to ensure that we have complete
control of the materials and ideas that we’re spending money on
putting in front of our students. For many of the domains and
approaches we’ll be pursuing, there don’t even exist appropriate
textbooks yet. This means that staff will be central in deﬁning and
reifying curricula, but also means that we should not need prior
review of the school committee to iterate on these questions
5. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph or
section ﬁfty-three of chapter forty-four, the school committee of a
176
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
city, town or district may authorize a school principal to receive
money in connection with the conduct of certain student activ-
ities and to deposit such money, with the municipal or regional
school district treasurer, into an interest bearing bank account,
hereinafter referred to as the Student Activity Agency Account,
duly established by vote of the school committee to be used for
the express purpose of conducting student activities. Interest
earned by such Student Activity Agency Account shall be re-
tained by the fund and the school committee shall determine for
what purpose such earnings may be used. In addition to such
Student Activity Agency Account, the school committee may
authorize the municipal or regional school district treasurer to
establish a checking account, hereinafter referred to as the Stu-
dent Activity Checking Account, to be operated and controlled
by a school principal and from which funds may be expended
exclusively for student activity purposes for the student activities
authorized by the school committee. Such account shall be used
for expenditures only and funds received for student activities
may not be deposited directly into such account.
The school committee shall vote to set the maximum balance that
may be on deposit in such Student Activity Checking Account.
The principal designated to operate and control such Student
Activity Checking Account shall give bond to the municipal-
ity or district in such amount as the treasurer shall determine
to secure the principal’s faithful performance of his duties in
connection with such account. To the extent that the funds are
available in such Student Activity Agency Account, funds up to
the maximum balance set by the school committee shall be trans-
ferred from the Student Activity Agency Account through the
warrant process to initially fund such Student Activity Checking
Account.
Periodically, to the extent that funds are available in such Stu-
dent Activity Agency Account, the municipal or regional school
district treasurer shall reimburse such Student Activity Checking
Account, through the warrant process, to restore the limit set by
the school committee. The principal shall adhere to such admin-
istrative procedures as the municipal or regional school district
treasurer or accountant may prescribe.
We would like to locate the control of and authority to admin-
ister the Student Activity Agency/Checking Account within the
SSA. Because of the SSA’s deep integration with the community,
the fundraising and grant-writing with which we will be help-
ing students to support their projects, and the spectrum from
‘activity’ to ‘class’ which the SSA stakes out, there is a great deal
of non-traditional uses for something like the Student Activity
Agency/Checking Account. We’d like control over that and see no
ﬁduciary or managerial reason for incurring the additional friction
and confusion of having the School Committee administer it.
legal affordances
177
6. The school committee shall appoint one or more school physi-
cians and registered nurses, shall assign them to the public
schools within its jurisdiction, shall provide them with all proper
facilities for the performance of their duties and shall assign one
or more physicians to the examination of children who apply
for health certiﬁcates required by section eighty-seven of chapter
one hundred and forty-nine, but in cities where the medical in-
spection hereinafter prescribed is substantially provided by the
board of health, said board shall appoint and assign the school
physicians and registered nurses.
While we are of course keen to ensure that the services of a regis-
tered nurse and/or physician are available at all times, we‘d like
to be in charge of handling this. Finding, documenting, hiring,
and relating to medical care (and the bevy of almost-social-work
functions a great school nurse can provide) is an essential and
unique function. No more than we would be content to have
someone else hire our teachers would we be comfortable hav-
ing a school nurse simply assigned to us. As long as students’
health and outcomes are not suffering, we’d like autonomy in the
provision of this support.
7. In addition to any other requirements of this section, the board
shall require, as a provision of an administrator’s or educator’s
re-certiﬁcation, that all educators and administrators shall have
training in strategies for effective inclusive schooling for chil-
dren with disabilities, instruction of students with diverse learn-
ing styles and classroom organization and management. Such
training shall include, at a minimum, practical experience in the
application of these strategies.
Of course, we are keen to see staff be effective in these strategies,
but we’d like for requirements to participate in training programs
to this effect at most trigger when there is an issue. e.g.,if the SSA
is not hitting its disciplinary goals, we should be accountable
to demonstrate efforts (which may take the form of training) to
address issues of classroom management and organization
8. The committee may supervise and control all athletic and other
organizations composed of public school pupils and bearing the
school name or organized in connection therewith.
We’d like this authority to rest with the school principal. Given
that students will be receiving stipends which they will use to
fund a variety of intramural and unorganized sports (e.g.,boxing
lessons), we’d like to absolve the school committee of any man-
agerial oversight of this
9. The principal at each school, subject to the direction of the su-
perintendent, shall, at the expense of the school district, purchase
textbooks and other school supplies, and consistent with the dis-
trict policy, shall loan them to the pupils attending such school
free of charge.
This may just be semantics, but ultimately, the choice of textbook
and the purchasing process will be up to each teacher and their
178
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
students. Of course we are happy to provide them to students
free of charge in the colloquial sense, but it is important to un-
derstand that in working on projects, students will not only have
their own stipends but will often be in a position of earning their
own money. In many cases, it will make managerial, social, and
ﬁnancial sense for students and their team of mentors/teachers to
make decisions about books and materials to buy. The principal
will take responsibility for ensuring that these funds are disbursed
responsibly and maintaining documentation to such an effect
10. Pupils in the public schools may, if the committee so votes, pur-
chase from the town, under such regulations as the committee
may prescribe, any textbooks which are to be, or have been, used
by them in such schools.
Related, we would like to be able to autonomously manage the
purchase of textbooks—as long as the SSA is meetings its perfor-
mance goals, we see no reason to involve the School Committee
at the managerial level. We’d like to ensure that in the absence
of such a failure, the school committee cannot prescribe further
regulation of any part of the SSA
11. The school committee may, at any national, state, or foreign
exposition, make an exhibition showing the character, standing,
or work of its public schools.
We’d love for this to happen. However, we are very keen to ensure
that the intellectual property students and teachers generate
remains their own. This means that we’d like to require student
consent for this, and furthermore, retain the authority to deﬁne
default licensing terms. We don’t do this because we don’t want
student work exhibited, of course, but precisely the opposite:
we’d like students to take ownership of their work and relate to
it as adults do. And we think that part of that is treating them as
adults
12. No student shall be suspended, expelled, or otherwise disci-
plined on account of marriage, pregnancy, parenthood or for
conduct which is not connected with any school-sponsored activ-
ities; provided, however, that in the case of a pregnant student,
the school committee may require that the student be under the
supervision of a physician.
We are completely on board with the thrust and intent of this.
However, we’d like the authority to require a student be under
the supervision of a physician (or not be, as well as the choice of
physician) to be entirely within the school, resting ultimately with
the principal
13. At the commencement of the ﬁrst class of each day in all grades
in all public schools the teacher in charge of the room in which
each such class is held shall announce that a period of silence
not to exceed one minute in duration shall be observed for per-
sonal thoughts, and during any such period, silence shall be
maintained and no activities engaged in.
Really?
legal affordances
179
14. In all the public schools the last regular session, or a portion
thereof, prior to the last Monday in May, known as Memorial
Day, shall be devoted to patriotic exercises.
Wait really?
15. A portion of the Bible shall be read daily in the public schools,
without written note or oral comment; but a pupil whose parent
or guardian informs the teacher in writing that he has conscien-
tious scruples against it, shall not be required to read from any
particular version, or to take any personal part in the reading.
The school committee shall not purchase or use in the public
schools school books favoring the tenets of any particular reli-
gious sect.
Uhh. . .
16. . . . no teacher or other employee shall receive compensation for
any period of lawful suspension.
We’d like the principal to have complete authority over whether
an employee receives compensation during a lawful suspension.
This compensation will not exceed the compensation they would
have received otherwise.
17. teacher salary autonomy, via Section 43. The salary of no teacher
employed with professional teacher status in any city or town
except Boston shall be reduced without his consent except by
a general salary revision affecting equally all teachers of the
same salary grade in the town or except in connection with a
reduction in status from full-time to part-time pursuant to a
reduction in force resulting from declining enrollments or other
budgetary reasons or pursuant to reorganizations for academic
or budgetary reasons. Nothing in this section or in any other
section of this chapter shall be construed to prevent a school
district from entering into an individual annuity contract for
such employee or from reducing the salary or compensation of
such employee pursuant to such agreement for the purpose of
such purchase as authorized by section thirty-seven B.
18. A ﬂag shall be displayed, weather permitting, on the school
building or grounds on every school day and on every legal
holiday or day proclaimed by the governor or the President
of the United States for especial observance; provided, that on
stormy school days, it shall be displayed inside the building.
A ﬂag shall be displayed in each assembly hall or other room
in each such schoolhouse where the opening exercises on each
school day are held. Each teacher at the commencement of the
ﬁrst class of each day in all grades in all public schools shall lead
the class in a group recitation of the “Pledge of Allegiance to the
Flag”. A ﬂag shall be displayed in each classroom in each such
schoolhouse.
180
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
The use & display of a ﬂag will be under the authority of the
teacher, or for all extra-classroom uses, the principal.
19. The compensation paid to such teachers shall be deemed to be
fully earned at the end of the school year, and proportionately
earned during the school year.
We’d like to leave the timing of teacher payment up to agreements
between individual teachers and the school principal.
20. In each school building containing the grades nine to twelve,
inclusive, the principal, in consultation with the school council,
shall prepare and distribute to each student a student handbook
setting forth the rules pertaining to the conduct of students. The
student handbook shall include an age-appropriate summary of
the student-related sections of the bullying prevention and inter-
vention plan required by section 37O. The school council shall
review the student handbook each spring to consider changes in
disciplinary policy to take effect in September of the following
school year, but may consider policy changes at any time. The
annual review shall cover all areas of student conduct, including
but not limited to those outlined in this section.
While we’ll obviously invest effort in ensuring preventing and
addressing bullying and in creating a culture of positive student
conduct, we think that student handbooks are by and large a
waste of students’, teachers’, and families’ time. This is not to say
that rules and expected conduct won’t be delineated someplace
accessible to all, but it is to say that we would like autonomy in
how we go about that.
21. Section 3. Physical education shall be taught as a required sub-
ject in all grades for all students in the public schools for the
purpose of promoting the physical well-being of such students.
Instruction in physical education may include calisthenics, gym-
nastics and military drill; but no pupil shall be required to take
part in any military exercise if his parent or guardian is of any
religious denomination conscientiously opposed to bearing arms,
or is himself so opposed, and the school committee is so notiﬁed
in writing; and no pupil shall be required to take part in physical
education exercises if a licensed physician certiﬁes in writing
that in his opinion such physical education exercises would be
injurious to the pupil.
We would like the requirement we offer PE be driven by student’s
healthfulness and activity, as assessed by a doctor of the princi-
pal’s choosing.
22. Section 34D. The board of education shall adopt regulations
relative to the maintenance, retention, duplication, storage and
periodic destruction of student records by the public elementary
and secondary schools of the commonwealth. Such rules and
regulations shall provide that a parent or guardian of any pupil
legal affordances
181
shall be allowed to inspect academic, scholastic, or any other
records concerning such pupil which are kept or are required to
be kept.
We think students are the ultimate owners of their academic
records, and that releasing them to their parents should be a
decision left up to them for students older than twelve years of
age.
23. Each school district in the commonwealth, subject to appropri-
ation, shall implement a speciﬁc policy and discipline code to
address teen dating violence in public schools. The policy shall
clearly state that dating violence will not be tolerated and shall
include guidelines for addressing alleged incidents of dating vio-
lence. The policy may include a teen dating violence prevention
task force comprised of staff, students and parents to provide
awareness training and education for the school community.
Topics to be covered in the policy include, without limitation,
deﬁning the issue of teen dating violence, recognizing warning
signs, identifying issues of conﬁdentiality, safety and appropriate
legal school-based interventions.
We think that these issues are best handled by people and cul-
tures. We don’t think that policies and protocols are as valuable
as a healthy environment. This does not mean, of course, that
we won’t be investing time and energy in addressing issues of
dating violence. But it does mean we won’t be asking teachers or
administrators to waste their time drafting a document no one
will read.
24. It shall be unlawful for any student, enrolled in either primary or
secondary public schools in the commonwealth, to use tobacco
products of any type on school grounds during normal school
hours.
Ibid.
25. the date of graduation from such high school may precede the
regular closing date of the school by not more than twelve school
days.
We think that students should be able to graduate when they have
demonstrated mastery of the curricula for which we are responsi-
ble. They of course will be welcome to stay with us longer, as long
as we feel in a position to authentically offer enriching learning
experiences. But we think it is important to consider outputs, not
inputs.
26. In addition, any school department personnel shall report in
writing to their immediate supervisor an incident involving a
student’s possession or use of a dangerous weapon on school
premises at any time.
182
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
27. Each school district, charter school, approved private day or
residential school and collaborative school shall provide age-
appropriate instruction on bullying prevention in each grade
that is incorporated into the curriculum of the school district or
school. The curriculum shall be evidence-based.
We would like the principal to have ﬁnal authority in notiﬁcation
and intervention with respect to bullying. We have zero tolerance
for the ridonkulousness that “zero tolerance” policies can create.
We trust people more than protocols.
28. Each school district, charter school, non-public school, approved
private day or residential school and collaborative school shall
develop, adhere to and update a plan to address bullying pre-
vention and intervention in consultation with teachers, school
staff, professional support personnel, school volunteers, ad-
ministrators, community representatives, local law enforcement
agencies, students, parents and guardians. The consultation shall
include, but not be limited to, notice and a public comment pe-
riod; provided, however, that a non-public school shall only be
required to give notice to and provide a comment period for
families that have a child attending the school. The plan shall
be updated at least biennially. Each plan shall include, but not
be limited to: (i) descriptions of and statements prohibiting bul-
lying, cyber-bullying and retaliation; (ii) clear procedures for
students, staff, parents, guardians and others to report bullying
or retaliation; (iii) a provision that reports of bullying or retal-
iation may be made anonymously; provided, however, that no
disciplinary action shall be taken against a student solely on the
basis of an anonymous report; (iv) clear procedures for promptly
responding to and investigating reports of bullying or retaliation;
(v) the range of disciplinary actions that may be taken against a
perpetrator for bullying or retaliation; provided, however, that
the disciplinary actions shall balance the need for accountability
with the need to teach appropriate behavior; (vi) clear proce-
dures for restoring a sense of safety for a victim and assessing
that victim’s needs for protection; (vii) strategies for protect-
ing from bullying or retaliation a person who reports bullying,
provides information during an investigation of bullying or wit-
nesses or has reliable information about an act of bullying; (viii)
procedures consistent with state and federal law for promptly
notifying the parents or guardians of a victim and a perpetra-
tor; provided, further, that the parents or guardians of a victim
shall also be notiﬁed of the action taken to prevent any further
acts of bullying or retaliation; and provided, further, that the
procedures shall provide for immediate notiﬁcation pursuant to
regulations promulgated under this subsection by the principal
or person who holds a comparable role to the local law enforce-
ment agency when criminal charges may be pursued against
the perpetrator; (ix) a provision that a student who knowingly
legal affordances
183
makes a false accusation of bullying or retaliation shall be subject
to disciplinary action; and (x) a strategy for providing counseling
or referral to appropriate services for perpetrators and victims
and for appropriate family members of said students. The plan
shall afford all students the same protection regardless of their
status under the law.
Ibid.
29. The plan for a school district, charter school, approved private
day or residential school and collaborative school shall include
a provision for ongoing professional development to build the
skills of all staff members, including, but not limited to, educa-
tors, administrators, school nurses, cafeteria workers, custodians,
bus drivers, athletic coaches, advisors to extracurricular activities
and paraprofessionals, to prevent, identify and respond to bully-
ing. The content of such professional development shall include,
but not be limited to: (i) developmentally appropriate strategies
to prevent bullying incidents; (ii) developmentally appropriate
strategies for immediate, effective interventions to stop bullying
incidents; (iii) information regarding the complex interaction
and power differential that can take place between and among
a perpetrator, victim and witnesses to the bullying; (iv) research
ﬁndings on bullying, including information about speciﬁc cate-
gories of students who have been shown to be particularly at risk
for bullying in the school environment; (v) information on the
incidence and nature of cyber-bullying; and (vi) internet safety
issues as they relate to cyber-bullying. The department shall
identify and offer information on alternative methods for fulﬁll-
ing the professional development requirements of this section, at
least 1 of which shall be available at no cost to school districts,
charter schools, approved private day or residential schools and
collaborative schools. The plan shall include provisions for in-
forming parents and guardians about the bullying prevention
curriculum of the school district or school and shall include, but
not be limited to: (i) how parents and guardians can reinforce
the curriculum at home and support the school district or school
plan; (ii) the dynamics of bullying; and (iii) online safety and
cyber-bullying.
Ibid.
30. bullying, (g) A member of a school staff, including, but not lim-
ited to, an educator, administrator, school nurse, cafeteria worker,
custodian, bus driver, athletic coach, advisor to an extracurric-
ular activity or paraprofessional, shall immediately report any
instance of bullying or retaliation the staff member has witnessed
or become aware of to the principal or to the school ofﬁcial iden-
tiﬁed in the plan as responsible for receiving such reports or
both. Upon receipt of such a report, the school principal or a
designee shall promptly conduct an investigation. If the school
184
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
principal or a designee determines that bullying or retaliation
has occurred, the school principal or designee shall (i) notify the
local law enforcement agency if the school principal or designee
believes that criminal charges may be pursued against a perpe-
trator; (ii) take appropriate disciplinary action; (iii) notify the
parents or guardians of a perpetrator; and (iv) notify the parents
or guardians of the victim, and to the extent consistent with state
and federal law, notify them of the action taken to prevent any
further acts of bullying or retaliation.
Ibid.
31. (h) If an incident of bullying or retaliation involves students
from more than one school district, charter school, non-public
school, approved private day or residential school or collabo-
rative school, the school district or school ﬁrst informed of the
bullying or retaliation shall, consistent with state and federal
law, promptly notify the appropriate administrator of the other
school district or school so that both may take appropriate ac-
tion. If an incident of bullying or retaliation occurs on school
grounds and involves a former student under the age of 21 who
is no longer enrolled in a local school district, charter school,
non-public school, approved private day or residential school or
collaborative school, the school district or school informed of the
bullying or retaliation shall contact law enforcement consistent
with the provisions of clause (viii) of the second paragraph of
subsection (d).
Ibid.
32. The superintendent, by means of comprehensive evaluation,
shall cause the performance of all teachers, principals, and ad-
ministrators within the school district to be evaluated using any
principles of evaluation established by the board of education
pursuant to section one B of chapter sixty-nine and by such
consistent, supplemental performance standards as the school
committee may require, including the extent to which students
assigned to such teachers and administrators satisfy student aca-
demic standards or, in the case of a special education student,
the individual education plan, and the successful implementa-
tion of professional development plans required under section
thirty-eight Q; provided, however, that such principles and stan-
dards be consistent with the anti-discrimination requirements of
chapter one hundred and ﬁfty-two B. The superintendent shall
require the evaluation of administrators and of teachers with-
out professional teacher status every year and shall require the
evaluation of teachers with professional teacher status at least
once every two years. The procedures for conducting such eval-
uations, but not the requirement for such evaluations, shall be
subject to the collective bargaining provisions of chapter one
hundred and ﬁfty E.
legal affordances
185
We would like all teachers, regardless of licensure status, to be
evaluated at the same depth and schedule. Furthermore, we
would like our teachers to only be evaluated by the Superintendent—
or indeed, anyone outside of the SSA—in the event the SSA falls
short of its performance goals.
33. Performance standards for teachers and other school district em-
ployees shall be established by the school committee upon the
recommendation of the superintendent, provided that where
teachers are represented for collective bargaining purposes, all
teacher performance standards shall be determined as follows:
The school committee and the collective bargaining representa-
tive shall undertake for a reasonable period of time to agree on
teacher performance standards. Prior to said reasonable period
of time, the school district shall seek a public hearing to com-
ment on such standards. In the absence of an agreement, after
such reasonable period, teacher performance standards shall be
determined by binding interest arbitration. Either the school dis-
trict or the teachers’ collective bargaining representative may ﬁle
a petition seeking arbitration with the commissioner of educa-
tion. The commissioner shall forward to the parties a list of three
arbitrators provided by the American Arbitration Association.
The school committee and the collective bargaining representa-
tive within three days of receipt of the list from the commissioner
of education shall have the right to strike one of the three arbi-
trators’ names if they are unable to agree upon a single arbitrator
from among the three. The arbitration shall be conducted in ac-
cordance with the rules of the American Arbitration Association
to be consistent with the provisions of this section. In reaching a
decision, the arbitrator shall seek to advance the goals of encour-
aging innovation in teaching and of holding teachers accountable
for improving student performance. The arbitrator shall consider
the particular socioeconomic conditions of the student popula-
tion of the school district. Both the parties and the arbitrator may
adopt performance standards established by state or national
organizations. The performance standards shall be incorporated
into the applicable collective bargaining agreement; provided,
however, that any subsequent modiﬁcation of the performance
standards shall be made pursuant to the procedures set forth in
this section.
We would like to locate the complete authority of deﬁning perfor-
mance standards to be located with the principal.
34. . . . nothing herein shall be construed to prevent a school commit-
tee from prescribing additional qualiﬁcations
We would like to be exempt from further constraints passed by
the School Committee. We would, of course, take any policies
passed by the School Committee under advisement in determin-
ing our own hiring practices.
186
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
35. In addition to any other requirements of this section, the board
shall require, as a provision of an administrator’s or educator’s
initial certiﬁcation, that all educators and administrators shall
have training in strategies for effective inclusive schooling for
children with disabilities, instruction of students with diverse
learning styles and classroom organization and management.
Such training shall include, at a minimum, practical experience
in the application of these strategies. In addition to any other
requirements in this section, in order to receive a provisional or
standard educator certiﬁcate, persons applying for such certiﬁca-
tion shall have completed such courses or training sessions as the
board shall require in second language acquisition.
We are keen for staff to be competent in strategies accommodating
inclusive schooling, diverse learning styles, second language
acquisition, and classroom organization & management. But we
think that training and support should be determined by staff’
competence; i.e. in focusing on output, not input, we think that staff
should be reviewed for their competence and if they are lacking,
we’d like the authority to seek out or design our own training
programs.
Code of Massachusetts Regulations
1. (1) Requirement of taking a mathematics content assessment —
The superintendent or the school’s receiver, if any, may require
all mathematics teachers at a Level 4 school to take a mathe-
matics content assessment approved by the Department. The
commissioner or the school’s receiver, if any, may require all
mathematics teachers at a Level 5 school to take a mathematics
content assessment approved by the Department. A mathematics
teacher shall be required to take a mathematics content assess-
ment pursuant to 603 CMR 2.07(1) no more than once a year.
Our autonomy over stafﬁng means this won’t be the case, but
if we’ve misunderstood that, we’d like an exemption from this.
Obviously, not because we’re not interested in assessing and
ensuring the quality of our math teachers, but because we’d like
to be in control of that assessment unless we miss our performance
goals repeatedly. Until then, we’d like to avoid wasting staff’s
time.
2. Each school district seeking approval for a vocational technical
education program shall demonstrate that the program has been
planned in consultation with the following advisory committees
[. . . ]
Since the Innovation Plan (and hence the vocational technical edu-
cation program it entails) was not developed with these advisory
committees in mind, we’d like a waiver from this requirement.
3. [The program of study shall] be based on the applicable Voca-
tional Technical Education Framework and the Massachusetts
Curriculum Frameworks;
legal affordances
187
Related, the autonomies of the Innovation Plan supersede those
of the VTEF and MCF. While there are strong vocational threads
in this Innovation Plan, by virtue of, well, it being innovative,
many of these have not yet been reiﬁed in state and national
frameworks.
4. [The program of study shall] meet National Occupational Pro-
gram Approval Standards as set forth in “Guidelines for Voca-
tional Technical Education Programs and Educator Licensure;”
Ibid.
5. [The program of study shall] meet state board/agency approvals,
accreditation association approvals as set forth in the “Guide-
lines for Vocational Technical Education Programs and Educator
Licensure;”
Ibid.
6. be scheduled so that vocational technical shop instruction, if
scheduled as a full school day, does not exceed ten consecutive
full school days. Shop instruction scheduled for ten consecu-
tive full school days or less must be scheduled for at least the
same number of full school days of academic instruction before
beginning another schedule of shop instruction.
“Shop instruction” & “instruction” blur in many of the academic
cases the SSA will be confronting, e.g. computer science. Safe &
competent operation of ‘shop’ equipment will drive preparation,
but the split between preparation and practice makes less sense in
the STEAM Academy context.
7. A Program of Studies including both academic and technical
programs and courses [. . . ] a copy shall be provided to each
student and parent/guardian.
The Program of Studies will be deeply individualized. Broad
descriptions of expected student development will be straightfor-
ward, but a generalized Program of Studies doesn’t make sense
for the SSA’s approach. We’ll be providing extensive information
on the SSA’s approach, and each student will work to create a
variety of plans for their own self-development in collaboration
with their Advisory.
8. (a) All personnel in the vocational technical education program
including academic teachers shall have an appropriate educator
license in accordance with the requirements set forth in 603 CMR
4.00 and 7.00.
The SSA’s autonomy in stafﬁng precludes this, a need exacerbated
by the mismatch between the cutting-edge nature of the SSA’s
programming and the current draft of the vocational technical
educator licensure regulations.
9. 603 CMR 7.00 Regulations for Educator Licensure and Prepara-
tion Program Approval
188
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Ibid.
10. (b) Each approved program shall: be supervised by a person
holding a Vocational Technical Cooperative Education Coor-
dinator license or Vocational Technical Teacher license in the
cooperative education program area;
Ibid.
11. 4.07: Types of Vocational Technical Teacher Licenses, Require-
ments for Licensure, and Licenses Issued
Ibid.
12. 4.08: Types of Vocational Technical Administrator Licenses and
Requirements for Licensure
Ibid.
13. 4.09: Types of Vocational Technical Cooperative Education Coor-
dinator Licenses and Requirements for Licensure
Ibid.
14. Candidates shall demonstrate that they meet the Standards 1)
by passing the written and performance tests required for the
preliminary license and, 2) as part of the preparation for the
professional license.
Ibid.
15. (b) Non-licensed substitute teachers and teacher (instructional)
aides shall be supervised by an appropriately licensed voca-
tional technical teacher while serving in a vocational technical
laboratory and shall not be allowed to supervise students using
hazardous equipment.
The SSA’s heavy integration with the community means we will
be relying on a long tail of community partners for mentorships,
co-ops, internships, and other support. These individuals will go
through a vetting and training process speciﬁc to their context,
but many contexts (e.g. regular lunches for students with industry
mentors, a la Boys & Girls Club) are expressly inappropriate to
impose SSA full-time staff supervision.
16. (e) Persons with special expertise related to the vocational tech-
nical area of instruction who can strengthen the vocational tech-
nical education program may be employed without a vocational
technical teacher license. Such persons shall work in concert
with, and under the direct supervision of, an appropriately li-
censed vocational technical teacher at all times.
Ibid. regarding issues of direct supervision.
17. Schools shall condition admission on a student having been
promoted to the grade that they have been admitted to enter.
legal affordances
189
The SSA’s lack of age segregation and focus on personalized
projects renders traditional grade separations and notions of
prerequisites less coherent. Student admission will be conditioned
on staff, family, and administration agreement that the SSA is
better than other options available to the student, modulo our
commitments to equity.
18. [Each approved program shall:] enroll only those students who
are enrolled in an approved vocational technical education pro-
gram and who have demonstrated the acquisition of the knowl-
edge and skills in the applicable Vocational Technical Education
Framework and the Massachusetts Curriculum Frameworks as-
sociated with at least one and one half years of full time study in
the vocational technical cooperative education program area, and
in no case enroll students earlier than midway through the junior
year;
Ibid; also, a primary premise of the SSA is that the vocational
paradigm not only does not compete with academic content, but
can enhance it. Artiﬁcially limiting access to it by age or narrowly
constraining it to pre-deﬁned State Frameworks cuts off many of
the advantages this plan is speciﬁcally designed to leverage.
19. (c) Each school shall have a code of conduct which shall include
standards and procedures for suspension and expulsion of stu-
dents in accordance with M.G.L c. 71, Â˘g 37H. The code shall
be published in the Student Handbook and a copy shall be pro-
vided to each student, parent/guardian. Expulsion for reasons
not included in the code shall not be allowed.
Ultimately, we trust people over protocols. Promulgating a code
of conduct no-one will read in a Student Handbook no one uses
and encouraging a legalistic approach to the letter of the ‘law’
are counterproductive to the creation of a healthy culture. The
ﬁrst line of defense in student discipline will be their Advisory,
then the Principal, then the combination of these in collaboration
with students’ families. We are still exploring the option of a peer
committee and honor code as might be found at many colleges.
20. (d) Each school with postsecondary vocational technical educa-
tion programs shall develop and implement an admission policy
for the postsecondary programs. The policy must be approved
by the Department prior to implementation.
We would like to retain the same autonomies over enrollment,
admission, and design for postsecondary programs as we seek in
our secondary programs. Combined with the heavy integration
of local college students and community members, we’d like
the freedom to admit and award credit in the pursuit of the best
experience possible for learners at the SSA. We are happy to
submit descriptions of our admissions policy and process to the
Department, and in the event of missing our performance or equity
goals repeatedly, undergo approval.
190
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
21. (e) Each school that admits postgraduate students shall develop
and implement an admission policy for the postgraduate open-
ings. The policy must be approved by the Department prior to
implementation.
Ibid.
22. [Each approved program shall:] be offered only during time not
scheduled for academic classes during the school year, and may
include summer programs;
The whole premise of the SSA blurs the distinction between ‘vo-
cational’ and ‘academic’ in deep ways; the design of a STEAM
program doesn’t accommodate a zero-sum approach to these
domains, as though they were independent.
23. [Each approved program shall:] provide students the opportu-
nity to acquire knowledge, and develop skills not acquirable in a
school-based setting but acquirable in a work-based setting;
Ibid. regarding the elucidation of ‘work’ v. ‘school’ uses—especially
given the prominence of knowledge work in the SSA’s focus.
24. [Each approved program shall:] provide students with continu-
ous supervision by the employer;
Given that a primary focus of the SSA is scaffolding the executive
function of students and effecting their full transition to indepen-
dent investigators, constant supervision cannot be a fundamental
constraint. Of course, this is modulo requirements of safety (ex-
pressed variously as the Advisory’s good judgment, the SSA’s
insurance policy, etc.)
25. (2) A licensed teacher in that approved vocational technical edu-
cation program area shall provide continuous supervision at the
job site.
Ibid.
26. The agreement shall include the skills to be acquired by the
student. The employer shall agree to meet all applicable require-
ments of state and federal labor laws and regulations including,
but not limited to, those addressing worker compensation insur-
ance, equal employment opportunity and occupational safety
and health;
If we are to push tight integration with work opportunities at
places like Google, we can’t be asking employers to enumerate all
the skills someone will develop. Part of this—the part mapping
back to the Common Core—is the job of the SSA. And while
we understand and empathize the concerns around child labor
driving the employer’s agreement to labor laws, the SSA will act
as student’s legal employer in these situations, and as such we’d
like prospective partners speciﬁcally waived from these concerns.
legal affordances
191
27. [Each approved program shall:] provide a safety and health
orientation speciﬁc to the site for all employee-students; and
Again, we empathize with the need to ensure student safety, but
this needn’t take the form of an orientation—especially in many of
the knowledge work sectors.
28. (5) The superintendent of each school system shall require em-
ployers who recruit new employees in and through the schools
of that district to sign a statement that the employer complies
with applicable federal and state laws prohibiting discrimination
in hiring or employment practices.
Ibid.
29. (1) In order to receive vocational technical education program
approval, the Superintendent shall submit an application to the
Commissioner that demonstrates the labor market outlook for
the program and compliance with the approval criteria.
In the event that program approval is required (given that we’re
requesting a waiver from prior approval, this would mean that the
SSA has missed its performance or equity goals repeatedly), we’d
like the principal, not the Superintendent, to be in charge of this.
30. (c) The Superintendent shall submit a corrective action plan
to the Department for programs that are under review. The
Department will monitor progress in meeting the goals of the
plan. If, after one year under review, a program has not made
satisfactory progress, its approval may be revoked.
Ibid.
31. (2) Outcome II - Upon the development of the Certiﬁcate of
Occupational Proﬁciency Assessment System, the percentage of
vocational technical education students who receive a Certiﬁcate
of Occupational Proﬁciency.
We think that we should be held to outputs of our education, and
“a certiﬁcate” is much less important than a paying job, strong
letters of recommendation, and so on. We’re happy with the other
two outcomes deﬁned, and would add many of our own, but are
wary to make ‘certiﬁcation’ a primary goal.
32. (5) Only those students who are enrolled in an approved voca-
tional technical education program and who have demonstrated
those academic, technical and employability competencies asso-
ciated with at least one and one half years of full time study in
the vocational technical education program project area, and in
no case shall students be allowed to participate in such projects
without a minimum enrollment of at least one year in the voca-
tional technical program.
192
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Given how deeply the vocational and academic programs will
be integrated at the SSA, the one-year preparation requirement
is a real obstacle. The students’ Advisory will be the primary
mechanism by which students’ autonomy and engagement will be
scaffolded.
33. (9) Public Record. Each school district shall maintain as a public
record, in a central location or in each school, a list of all staff
members whose employment is governed by 603 CMR 4.00,
indicating the role in which each is employed and the credential
that authorizes such employment.
Because of our stafﬁng autonomy, maintaining a list of the ‘appro-
priate credential’ is incoherent. We’d like a waiver only from that
part of this requirement.
34. (2) The superintendent or designee shall review the issue and
provide the parent with a timely written decision within 15 days
of the request, unless extenuating circumstances require a delay.
We‘d like the principal to be the ﬁrst line of defense in these
situations, unless the issue is with SSA administration. Which
is to say, we’d like a letter to ﬁrst go to the principal and for the
principal to respond before opening up the superintendent to
parents’ queries.
35. (2) The parent shall submit a written request to the superinten-
dent for review of the parent’s allegation. The request for review
shall provide the basis for the parent’s allegation, including the
name(s) of the school district employee(s) involved and a de-
scription of the actions that the employee(s) took or failed to take
that resulted in willful and repeated violations of M.G.L. c. 71A.
Except in extenuating circumstances, the parent shall submit the
request within 30 calendar days of the last incident at issue. The
superintendent shall provide the school district employee with
a copy of the written request within 10 calendar days after it is
ﬁled and in advance of the meeting with the superintendent.
Ibid.
36. (1) A parent who is dissatisﬁed with the ﬁnal local decision on
an issue arising under M.G.L. c. 71, §32A may submit a written
request for review to the Commissioner, within 15 days of the
date of the ﬁnal local decision. The written request shall specify
the basis on which the parent alleges the school or school district
has not met the requirements of M.G.L. c. 71, ’ 32A and shall
include a copy of the ﬁnal local decision and any other relevant
correspondence. The parent shall send a copy of the written re-
quest to the superintendent of schools or, in the case of a charter
school, to the charter school leader.
The SSA principal should be able to, too
37. 603 CMR 13.00: Certiﬁcation of Supervisors of Attendance
legal affordances
193
The SSA won’t have truancy ofﬁcers, and it does not seem it is
a legal requirement that we do so. In the event that it is, we’d
like this responsibility to rest with the Social Worker role in the
Advisory, and to be free of the training and paperwork constraints
accompanying their statutory role as “supervisor of attendance.”
38. (1) Core academic teachers who provide sheltered English in-
struction to English learners in school districts, including charter
schools and education collaborative, must earn an SEI Teacher
Endorsement as set forth in 603 CMR 7.00 and this section. Prin-
cipals, assistant principals, and supervisors/directors supervise
or evaluate such teachers, must earn an SEI Teacher Endorse-
ment or SEI Administrator Endorsement as set forth in 603 CMR
7.00 and this section.
Every SSA staff will be bilingual and trained in English immersion
and support. Unless the SSA is missing its performance or equity
goals, we’d like autonomy over the requirement that staff earn a
particular endorsement.
39. (3) Starting on July 1, 2016, any core academic teacher who is
assigned to provide sheltered English instruction to an English
learner shall either hold an SEI Teacher Endorsement, or is re-
quired to earn such endorsement within one year from the date
of the assignment. Any school district that assigns an English
learner to a core academic teacher who has a year to obtain an
SEI endorsement, shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that
such English learner is assigned to core academic teachers with
an SEI endorsement in subsequent school years.
Ibid.
40. (4) Starting on July 1, 2016, no principal, assistant principal, or
supervisor/director shall supervise or evaluate a core academic
teacher who provides sheltered English instruction to an English
learner unless such principal, assistant principal, or supervi-
sor/director holds an SEI Teacher Endorsement or SEI Adminis-
trator Endorsement, or will earn either endorsement within one
year of the commencement of such supervision or evaluation.
Ibid.
41. (1) These rights shall be the rights of the student upon reaching
14 years of age or upon entering the ninth grade, whichever
comes ﬁrst. If a student is under the age of 14 and has not yet
entered the ninth grade, these rights shall belong to the student’s
parent.
We’d like these rights to begin at age 12.
42. (2) If a student is from 14 through 17 years of age or has entered
the ninth grade, both the student and his/her parent, or either
one acting alone, shall exercise these rights.
194
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Ibid.
43. (1) All public schools in the Commonwealth shall admit stu-
dents without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, reli-
gion, national origin, or sexual orientation. This includes, but
is not limited to charter, elementary, secondary, trade, regional
vocational-technical schools and selective academic high schools.
We’re sure there’s some reconciliation between this and processes
aiming to increase and ensure minimum types and distributions
of diversity, but given that half our students will be identiﬁed
as “struggling” and the other half will be lotteried in through a
weighted process matching Somerville High Schools socioeco-
nomic and demographic proﬁle, contravening this is necessary if
we’re to hit our equity goals.
44. (3) A public school shall not schedule students into courses or
units of study on the basis of race, color, sex, gender identity,
religion, national origin or sexual orientation.
We believe that authentic, deep integration across social, ethnic,
gender, and other cultural and economic lines is essential to a
functioning republic. We’d like to reserve the right to pursue such
scheduling processes with the goal of ensuring diversity.
45. (1) Guidance counselors and other personnel shall represent to
students a broad spectrum of education and career opportuni-
ties. School personnel shall not present race, color, sex, gender
identity, religion, national origin or sexual orientation as limiting
factors in career determination.
To suggest that issues of culture and gender should not impinge
on discussions of future economic and cultural options is laudably
naive. Minimally, we‘d like to discuss with students the effect of
the gender pay gap, industry norms for child care and maternity
leave, and so on. But truly, this should be left up to the good
judgment of the adults in the students’ lives.
46. (3) Each school shall provide equal opportunity for physical ed-
ucation for all students. Goals, objectives and skill development
standards, where used, shall neither be designated on the basis
of sex, nor designed to have an adverse impact on members of
either sex.
If qualifying times for the Olympics are gendered, we think our
standards of satisfactions for student health can reasonably be as
well.
47. (1) Advantages and privileges of public schools include all extra-
curricular activities made available, sponsored or supervised
by any public school. No school shall sponsor or participate in
the organization of outside extra-curricular activities conducted
at such school that restrict student participation on the basis of
race, color, sex, gender identity, religion, national origin or sexual
legal affordances
195
orientation. 603 CMR 26.06 (1) does not prohibit school com-
mittees from allowing use of school premises by independent
groups with restrictive membership.
Much of the SSA’s focus is on making science a cultural activity.
In some cases, that will involve supporting traditional minori-
ties’ own identiﬁcation with a skill or domain—e.g. a ‘girls only’
electronics club. We of course empathize with the equitable and
egalitarian spirit which we’re sure motivates this statute, but we
think it can get in the way of effecting real equity.
48. Schools may post or print information regarding private re-
stricted scholarships as long as no preferential treatment is given
to any particular scholarship offered and as long as the school
does not endorse or recommend any such scholarship nor advise
or suggest to a particular student that he or she apply for such a
scholarship.
Ibid. We can’t be asked to avoid helping our students succeed if
we are to provide the personalized care and attention we promise.
49. (1) Prior to the beginning of each school year, every school com-
mittee shall establish school year schedules for each of the public
schools under its supervision and control, based on the particu-
lar learning needs of students within each school. In determining
the school year schedule for each school, the school committee
shall be guided by the student learning time plan recommended
by the school council for each school, and shall attempt to max-
imize high quality teaching, learning, and professional develop-
ment opportunities.
The SSA will have scheduling autonomy, and the SSA principal
will have the ultimate responsibility for the schedule.
50. (2) Notwithstanding the minimum school year requirements
set forth in 603 CMR 27.03 and 27.04(2), at the discretion of the
school committee the scheduled school year for the graduating
senior class of a high school or vocational/technical school may
conclude, and the school graduation may be held, up to twelve
school days before the regular scheduled closing date of that
school.
In a competency- or mastery-based advancement scheme, absolute
time constraints on graduation are incoherent. We’d like control
over this process.
51. (2) Upon the written request of a school district, the Commis-
sioner of Education may, in his discretion, grant a waiver of the
minimum school year requirement set forth in 603 CMR 27.03(3)
in situations where an emergency or extraordinary circumstance
forces the closing of one or more of the district’s schools.
We’d like the SSA Principal to be able to make this request on
behalf of the SSA.
196
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
52. 33.04: Filing of Reports
As far as we can tell, this creates paperwork that does nothing to
ensure student safety. We will, of course, go to every length nec-
essary to ensure a safe and welcoming environment for students,
free of hazing. But until a pattern of negligence appears, or mini-
mally a parental complaint, we think that this is a waste of teacher
and administrator time.
53. (1) Procedures. Public education programs shall develop written
procedures regarding appropriate responses to student behavior
that may require immediate intervention. Such procedures shall
be annually reviewed and provided to school staff and made
available to parents of enrolled students.
Ibid.
54. (2) Required training for all staff. Each principal or director shall
determine a time and method to provide all program staff with
training regarding the school’s restraint policy. Such training
shall occur within the ﬁrst month of each school year and, for
employees hired after the school year begins, within a month of
their employment.
Ibid; we’d like to only have to offer this training at the beginning of
a staff’s hire, not every year.
55. (1) In accordance with G.L. c. 71, Â˘g 38G, educators working
in a Massachusetts public school must obtain approval of their
proposed professional development plans from their supervisors
by the timelines set out in 603 CMR 44.05 (2), and 44.06 (2). Li-
censed educators working in schools other than Massachusetts
public schools are encouraged to seek such approval.
Our stafﬁng & professional development autonomy should ob-
viate the need for such a setup. Unless a staff members results
are failing, we think that dictating the process of approving PD
plans will generate needless paperwork and transform an exciting
process—deﬁning your goals for self-development—into a burden.
56. [(4) Approval of professional development plans of mathemat-
ics teachers in low-performing mathematics programs shall be
subject to the following additional requirements: (a) A supervi-
sor shall not approve or sign the professional development plan
of any mathematics teacher in a low-performing mathematics
program until that educator takes the Mathematics Content As-
sessment. However, if no Mathematics Content Assessment is
offered between the ﬁrst date the educator is required to take
the Mathematics Content Assessment, pursuant to the Under-
Performing Schools and Districts Regulations, 603 CMR 2.05, and
the last date on which the approval or signature may be granted,
the supervisor may approve or sign the professional develop-
ment plan of an educator who has not yet taken the Mathematics
Content Assessment.
legal affordances
197
57. In considering whether a professional development plan is con-
sistent with the educational needs of the school and/or district
and whether the plan is designed to enhance the ability of the
educator to improve student learning, pursuant to 603 CMR
44.04 (1)(b), a supervisor must determine that the professional
development plan addresses weaknesses identiﬁed by the Mathe-
matics Content Assessment. (c) In the event that a school’s math-
ematics program is classiﬁed as a low-performing mathematics
program after approval of the educator’s professional develop-
ment plan, the educator shall take the next Mathematics Content
Assessment offered by the Board. (d) In the event that a mathe-
matics teacher who was not previously teaching in a school with
a low-performing mathematics program goes to work in school
with a low-performing mathematics program, that teacher will
not have to take the Mathematics Content Assessment until the
school’s mathematics program is classiﬁed as low-performing
based on the results of an MCAS mathematics test administered
while the teacher is employed at the school. (e) In biannual re-
views conducted pursuant to 603 CMR 44.04 (2), a supervisor
must withdraw approval of the professional development plan
of any educator who has not taken the Mathematics Content As-
sessment offered by the Board, unless no Mathematics Content
Assessment is offered between the time such Assessment was
required of the educator, pursuant to 603 CMR 2.05 (2), and the
time of the biannual review. A supervisor must also withdraw
approval of any professional development plan that fails to ad-
dress weaknesses identiﬁed by the Mathematics Content Assess-
ment.](http://www.doe.mass.edu/lawsregs/603cmr44.html?section=all)
Given our stafﬁng autonomy, we’d like this process to be within
our control unless there exists signiﬁcant cause to suspect a staff
member’s capacity or performance.
58. (2) Before the Department deems the license inactive, it shall
notify the educator in writing that the Department intends to
deem the license inactive and of the educators right to request
a hearing before the Commissioner in accordance with M.G.L.
c. 30A and 801 CMR 1.00: Adjudicatory Rules of Practice and
Procedure. This notice shall operate as a notice of the action and
does not operate as an order to show cause.
We’d like to ensure the principal is notiﬁed, as well.
59. School committees shall establish evaluation systems and Perfor-
mance Standards for the evaluation of all teachers that include
all of the principles of evaluation, set forth in 603 CMR 35.00–
35.11. School committees may supplement the standards and
indicators in 603 CMR 35.03 with additional measurable perfor-
mance standards and indicators consistent with state law and
collective bargaining agreements where applicable. The district
198
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
shall adapt the indicators based on the role of the teacher to re-
ﬂect and to allow for signiﬁcant differences in assignments and
responsibilities. The district shall share the Performance Stan-
dards with teachers employed by the district.
The SSA’s heterodox, heavily project-based work means we’d like
autonomy over the selection, training, and evaluation of teachers.
60. School committees shall establish evaluation systems and per-
formance standards for the evaluation of administrators that
include all of the principles of evaluation, set forth in 603 CMR
35.00–35.11. School committees may supplement the standards
and indicators in 603 CMR 35.04 with additional measurable
performance standards consistent with state law and collective
bargaining agreements where applicable. The district shall adapt
the indicators based on the role of the administrator to reﬂect
and allow for signiﬁcant differences in assignment and responsi-
bilities. The district shall share the performance standards with
all administrators.
Ibid.
61. (1) School committees shall adopt either the Model System de-
signed and regularly updated by the Department, or a locally
developed system that is consistent with these principles. The
evaluation system shall include the evaluation cycle set forth in
603 CMR 35.06.
Ibid. This includes the reporting systems accompanying the pro-
cess.
62. (7) The superintendent is responsible for ensuring that all evalua-
tors have training in the principles of supervision and evaluation.
All evaluations should be free of racial, sexual, religious, and
other illegal discrimination and biases as deﬁned in state and
federal laws.
We’d like the principal of the SSA to be in charge of this for the
evaluators the SSA employs, given how heterodox many of the
materials and artifacts for evaluation will be.
63. (8) Extended Day and Extended Year. Costs for extended day
or extended year services shall be eligible only if such services
are speciﬁed on the student’s IEP, and shall be calculated in
accordance with 603 CMR 10.07 (6) or 603 CMR 10.07 (7).
Given the year-round nature of the SSA, we’ll already be build-
ing in ‘extended’ programming, and the costs for those services
should not need speciﬁcation in a student’s IEP, given their partic-
ipation in an ELT context.
legal affordances
199
Exemptions and Variances from 603 CMR
1. Each vocational technical school district and agricultural school
shall employ a vocational technical superintendent and voca-
tional technical principal licensed pursuant to 603 CMR 4.00.
The SSA is an independent technical institute and vocational
school; however, the unique content, focus, and modality of the
SSA means that current licensing practices and regulations are far
from catching up. In concert with the unusual stafﬁng structure
and the SSA’s autonomy in hiring, we’d like to be able to hire,
independent of nominal licensing status or credentials.
2. (1) Procedures. Public education programs shall develop written
procedures regarding appropriate responses to student behavior
that may require immediate intervention. Such procedures shall
be annually reviewed and provided to school staff and made
available to parents of enrolled students.
We think that good people trump good protocols. This does not
mean that we will not have written procedures or guidelines; how-
ever, they will not be a recipe concocted and reviewed annually.
3. (3) In-depth staff training in the use of physical restraint. At the
beginning of each school year, the principal or director of each
public education program or his or her designee shall identify
program staff that are authorized to serve as a school-wide re-
source to assist in ensuring proper administration of physical
restraint. Such staff shall participate in in-depth training in the
use of physical restraint. The Department of Elementary and
Secondary Education recommends that such training be at least
sixteen (16) hours in length.
Every staff member will receive training and instruction in proper
physical constraint; however, there will be no centralized program
staff to serve as school-wide resource. We will be working with
community partners and organizations to ensure this background
is well-provided.
4. Whenever possible, the administration of a restraint shall be
witnessed by at least one adult who does not participate in the
restraint.
There are many situations where the best interest of the student
means that a non-public encounter is preferable, even if a pub-
lic encounter is possible. We acknowledge those are likely to be
charged situations, but we think staff should be making deci-
sions that are best for the restrained student, not the best for our
insurance policy.
5. The program staff member who administered the restraint shall
verbally inform the program administration of the restraint as
soon as possible, and by written report no later than the next
school working day. The written report shall be provided to the
principal or director of the program or his/her designee, except
200
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
that the principal or director shall prepare the report if the prin-
cipal or director has administered the restraint. The principal or
director or his/her designee shall maintain an on-going record
of all reported instances of physical restraint, which shall be
made available for review by the Department of Elementary and
Secondary Education, upon request.
In all cases, the principal is responsible for interviewing and
drawing up the report. We want these [hopefully rare] situations
to be treated as a facilitator or investigator might. Not only do we
not want to burden teachers with paperwork, we want the prin-
cipal to take full responsibility for the chain of events and avoid
any appearance of impropriety due to the chain of authorship in
drafting the report.
6. (1) On or before October 1 of each year, the principal or head-
master of every secondary school shall ﬁle a report as required
by M.G.L. c. 269, Â˘g 19 with the Bureau of Student Services.
This seems to be paperwork for paperwork’s sake. If there is
ever a hazing problem, we’ll happily commit to these protocols,
but in the meantime we think that this represents nothing but
unnecessary friction for school staff.
7. (2) If a student is from 14 through 17 years of age or has entered
the ninth grade, both the student and his/her parent, or either
one acting alone, shall exercise these rights.
We’d like students to be able to exercise these rights immediately
upon entry into the SSA, regardless of age.
8. (3) If a student is 18 years of age or older, he/she alone shall
exercise these rights, subject to the following. The parent may
continue to exercise the rights until expressly limited by such
student. Such student may limit the rights and provisions of 603
CMR 23.00 which extend to his/her parent, except the right to
inspect the student record, by making such request in writing
to the school principal or superintendent of schools who shall
honor such request and retain a copy of it in the student record.
Pursuant to M.G.L. c. 71, section 34E, the parent of a student
may inspect the student record regardless of the student’s age.
We’d like the default to be that the student has exclusive rights
unless expressly relinquished by the student.
9. (2) The superintendent of schools or his/her designee shall be re-
sponsible for the privacy and security of all student records that
are not under the supervision of a school principal, for example,
former students’ transcripts stored in the school department’s
central administrative ofﬁces or student records of school-age
children with special needs who have not been enrolled in a
public school.
We’d like the principal to be entirely responsible for all documen-
tation created and maintained by the SSA. Because we plan to be
building such an extensive system of documentation, curriculum
legal affordances
201
mapping, and record-keeping, putting folks outside of the SSA in
charge of this creates unnecessary friction.
10. (2) During the time a student is enrolled in a school, the prin-
cipal or his/her designee shall periodically review and destroy
misleading, outdated, or irrelevant information contained in the
temporary record provided that the eligible student and his/her
parent are notiﬁed in writing and are given opportunity to re-
ceive the information or a copy of it prior to its destruction. A
copy of such notice shall be placed in the temporary record.
Rather than this be a regular activity on staff’s part, we’d like it to
be an on-demand service offered when students and/or families
seek it out. We’ll be building systems that let students suggest
edits and have those approved by staff to handle this.
11. (3) The temporary record of any student enrolled on or after the
effective date of 603 CMR 23.00 shall be destroyed no later than
seven years after the student transfers, graduates, or withdraws
from the school system. Written notice to the eligible student
and his/her parent of the approximate date of destruction of
the record and their right to receive the information in whole or
in part, shall be made at the time of such transfer, graduation,
or withdrawal. Such notice shall be in addition to the routine
information letter required by 603 CMR 23.10.
Because of our interest in longitudinal assessment and measure-
ment, we’d like to keep these temporary records indeﬁnitely,
provided student and parent consent to waive the seven year period.
12. (4) In accordance with M.G.L. c 71, section 87, the score of any
group intelligence test administered to a student enrolled in a
public school shall be removed from the record of said student
at the end of the school year in which such test was so adminis-
tered.
Similarly, we’d like this to be up to the student and/or their
family.
13. (4) Access of Third Parties. Except for the provisions of 603 CMR
23.07(4)(a) through 23.07(4)(h), no third party shall have access
to information in or from a student record without the speciﬁc,
informed written consent of the eligible student or the parent.
Because the line between “third party” and “educational service
provider” will be so blurry at the SSA, we’d like to put this power
in students’ hands—that is, the student needn’t provide informed
written consent, they can simply share the records themselves.
14. (b) Upon receipt of a court order or lawfully issued subpoena the
school shall comply, provided that the school makes a reasonable
effort to notify the parent or eligible student of the order or
subpoena in advance of compliance.
We’d like to reserve the right to [lawfully] contest a subpoena,
even if lawfully issued.
202
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
15. (g) Authorized school personnel of the school to which a student
seeks or intends to transfer may have access to such student’s
record without the consent of the eligible student or parent,
provided that the school the student is leaving, or has left, gives
notice that it forwards student records to schools in which the
student seeks or intends to enroll. Such notice may be included
in the routine information letter required under 603 CMR 23.10.
We’d like the student and/or family to consent to this, given that
there will be no non-consensual transfers, we see no reason for
this to right to be taken from students and families.
16. (h) School health personnel and local and state health depart-
ment personnel shall have access to student health records, in-
cluding but not limited to immunization records, when such
access is required in the performance of ofﬁcial duties, without
the consent of the eligible student or parent.
Ibid.
17. (2) The eligible student or the parent shall have the right to re-
quest in writing deletion or amendment of any information
contained in the student record, except for information which
was inserted into that record by an Evaluation Team. Such in-
formation inserted by an Evaluation Team shall not be subject to
such a request until after the acceptance of the Evaluation Team
Educational Plan, or, if the Evaluation Team Educational Plan is
rejected, after the completion of the special education appeal pro-
cess. Any deletion or amendment shall be made in accordance
with the procedure described below.
We see no reason for Evaluation Team’s materials to get special
treatment here. We’d like this to be a matter for students and
families to work out with the principal and their teachers.
18. (1) In the event that any decision of a principal or his/her de-
signee regarding any of the provisions contained in 603 CMR
23.00 is not satisfactory in whole or in part to the eligible student
or parent, they shall have the right of appeal to the superinten-
dent of schools. Request for such appeal shall be in writing to
the superintendent of schools.
Before appealing to the Superintendent, we’d like this appeals
process to pass through the principal at the SSA.
19. Structured learning time shall mean time during which students
are engaged in regularly scheduled instruction, learning activi-
ties, or learning assessments within the curriculum for study of
the "core subjects" and "other subjects." In addition to classroom
time where both teachers and students are present, structured
learning time may include directed study, independent study,
technology-assisted learning, presentations by persons other
than teachers, school-to-work programs, and statewide student
performance assessments.
legal affordances
203
Because of the broad community integration and project-based
curricula at the SSA, we’d like to expand the deﬁnition of “struc-
tured learning time” to include those activities which may be
optional—speciﬁcally, all activities undertaken with the intent to
learn as agreed upon by staff and student. Some of these may be
optional and highly personalized, but we see no reason that—if
educational—these should not contribute to “structured learning
time” broadly.
20. (1) Prior to the beginning of each school year, every school com-
mittee shall establish school year schedules for each of the public
schools under its supervision and control, based on the particu-
lar learning needs of students within each school. In determining
the school year schedule for each school, the school committee
shall be guided by the student learning time plan recommended
by the school council for each school, and shall attempt to max-
imize high quality teaching, learning, and professional develop-
ment opportunities.
Because of the personalization and individual attention which
will be part of every student’s experience, the autonomy for deﬁn-
ing and managing the schedule for the SSA will fall under the
purview of the SSA and its families.
21. Time which a student spends at school breakfast and lunch,
passing between classes, in homeroom, at recess, in non-directed
study periods, receiving school services, and participating in
optional school programs shall not count toward meeting the
minimum structured learning time requirement for that student.
In particular, “non-directed study periods, receiving school ser-
vices, and participating in optional school programs” are likely to
be central to many SSA students’ educational development, and as
such, these activities will count as “structured learning time.”
22. (2) Notwithstanding the minimum school year requirements
set forth in 603 CMR 27.03 and 27.04(2), at the discretion of the
school committee the scheduled school year for the graduating
senior class of a high school or vocational/technical school may
conclude, and the school graduation may be held, up to twelve
school days before the regular scheduled closing date of that
school.
The SSA uses a system of mastery and competency based as-
sessment and advancement. As such, we’d like control over the
scheduling and planning of graduation/conclusion/matriculation
in light of this, without framing it in terms of time invested. In-
stead, the staff heading up the relevant cohorts will make a deci-
sion together with the principal.
23. (k) structured learning time schedule
Given how multifaceted and integrated learning time will be,
mandating this be documented ahead of time cuts against the
grain of the SSA’s personalization, meaning we’re seeking exemp-
tion from this requirement, supplanting it with the retrospective,
curriculum mapping process.
204
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
24. (12) Each school district or municipality which reports student
transportation expenses shall maintain the lease contract, bid
speciﬁcations and responses to the bid in support of reported
student transportation expenditures.
The SSA’s individual, stipend based approach to transportation
for some students precludes the bid approach—we’ll be working
with students to secure and ensure their own modes of transport.
25. (8) Extended Day and Extended Year. Costs for extended day
or extended year services shall be eligible only if such services
are speciﬁed on the student’s IEP, and shall be calculated in
accordance with 603 CMR 10.07 (6) or 603 CMR 10.07 (7).
The SSA will be operating a signiﬁcantly extended, year-round
program, and as such these costs should be covered accordingly as
during the traditional school year.
26. No person shall be eligible for employment by a school commit-
tee as a supervisor of attendance unless he has been granted a
certiﬁcate by the Board of Education.
Because of the high touch, team-driven approach of staff to en-
suring family engagement and full awareness of students’ issues,
we’d like to certify at least one staff member in each cohort as a
supervisor of attendance.
27. No exemption under the 603 CMR 13.02 shall be granted by the
Board of Education to candidates for appointment in any city or
town subject to the provisions of M.G.L. c. 31 and the rules made
thereunder if the Civil Service Commission has certiﬁed three or
more persons to the School Committee of said city or town who
have met all the requirements of 603 CMR 13.02 for the position
of supervisor of attendance.
Ibid.
28. (2) The parent shall submit a written request to the superinten-
dent for review of the parent’s allegation. The request for review
shall provide the basis for the parent’s allegation, including the
name(s) of the school district employee(s) involved and a de-
scription of the actions that the employee(s) took or failed to take
that resulted in willful and repeated violations of M.G.L. c. 71A.
Except in extenuating circumstances, the parent shall submit the
request within 30 calendar days of the last incident at issue. The
superintendent shall provide the school district employee with
a copy of the written request within 10 calendar days after it is
ﬁled and in advance of the meeting with the superintendent.
We’d like for the parent to ﬁrst go through the principal and wait
a minimum of seven days before submitting a written request to
the superintendent.
29. (1) Core academic teachers who provide sheltered English in-
struction to English learners in school districts, including charter
legal affordances
205
schools and education collaborative, must earn an SEI Teacher
Endorsement as set forth in 603 CMR 7.00 and this section. Prin-
cipals, assistant principals, and supervisors/directors supervise
or evaluate such teachers, must earn an SEI Teacher Endorse-
ment or SEI Administrator Endorsement as set forth in 603 CMR
7.00 and this section.
Because every staff member will be trained in a second [germane]
language and because we’ll be offering staff-wide training in
SEI/ELL support in partnership with community organizations,
we’d like to manage our own personnel’s preparation in these
areas.
30. (3) Starting on July 1, 2016, any core academic teacher who is
assigned to provide sheltered English instruction to an English
learner shall either hold an SEI Teacher Endorsement, or is re-
quired to earn such endorsement within one year from the date
of the assignment. Any school district that assigns an English
learner to a core academic teacher who has a year to obtain an
SEI endorsement, shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that
such English learner is assigned to core academic teachers with
an SEI endorsement in subsequent school years.
Ibid.
31. (4) Starting on July 1, 2016, no principal, assistant principal, or
supervisor/director shall supervise or evaluate a core academic
teacher who provides sheltered English instruction to an English
learner unless such principal, assistant principal, or supervi-
sor/director holds an SEI Teacher Endorsement or SEI Adminis-
trator Endorsement, or will earn either endorsement within one
year of the commencement of such supervision or evaluation.
Ibid.
32. Each school district requesting approval of a vocational technical
education program shall demonstrate that the program meets the
following approval criteria
Because the vocational program is being instantiated under the
Innovation School statute, the Board/Department is not involved.
33. (c) Each school district seeking approval for a vocational tech-
nical education program shall demonstrate that the program
has been planned in consultation with the following advisory
committees
Ibid.
34. (a) Each vocational technical school district and agricultural
school shall employ a vocational technical superintendent and
vocational technical principal licensed pursuant to 603 CMR 4.00.
Our stafﬁng autonomy, irrespective of nominal credentialling or
licensure, precludes this.
206
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
35. (b) Each school district that conducts ﬁve or more approved vo-
cational technical education programs in public comprehensive
high schools must employ a licensed vocational technical su-
pervisor/director of vocational technical education to plan and
supervise the programs.
Ibid.
36. include related instruction that shall be primarily taught by
licensed vocational technical teachers in the speciﬁc program
area. Academic teachers may assist in the delivery of related
instruction components when their particular expertise will
enhance the instruction;
Ibid.
37. (a) All personnel in the vocational technical education program
including academic teachers shall have an appropriate educator
license in accordance with the requirements set forth in 603 CMR
4.00 and 7.00.
Ibid.
38. (b) Non-licensed substitute teachers and teacher (instructional)
aides shall be supervised by an appropriately licensed voca-
tional technical teacher while serving in a vocational technical
laboratory and shall not be allowed to supervise students using
hazardous equipment.
Ibid.
39. (e) Persons with special expertise related to the vocational tech-
nical area of instruction who can strengthen the vocational tech-
nical education program may be employed without a vocational
technical teacher license. Such persons shall work in concert
with, and under the direct supervision of, an appropriately li-
censed vocational technical teacher at all times.
Ibid.
40. (d) The school shall develop and implement a comprehensive
safety and health plan to safeguard the safety and health of all
students and school personnel. The regulations of the Occupa-
tional Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) governing work
sites shall serve as the minimum standards for safety in the vo-
cational technical education program. The plan should include
provisions for safety inspections of all facilities, safety training
for all students and staff and the use, storage and disposal of
toxic and hazardous materials.
For many of the vocational focuses we’re developing, OSHA
standards and even the notion of a ‘worksite’ are poor matches.
It is our job to ensure students are safe, but that does not require
incurring the paperwork costs of full OSHA compliance.
legal affordances
207
41. include a comprehensive safety and health plan, which includes
safety training for all students and staff;
Ibid.
42. meet National Occupational Program Approval Standards as set
forth in "Guidelines for Vocational Technical Education Programs
and Educator Licensure;"
Our curricular autonomy and the Innovation School legislation
preclude this.
43. meet state board/agency approvals, accreditation association
approvals as set forth in the "Guidelines for Vocational Technical
Education Programs and Educator Licensure;"
Ibid.
44. be scheduled so that vocational technical shop instruction, if
scheduled as a full school day, does not exceed ten consecutive
full school days. Shop instruction scheduled for ten consecu-
tive full school days or less must be scheduled for at least the
same number of full school days of academic instruction before
beginning another schedule of shop instruction.
Given our curriculum, the line between ‘technical shop instruc-
tion’ and ‘academics’ is quite blurry. As such, we’d like to be
exempt from this prohibition.
45. (b) A Program of Studies including both academic and tech-
nical programs and courses and the admission policy shall be
published and a copy shall be provided to each student and
parent/guardian.
The individualized nature of the SSA’s programming (not to men-
tion its comparative novelty) mean that a traditional “Program
of Studies” is an inappropriate document for capturing the SSA
experience for families. We’ll be setting up extensive
46. (d) Career guidance and placement services shall be provided to
each student and shall include assessment of all vocational tech-
nical students to determine individual vocational technical and
academic aptitude, interest and learning styles and assistance
with the development of a four-year career plan based on the
assessments. Services shall be provided to assist each student in
making the transition to the workforce, postsecondary education
and apprenticeship programs.
The notion of a ‘four year career plan’ is poorly matched to the
realities of many students’ futures now, especially in the deeply
technical ﬁelds the SSA will be focused on. We plan to maintain
signiﬁcant relationships with alumni, guiding and connecting
them as they move through their ﬁrst postsecondary experiences.
We simply don’t want this to necessarily be encoded as performa-
tive paperwork, the ‘four year plan.’
47. A description of the Exploratory Program;
208
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Because the SSA won’t be organized in terms of traditional career
tracks—and because our seminars will be structured around orga-
nizing questions, not speciﬁc skills—the notion of an “Exploratory
Program” is incoherent.
48. A Review Process and an Appeal Process. A process at the
school district level for students and parents/guardians to re-
view and appeal the decision to deny the student admission to
the school or program shall be included.
We’d like this process to ﬁrst pass through appeal to the principal.
49. (c) Each school shall have a code of conduct which shall include
standards and procedures for suspension and expulsion of stu-
dents in accordance with M.G.L c. 71, Â˘g 37H. The code shall
be published in the Student Handbook and a copy shall be pro-
vided to each student, parent/guardian. Expulsion for reasons
not included in the code shall not be allowed.
Establishing a culture involves establishing a code of conduct,
but the form, format, and tone of a “Student Handbook” insures
that it is not taken seriously. We don’t plan to expel or suspend
students, but to develop individualized interventions responsive
to speciﬁc student issues that retain intellectual, emotional, and
social depth. This cannot be codiﬁed into a Student Handbook or
Code of Conduct, because it puts people ahead of protocol.
50. (d) Each school with postsecondary vocational technical educa-
tion programs shall develop and implement an admission policy
for the postsecondary programs. The policy must be approved
by the Department prior to implementation.
The SSA’s autonomy in deﬁning enrollment processes—as cap-
tured by this Innovation Plan—obviates the Department’s ap-
proval.
51. (e) Each school that admits postgraduate students shall develop
and implement an admission policy for the postgraduate open-
ings. The policy must be approved by the Department prior to
implementation.
Ibid.
52. (a) Vocational Technical Cooperative Education Programs must
be approved by the Department prior to implementation.
The primary role of internships, co-ops, and community integra-
tion in the SSA’s Innovation Plan means not only that this is built
into the Innovation Plan’s approval, but that those offerings will
be constantly changing and growing in a way that makes ongoing
approval incoherent.
53. be supervised by a person holding a Vocational Technical Co-
operative Education Coordinator license or Vocational Technical
Teacher license in the cooperative education program area;
Obviated by SSA Stafﬁng autonomy.
legal affordances
209
54. enroll only those students who are enrolled in an approved voca-
tional technical education program and who have demonstrated
the acquisition of the knowledge and skills in the applicable Vo-
cational Technical Education Framework and the Massachusetts
Curriculum Frameworks associated with at least one and one
half years of full time study in the vocational technical coop-
erative education program area, and in no case enroll students
earlier than midway through the junior year;
Obviated by SSA’s enrollment autonomy.
55. be offered only during time not scheduled for academic classes
during the school year, and may include summer programs;
Obviated by SSA scheduling autonomy.
56. provide students with continuous supervision by the employer;
In many cases, the co-op and internship opportunities that stu-
dents will be participating in will involve projects taking them far
aﬁeld—apprenticing as a machinist involves very different sched-
ules and patterns than apprenticing as a designer. In many cases,
that may involve students working on employer projects under
the supervision of SSA staff and volunteers, meaning ’continuous
supervision’ won’t make sense.
57. provide a written agreement between the school, employer, stu-
dent and parent/guardian delineating the conditions of the
employment including, but not limited to, hours, wages and
time-off. The agreement shall include the skills to be acquired
by the student. The employer shall agree to meet all applicable
requirements of state and federal labor laws and regulations
including, but not limited to, those addressing worker compensa-
tion insurance, equal employment opportunity and occupational
safety and health;
Because the line between advising, mentoring, and employing
will be signiﬁcantly blurred by the SSA, imposing the tax/friction
of drawing up a written contract for every iteration should be
avoided.
58. provide a safety and health orientation speciﬁc to the site for all
employee-students;
Many of the vocational sites for SSA work will not require such
orientations because unlike many traditional vocational programs,
the SSA vocational education is not focused exclusively on en-
deavors requiring specialized equipment. This obviates per-site,
comprehensive orientation programs..
59. (1) In order to receive vocational technical education program
approval, the Superintendent shall submit an application to the
Commissioner that demonstrates the labor market outlook for
the program and compliance with the approval criteria.
210
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
The SSA’s vocational focus does not track easily down to line-item
BLS codes, and much of what accounts for the gaps in vocational
training—e.g. software engineering—is due partially to the delay
and relative inﬂexibility with which vocational programming can
respond to needs and opportunities in the market. The relevance
of the labor market outlook to the SSA’s vocational technical
education program is subsumed by the SSA’s approval by the
School Committee.
60. (4) Substantial changes in any approved program shall be ap-
proved in writing by the Commissioner prior to implementation.
The governance authority here, in the SSA’s setup, lies with the
School Committee.
61. Speciﬁc minimum outcome standards as percentages for each
outcome will be set by the Board every three years.
The governance authority to set these minimum outcomes for the
SSA sits with the Board of Trustees and School Committee.
62. (2) A licensed teacher in that approved vocational technical edu-
cation program area shall provide continuous supervision at the
job site.
Obviated by SSA stafﬁng autonomy.
63. (5) Only those students who are enrolled in an approved voca-
tional technical education program and who have demonstrated
those academic, technical and employability competencies asso-
ciated with at least one and one half years of full time study in
the vocational technical education program project area, and in
no case shall students be allowed to participate in such projects
without a minimum enrollment of at least one year in the voca-
tional technical program.
Many of the co-op and internship opportunities the SSA is con-
sidering are appropriate for novices in ways that traditional vo-
cational education programs might not have had to deal with.
Regardless, the metric of “one and one half years of full time
study” is clearly inappropriate for many of the opportunities, even
relatively straightforward ones like web development. Employ-
ers, students, and SSA staff will be working closely to make sure
projects and relationships are scoped appropriately and managed
to the beneﬁt of both employers and students.
64. Requirements for Licensure, 4.07-4.09
Obviated by SSA stafﬁng autonomy.
65. (d) (for teachers) - evidence of the possession of Massachusetts
and/or national professional government or industry issued
licenses or certiﬁcations required by the government or industry
to work in the technical program area and by the Department
to teach in the vocational technical program area as set forth in
"Guidelines for Vocational Technical Education Programs and
Educator Licensure."
legal affordances
211
Ibid.
66. 44.05: Provisions applicable to licenses renewed before July 1,
2016
Because the SSA’s professional development will often take forms
very different from traditional PD courses, we won’t be relying
on the PDP system. Between this and our stafﬁng autonomy,
the licensing/employment requirements stemming from the
incorporation of PDPs into the state regulations are incoherent.
67. 44.06: Provisions applicable to licenses renewed on or after July
1, 2016
Ibid.
68. (e) statement, signed under penalties of perjury, that the candi-
date has successfully completed the requisite number of PDPs
under a professional development plan.
Ibid.
69. reasonable documentation that validates the completion of each
activity and the number of points accrued.
Ibid.
70. record log of completed license renewal activities, that at a min-
imum includes the topic and type of professional activities com-
pleted, the dates of such activities and the number of points
completed.
Ibid.
71. For the renewal of a Professional Vocational Technical Teacher
license, professional development points (150 points) must be
earned in a minimum of four areas
Ibid.
72. For the renewal of a Professional Vocational Technical Adminis-
trator or Professional Vocational Technical Cooperative Educa-
tion Coordinator license, professional development points (150
points) must be earned for the primary license. Professional de-
velopment must include an additional 30 PDPs in the area of any
additional educator license to be renewed.
Ibid.
73. Vocational Technical educators employed in a Massachusetts
public school must obtain approval of their proposed profes-
sional development plans from their supervisors by the timelines
set out in 603 CMR 4.12(8)(e).
Ibid.
74. Approval of a plan shall be based on whether the PDPs in the
plan are consistent with the educational needs of the school
and/or district
212
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Ibid.
75. (1) Except as provided in 603 CMR 44.07, each license shall be
valid for ﬁve years, and may be renewed for successive ﬁve year
terms upon the successful completion of the requisite number
of PDPs as set forth in 603 CMR 44.05 (1) and 44.06(1) within a
particular ﬁve year active period, based on a professional devel-
opment plan that is designed to improve teaching and student
learning and that is approved, if required, by the educator’s
supervisor.
Ibid.
76. (1) In accordance with G.L. c. 71, Â˘g 38G, educators working
in a Massachusetts public school must obtain approval of their
proposed professional development plans from their supervisors
by the timelines set out in 603 CMR 44.05 (2), and 44.06 (2).
Ibid.
77. (b) Approval of a plan shall be based on whether the 80% of
the PDPs in the plan that are subject to supervisor approval
are consistent with the educational needs of the school and/or
district and whether the plan is designed to enhance the ability
of the educator to improve student learning, and is based on
evidence that it contributes to increased student achievement and
growth.
Ibid.
78. (2) A supervisor shall review each individual professional devel-
opment plan at least every two years. A supervisor shall review
the professional development plan of any educator new to the
district or school within three months of the educator’s begin-
ning employment in the new position.
Ibid.
79. (4) Approval of professional development plans of mathemat-
ics teachers in low-performing mathematics programs shall be
subject to the following additional requirements
Ibid.
80. A supervisor shall review each individual professional develop-
ment plan at least every two years.
Professional development plans at the SSA may not take the IEP-
style format often seen in traditional contexts. The relationship
will be much more like that between managers and team members
in corporations. The only time the SSA guarantees these will be
formalized is in the case of consistent underperformance.
81. (1) Criteria for Candidacy for the Certiﬁcate of Occupational Pro-
ﬁciency In order to qualify as a candidate for the Certiﬁcate of
legal affordances
213
Occupational Proﬁciency in a speciﬁc vocational technical edu-
cation program, a student must possess a portfolio containing at
a minimum a competency proﬁle demonstrating the acquisition
of the knowledge and skills associated with at least two years of
full-time study in the program, as well as a career plan, safety
credential and a resume.
Safety credentials are irrelevant to much of the SSA’s preparation.
82. (2) Criteria for Receiving the Certiﬁcate of Occupational Proﬁ-
ciency In order to receive the Certiﬁcate of Occupational Proﬁ-
ciency, a student must qualify as a candidate for the Certiﬁcate
of Occupational Proﬁciency, have acquired a state competency
determination for high school graduation, and be in good stand-
ing to graduate from the high school in which he/she is enrolled.
The student must receive a passing score, as determined by the
Commissioner, on the written test and the performance test for
the Certiﬁcate of Occupational Proﬁciency.
83. Regulations for Educator Licensure and Preparation Program
Approval
Obviated by SSA Stafﬁng autonomy.
84. The school district shall provide training to all school district
staff, including general and special educators, administrators,
and paraprofessionals, on the requirements of special education.
The SSA will be in charge of this because of the variety of ways
in which the SSA’s non-traditional approach requires we bring in
special education experts to develop programming and capacity
speciﬁc to the SSA’s context.
85. The school district shall provide such staff training in analyzing
and accommodating diverse learning needs of all students in the
general education classroom.
Ibid.
86. The school district shall provide such staff training in methods
of collaboration among teachers, paraprofessionals, and teacher
assistants to accommodate diverse learning needs.
Ibid.
87. (a) Instructional support. The principal shall implement the plan
developed and adopted by the district to ensure that efforts have
been made or will be made to meet the needs of diverse learners
in the general education program.
Obviated by SSA’s autonomies; we will develop and implement
our own plan for meeting the needs of diverse learners.
88. An educational assessment by a representative of the school
district, including
214
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
This assessment will be performed by SSA staff or an expert third
party, designated by the SSA principal.
89. Public funding of independent education evaluations
We’d like the ﬂexibility to make these assessments freely available,
funding permitting. We will provide for at least as much support
as the sliding scale described herein.
90. The IEP shall be completed using the standard IEP format pro-
vided by the Department.
In collaboration with the Department of Special Education in
Somerville, we’d like to reserve the option of developing our
own IEP formats which accommodate and recognize many of the
non-traditional aspects and ﬂexibilities of the SSA more effectively.
91. (c) For any student approaching graduation or the age of twenty-
two, the Team shall determine whether the student is likely to
require continuing services from adult human service agencies.
In such circumstances, the Administrator of Special Education
shall make a referral to the Bureau of Transitional Planning in
the Executive Ofﬁce of Health and Human Services in accor-
dance with the requirements of M.G.L. c. 71B, Â˘g 12A through C
(known as Chapter 688).
We’d like to reserve the option to make other, appropriate refer-
rals, where the determination of what is appropriate is managed
by a combination of the student’s advocate, the SSA principal, and
the director of special education in Somerville.
92. The evaluation system shall include the evaluation cycle set forth
in 603 CMR 35.06.
Obviated by the SSA’s stafﬁng and evaluation autonomy; we’ll be
designing our own system.
93. The evaluation cycle shall include self-assessment addressing
Performance Standards established through collective bargaining
or included in individual employment contracts.
Ibid.
94. The evaluation cycle shall include goal setting and development
of an Educator Plan.
Ibid.
95. The evaluation cycle shall include a summative evaluation, in
which the evaluator determines an overall rating of educator
performance based on the evaluator’s professional judgment and
an examination of evidence that demonstrates the educator’s
performance against Performance Standards and evidence of
the attainment of the Educator Plan goals. The educator shall
have the opportunity to respond in writing to the summative
evaluation.
Ibid.
legal affordances
215
96. For any experienced educator who receives an evaluation rating
of Unsatisfactory, the district shall place the educator on an
Improvement Plan. The educator shall receive a summative
evaluation at the end of the period determined by the evaluator
for the Plan.
Ibid.
97. A teacher without professional teacher status, an administrator
in the ﬁrst three years in a position in a district, or an educator
in a new assignment, may be placed on a Developing Educator
Plan. The educator shall be evaluated at least annually.
Ibid.
98. Additional evidence relevant to one or more Performance Stan-
dards, including, but not limited to: Student feedback collected
by the district, starting in the 2013-2014 school year.
Ibid.
99. Additional evidence relevant to one or more Performance Stan-
dards, including, but not limited to: Staff feedback (with respect
to administrators) collected by the district
100. Each educator shall receive one of four ratings on each Perfor-
mance Standard and overall.
Ibid.
101. Professional teacher status, pursuant to G.L. ch. 71, Â˘g 41,
should be granted only to educators who have achieved rat-
ings of proﬁcient or exemplary on each Performance Standard
and overall. A principal considering making an employment
decision that would lead to professional teacher status for any
educator who has not been rated proﬁcient or exemplary on each
Performance Standard and overall on the most recent evalua-
tion shall confer with the superintendent of schools by May 1.
The principal’s decision is subject to review and approval by the
superintendent.
Obviated by the SSA’s stafﬁng autonomy.
102. (1) Student Performance Measures as described in 603 CMR
35.07(1)(a)(3-5) shall be the basis for determining an educator’s
impact on student learning, growth, and achievement.
Obviated by our stafﬁng and evaluation autonomy and the gover-
nance system setting up our local accountability.
103. At least two state or district-wide measures of student learning
gains shall be employed at each school, grade, and subject in
determining impact on student learning, as follows
Ibid.
216
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
104. (3) Based on a review of trends and patterns of state and district
measures of student learning gains, the evaluator will assign
the rating on growth in student performance consistent with
Department guidelines
Ibid.
105. (4) For an educator whose overall performance rating is exem-
plary or proﬁcient and whose impact on student learning is low,
the evaluator’s supervisor shall discuss and review the rating
with the evaluator and the supervisor shall conﬁrm or revise the
educator’s rating. In cases where the superintendent serves as
the evaluator, the superintendent’s decision on the rating shall
not be subject to such review. When there are signiﬁcant dis-
crepancies between evidence of student learning, growth, and
achievement and the evaluator’s judgment on educator per-
formance ratings, the evaluator’s supervisor may note these
discrepancies as a factor in the evaluator’s evaluation.
Ibid.
106. (5) Notwithstanding 603 CMR 44.05 and 603 CMR 44.06, any
core academic teacher, principal, assistant principal, or supervi-
sor/director supervising or evaluating a core academic teacher,
who fails to earn an SEI endorsement by the time designated for
his or her cohort established pursuant to 603 CMR 14.07(2), will
not be eligible to renew his or her license until such educator
earns an SEI endorsement. Provided however, in accordance with
603 CMR 14.07(2), upon a showing of hardship, the Department
may grant an educator an extension of time beyond the date
designated for his or her cohort to earn an SEI endorsement.
Ibid.
Supporting Documents
The Somerville STEAM Academy —
An Innovation School Prospectus
last revised July 18, 2012
drafted by A. Resnick (principal, sprout
& co.) and G. Nadeau (co-founder,
Somerville Children’s Network).
Any questions or concerns should
be directed to Alec Resnick at
alec@thesprouts.org.
This prospectus sets down a vision for a new kind of a school—an In-
novation School1 within Somerville High School called the Somerville
1 The Massachusetts Innovation Schools
Initiative provides for in-district,
charter-like schools.
STEAM Academy. A collaboration between the Mayor’s Ofﬁce, the
Somerville Public Schools, the Somerville Children’s Network, and
sprout & co. , the Somerville STEAM Academy as proposed is a project
based high school opening in Fall 2013 to ~50 Somerville students.
The curricular focus will be on unifying art and science through an
integrative focus on computing.
This prospectus is just barely a ﬁrst step. Most details and design
decisions will be ﬂeshed out during the design phase by an Innovation
Plan Committee. But only the approval of the Superintendent, School
Committee, and Teacher’s Association can get us there.
§
Contents
Executive Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
Public Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
Innovation School Vision, Mission, and Statement of Need
. .
4
How Will Autonomy & Flexibility Be Used?
. . . . . . . . . . .
6
Capacity of Applicant Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
Proposed Development & Establishment Timetable . . . . . . .
11
Administrivia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
2
Executive Summary
“It is only in the presence of loving, respectful, trusting adults . . . that
children will learn all they are capable of learning . . . The tinkerers,
dissectors, and manipulators will only drive children into artiﬁcial
behavior; if not actual deception, evasion, and retreat.”
— John Holt, How Children Learn
What would it take for Somerville to become the best place to
live, work, play, and raise a family? Whatever your answer, we need
ﬁrst-class learning opportunities made equitably available to achieve our
ambitions. Though Somerville is known nationally for its municipal
innovation, the performance and reputation of the Somerville School
System has lagged despite a demonstrated commitment to change.2
2 Although voted best-managed city,
Somerville is in the top 10% in per
capita school budget and bottom 10% in
MCAS performance.
While confronting poverty and equity challenges rivaling those of
Gateway Cities like New Bedford3, we sit at a nexus of world-class
3 e.g. 65% of Somerville students are on
free or reduced lunch.
educational institutions, a vibrant arts scene, and a diverse commu-
nity. We are situated to reinvent urban education like few (if any)
other cities in the United States. Ideas born here stand to have na-
tional impact; we’ve the chance to become a national hub for innovation in
urban learning and teaching.
The Somerville STEAM4 Academy (SSA) will be Somerville’s
4 STEAM ≡Science, Technology,
Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics
next step on a path toward educational excellence and equity for
its families. The SSA’s focus on structural and curricular innovation
will offer an opportunity to foster constructive disruption within and
alongside the existing school system, avoiding the top-down design
processes and adversarial dynamics dooming many reform efforts
and instead offering a workable path forward.5 Through partnerships
5 The Massachusetts Innovation School
Initiative make transformative experi-
ments possible while keeping funding
in the district, close to those who know
Somerville best. The SSA will be head-
quartered at Somerville High School,
issue Somerville High School diplomas,
and work closely with Somerville High
School teachers to ensure design and
stafﬁng decisions fully beneﬁt from
their accumulated experience.
with institutions like MIT and ties to an expanding base of innovative
community organizations like Parts & Crafts and Artisan’s Asylum,
the SSA will help make community-driven approaches to education,
enrichment, and student support possible for all Somerville Schools.
The mission of the SSA is simple: to cultivate learners’ scientiﬁc
curiosity & the hands-on capacity for creative, independent inves-
tigation & engineering required to follow through on that curiosity.
The SSA’s design and operation will be deﬁned by three, core themes
implementing that mission:
• Autonomy and the executive skills supporting it are increasingly
essential in creative knowledge work. The SSA’s focus on collabo-
rative, hands-on projects is motivated by the recognition that we
all must become lifelong learners capable of managing ourselves,
our projects, and our collaborations.
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
3
• Computing principles—not simply technology, but the ideas
behind algorithms, networks, data processing, and so on—are
becoming fundamental to modern intellectual and economic life.
The integration of simulation and computational environments
will ensure ﬂuency in computational thinking and programming,
just as current models are designed to ensure written ﬂuency.
• Critical creativity refers to the capacity to integrate technical
and artistic modes in reﬂection and critique. The SSA’s cross-
disciplinary themes and project-based curricula will emphasize
the skill to which Steve Jobs traced Apple’s success: the ability to
integrate technology and the liberal arts.
Differentiated modes will comfortably
transition students from traditional
contexts to autonomous investigation.
The SSA is a novel, hybrid model combining project-based
curricula, computing technology, and a distributed community in-
tegration to enable a personalized, mastery-based process which
works forward from learners’ interests. Three academic modes (small
group tutoring, topic seminars, and self-directed projects) will struc-
ture cross-disciplinary themes like biomechanics and computational
art. These modes will scaffold students’ growth from a traditional
classroom environment to self-directed investigation.6 The SSA will
6 Note that “self-directed” does not mean
solitary—collaboration is a natural mode
for learners and co-teaching will be
emphasized.
also be a center for professional development opportunities for all
Somerville educators offerings workshops around new technolo-
gies, an environment for prototyping curricula, and funded time for
co-planning and reﬂection.
From TechBoston Academy to High
Tech High, the SSA brings together
components of several, innovative
models to ﬁt Somerville’s unique
situation.
But ’novel’ does not mean ’shot in the dark:’ the SSA com-
bines several, successful models to ﬁt Somerville. The Harlem Chil-
dren’s Zone’s community integration and emphasis on equity, High
Tech High’s project-driven curricula and emphasis on professional
development, the industry partnerships and emphasis on technolog-
ical ﬂuency of NYC’s Academy for Software Engineering, and Tech-
Boston Academy’s emphasis on a a nurturing environment. Even the
innovation hub strategy uniting school and community is inspired by
the original innovation hub: Xerox PARC.
As a joint project between sprout & co., the Somerville Children’s
Network, the District, and the City, collaboration deﬁnes the SSA.
We are applying for $450,000 from the Gates Foundation7 to sup-
7 via Wave iii(a) of EDUCAUSE’s Next
Generation Learning Challenge
port the the SSA’s design process. The Mayor’s Ofﬁce has committed
to matching $300,000 of that support. It’s exactly that type of com-
mitment which demonstrates there is something new and exciting
here in Somerville. We hope this prospectus will start the ball rolling
toward a future Somerville can be proud of.
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
4
Public Statement
The City of Somerville is committed to becoming the best place to
live, work, play, and raise a family. Without equitably available, ﬁrst-
class educational opportunities, we cannot realize those ambitions.
The Somerville STEAM Academy (SSA) will be a high school (open-
ing Fall 2013 to ~50 students grades 9–12) founded on a novel model
unifying artistic & scientiﬁc modes with immersive, project-based
curricula emphasizing computational thinking. We hope the SSA will
be one of many steps making Somerville a world class hub of inno-
vation in urban teaching and learning, pioneering a replicable model
for constructive disruption of school-as-it-is.
Innovation School Vision, Mission, and Statement of Need
“Visions give people a direction and inspire people to act, and a group
of inspired people is the most powerful force in the world. If you’re a
young person setting off to realize a vision, or an old person setting off
to fund one, I really want it to be something worthwhile.”
— Bret Victor, “A Brief Rant on the Future of Interaction Design
Our vision
Somerville Public Schools struggle with the same urban
challenges of intense poverty, linguistic diversity, and social mobility
facing many other communities. But Somerville has a unique set of
human and organizational resources which enable us to not just solve
our own problems and become a ﬁrst-class district but to pioneer
innovations with national relevance. More artists per capita than any-
where besides New York City, proximity to world-class educational
institutions, and a burgeoning sector of innovative community orga-
nizations inspire our vision of Somerville transformed into a world-class
center of innovation in urban learning & teaching.
Figure 1: The SSA’s core responsibility
is the reconciliation of the real world’s
social and economic demands with the
creative and developmental demands of
raising happy, empowered children.
Our mission
The SSA’s mission grows from a recognition that as
a society, we task school with the responsibility of reconciling the
social and economic demands of the ‘real world’ with the creative
and developmental demands of raising happy, empowered children.
But, the real world is in a state of constant disruption driven largely
by continually accelerating technological progress. And while the
future is unclear, we know the capacity to independently integrate
the creative and technical will be key.
The Somerville STEAM Academy is dedicated to equipping learn-
ers not just with the necessary scientiﬁc and artistic training, but
the investigative, independent mindset needed to thrive. Bud Cadell
summed it up well: you need to ﬁnd the intersection of what you
do well, what you want to do, and what you can be paid to do. For
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
5
the SSA, that focus translates into a simple mission: to cultivate learn-
ers’ scientiﬁc curiosity & the hands-on capacity for creative, independent
investigation & engineering required to follow through on that curiosity.
Why Somerville?
Equity is an expected challenge in a community
as diverse as Somerville. While closing the achievement gap needs
to be our ﬁrst priority, those efforts cannot come at the expense of
the rigor or excellence of the educational opportunities available in
Somerville.8 While Somerville Public Schools have demonstrated an
8 Otherwise we will end up right back
where we started: in the midst of
increasing gentriﬁcation and social
stratiﬁcation accompanied by declining
enrollments.
admirable capacity to come together and diligently work to improve,
if a school system as committed as ours struggles, it is clear that
new models acknowledging Somerville’s unique challenges and
opportunities are needed.
Despite a median income greater than Massachusetts and above
the national average, nearly 65% of Somerville Public School stu-
dents receive free- or reduced lunch,9 making “preparing students
9 as reported by Somerville School
News in 2009
for the 21st century” all the more challenging. Fortunately, compared
to Gateway Cities10 with similar school populations, Somerville’s
10 a group of 24 former mill cities strug-
gling with the transition to a knowledge
economy—they have a population
35,000–250,000, and below-average
household incomes and educational
attainment rates.
density, proximity to world class educational institutions, and vibrant
community of creative businesses—offers much greater room to in-
novate. We are in a unique position to prototype the future of urban
learning. Massachusetts’ Innovation School Initiative now makes it
possible to develop a path forward for Somerville, one free of the ac-
rimony and adversarialism associated with past experiences with the
charter model.
To avoid an ever-tightening spiral of declining enrollment and
the increasingly challenging academic, social, and economic conse-
quences of our stark achievement gap, Somerville must re-imagine
school from the ground up. But really, we must go beyond “imagin-
ing” and focus on prototyping novel solutions on the ground. We think
the Somerville STEAM Academy (and the team behind it) is the R&D
high school needed to do that.
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
6
How Will Autonomy & Flexibility Be Used?
“I would suggest that one reason education reform has not worked
is that it almost always treats these dimensions [of curriculum and
organization] as separate . . . Curriculum reformers try to put new
curriculum in an otherwise unchanged system but ignore the fact that
the old curriculum really suits the system and reverts to type as soon
as the reformers turn their backs. Similarly, when reformers introduce
new forms of management of the old approach to knowledge and
learning, the system quickly snaps back to its state of equilibrium.”
— Seymour Papert, “Perestroika and Epistemological Politics”
Mathematica et al exemplify a burgeon-
ing class of accessible toolkits enabling
an unprecedented breadth and depth of
computational explorations.
Curriculum
The Somerville STEAM Academy’s curriculum will fo-
cus on the integration of creative and technical modes of expression
and investigation. The future of creative knowledge work is domi-
nated by collaborative teams communicating and solving open-ended
design problems crossing disciplinary boundaries. The SSA will de-
velop the executive and analytic skills students will need to embrace
the uncertain future, regardless of what the domains or tools du jour
may be.
This ambition is reﬂected in the SSA’s cross-disciplinary curricular
themes like biomechanics & computational art which will in turn
leverage sophisticated computational toolkits and environments like
Mathematica, Processing, and Arduino. In every subject, the focus will
be students’ growth into independent investigators.11
11 At the SSA, students will eventually
be in charge not only of project man-
agement, but ancillary activities like
online project documentation as well.
Achieving and documenting parity between these themes and the
Core Curriculum will be one of the primary responsibilities of SSA
administration; it will not be a concern of teachers or students (whose
job, after all, is to learn & explore deeply together). Any additional
instructional attention required will be provided for by SSA tutoring
services.
Instruction
The SSA’s mission emphasizes learner autonomy. Devel-
oping students’ ability to manage themselves and their investigations
will be a priority. To do this, three tiers of instructional support will
scaffold the transition from traditional classroom contexts to self-
directed collaboration and investigation: (i) small group tutoring,
(ii) topic seminars, and (iii) self-directed projects.
Figure 2: Instructional options at SSA
will be differentiated to comfortably
transition students from traditional
contexts to self-directed investigation.
The majority of instructional time will eventually be devoted to
immersive, long-term projects managed by students and mentored by
a combination of teachers and community members. These projects
will be complemented by two other modes: ongoing topic seminars
introducing students to particular subject domains and toolsets, and
small group co-teaching and tutoring. The small group teaching
and tutoring will create a familiar environment for students with
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
7
additional ﬂexibility & intimacy. Over time, students will seek this
close-range instruction less and less, eventually relying primarily on
topic seminars, personal projects, and self-directed projects.
Assessment
Assessment’s purpose is to help us do right by our stu-
dents. That means assessment structures should enable teachers and
students to make better decisions about how to support and work
with one another. Structures like MCAS are a fact of life, but they are
not useful when considering an individual student’s intellectual and
emotional development.
“Not everything that can be counted
counts, and not everything that counts
can be counted.”
— Albert Einstein
The SSA’s focus on developing an individual’s capacity for sci-
entiﬁc and creative exploration at a pace and in a direction person-
alized for each student means standardized testing cannot provide
feedback at high enough resolution to usefully inform the design
of tools, materials, and projects. So of course while MCAS perfor-
mance will be an aggregate metric we attend to, the SSA will need
higher ﬁdelity methods to get the feedback needed to make the most
of our time with students. That ﬁdelity and depth will be provided
by an anthropological assessment program complementing the SSA’s
project-based curricula and focus on learner autonomy.
This anthropological assessment program will create new staff
positions responsible for interviewing students and supporting the
documentation of their projects, unifying work across self-directed
projects, topic seminars, and small group tutoring. Project-based cur-
ricula often pose a challenge for traditional assessment. Assessment
at the SSA will embrace the multifaceted nature of project work. The
anthropological assessment process will map student and teacher
work to the Common Core, document competency, and inform the
design of future projects and topic seminars on a student-by-student
basis to ensure that everyone—in a personalized and self-paced
way—covers the required material. Any remaining gaps or issues
will be addressed in ongoing small group tutoring sessions through-
out the year.
“To be effective, every knowledge
worker . . . needs to be able to dispose
of time in fairly large chunks. To have
small dribs and drabs of time at his
disposal will not be sufﬁcient even if
the total is an impressive number of
hours. . . . Moreover, because knowledge
work cannot be measured the way
manual work can, one cannot tell a
knowledge worker in a few simple
words whether he is doing the right job
and how well he is doing it.”
— Peter Drucker, The Effective Executive
Schedule & Calendar
Real projects don’t ﬁt into a single period. Cre-
ativity and innovation are hard to schedule. Building a school which
accommodates the organic structure and pace of creative knowl-
edge work requires ﬂexibility. The Somerville STEAM Academy will
operate year-round, with curricular and professional development
happening in parallel with student projects, topic seminars, and tu-
toring.
The nature of the project-based curricula and the prominent role
of mentorship and community connection in the SSA means both
teachers and students will be found working on their projects and
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
8
classes outside of traditional class hours.12 This will present a unique
12 That said, the minimum total time
involved will not exceed State require-
ments.
challenge for the SSA: much of the school experience is social, and a
coherent social fabric is key to a healthy learning community.
To address this, the SSA will work closely with students, teachers,
and community mentors to develop a plan allowing them to choose
the timing and distribution of their vacation time. The SSA will work
closely with students to ensure the availability of their peers’ social
support and academically relevant mentorship and job opportunities
throughout the year. This arrangement requires further study and
elaboration; its details (and their framing within state requirements)
will be ﬂeshed out during the design phase of the Innovation School
process.
Stafﬁng Policies and Procedures
The SSA is committed to creating a
path forward for all Somerville teachers and students. We will rely
on and work closely with Somerville teachers and make capitalizing
on their expertise and experience a top priority. The SSA’s focus on
community integration and partnership also means we will be able
to contract with providers from the community, bringing in mentors
from local businesses and organizations, relying on signiﬁcant family
and community outreach to establish the level of transparency and
accessibility to which the SSA is committed.
Professional Development
At the SSA, teachers will be expected to be
investigators just as students are. Acknowledging that the future is
uncertain and that the ability to manage yourself and your peers in
creative and open-ended investigations is central, professional devel-
opment will be an equal priority to student development. The long-
term success of students, the SSA, and Somerville Public Schools as a
whole requires ongoing commitment to the development of the best
teachers and learners.
Going beyond this, the SSA will function as a center for pro-
fessional development, enrichment, and prototyping for teachers
throughout Somerville. Among other offerings, the SSA will provide
workshops introducing teachers to new technologies, room to try
out new pedagogies in a reﬂective environment, funded time for
co-planning and reﬂection, and a venue and organization to bring
interesting speakers to the area. Not only will teachers be encouraged
to prototype new materials for the beneﬁt of their own students, but
the SSA will explicitly support teachers’ efforts to share and spread
their material, helping them develop content and potentially branch-
ing out into learning microbusinesses through infrastructure like
udemy13
13 an online infrastructure letting people
build and sell courses online. Their
stated goal is “to disrupt and democ-
ratize education by enabling anyone to
learn from the world’s experts.”
All this stems naturally from the dual ambition to make Somerville
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
9
a world-class hub of innovation in education and the recognition that
that requires doing the hard work to provide a path forward for all
Somerville teachers.
District Policies and Procedures
Especially in innovative startups, clear
and accountable leadership is key. While hierarchy excels at main-
taining predictability and repeatability by simplifying planning and
control, the rigors of hierarchy waste most of creative people’s poten-
tial to contribute. Reconciling these competing pressures requires the
SSA’s structure be very ﬂat—there will be no deans or middle man-
agement. The principal will be in charge and completely accountable
for preventing and managing any issues that arise. The chain of ac-
countability will ﬂow directly from student to teacher to principal.
Figure 3: The principal will be held
solely responsible for ensuring SSA’s
success and will be reviewed quarterly
by the Community and SSA Boards.
Working groups responsible for cross-
cutting concerns like IT will play a
support role. Outside of these struc-
tures, there will be no hierarchy at the
SSA.
Cross-disciplinary, project-based curricula are a poor match for
traditional departments organized by subject. Instead, the SSA will
feature working groups responsible for ensuring excellent service to
teachers along cross-cutting concerns like technological infrastruc-
ture, professional development, community outreach, etc. Quarterly,
the various groups at SSA will be reviewed by teachers and students,
and it will be the principal’s responsibility to design and enact poli-
cies addressing issues raised.
Budget
The SSA’s focus on technologically enabled, project-based
curricula means material and technology costs will be larger than
normal. Similarly, the SSA’s professional development budget will be
larger than normal to accommodate teachers’ ongoing investigations
(which we expect will often require ancillary training, hardware, or
software). While the innovations for which the SSA will be respon-
sible will require greater discretionary spending in the prototyping
and design stages, these budgetary details will be ﬂeshed out in the
course of the Innovation School design process.
Capacity of Applicant Group
N.B. This prospectus was drafted by
Alec Resnick (principal at sprout & co.)
and Greg Nadeau, co-founder of the
Somerville Children’s Network.
sprout & co.
The Somerville Children’s Network approached sprout
about the prospect of starting an Innovation School within Somerville
High School. Shaunalynn, Michael, and Alec have between them
nearly two decades of combined experience teaching, designing cur-
ricula, coordinating professional development, and creating hardware
and software tools to support learning STEM content. They have
been intimately involved in the startup and management of a vari-
ety of organizations ranging from the HONK! Committee to nublabs
(an educational technology startup) to Camp Kaleidoscope (a sci-
ence and arts summer camp) to sprout & co. itself. Each has a strong
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
10
technical background and has collaborated closely with teachers and
administrators in professional development, teaching, and manage-
rial contexts. And since starting sprout, each has managed teams
of volunteers of all sizes in designing and coordinating educational
programs.
In founding sprout, our primary motivation was to transform
the way we think about learning and research. We chose Somerville
as a place to live and work for a host of reasons ranging from its
diversity to its tightly knit communities to its social and economic
challenges to its proximity to world-class educational institutions. We
started with the conviction—which has only grown—that Somerville
has the ingredients to become a world-class locus of educational
innovation. When we were approached about the prospect of starting
an Innovation School, we felt the opportunity was a natural ﬁt for all
involved and that—with help from existing teachers and Somerville
families—sprout & co. would be up to the task.14
14 Of course, there are gaps in our
background—notably in public sector
legal and ﬁnancial management. That
said, we’re conﬁdent that we can
address these gaps through prudent
hiring and collaboration.
Somerville Children’s Network (SCN)
A 501(c)3 non-proﬁt, the Somerville
Children’s Network (SCN) is dedicated to making Somerville the best
possible urban place to live, work, play, and raise a family. SCN’s
BBQ co-op events have connected families across Somerville and
build the foundation for many of the community efforts currently
underway. Over the past ten years, SCN has raised funds provid-
ing hundreds of hours of pre-school indoor play spaces, after school
clubs such as Not Just Lego, and family-oriented activities such as
Somerville Youth Build and Sail.
Greg Nadeau, SCN co-founder, is a manager at PCG with over
seventeen years of experience leading state longitudinal data sys-
tems: eight on the public side as Chief Information Ofﬁcer of the
Massachusetts Department of Education, and ten in the private sector
consulting with private companies, education organizations and state
governments. Mr. Nadeau served on the Board of Directors of the
School Interoperability Framework Association (SIFA) and as an ex-
pert consultant to the Council of Chief State School Ofﬁcers (CCSSO).
In 2001, Mr. Nadeau created and led the US Open e-Learning Con-
sortium, a 14-state USED-funded project. The primary objective of
the consortium was to harvest released high-stakes, assessment items
to create a pool for low-stakes interim assessments. Mr. Nadeau
has directed successful statewide education data projects in Mas-
sachusetts, South Carolina, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Illinois, and
Utah, and participated in projects with dozens of other states. From
2009–2011 he successfully led CCSSO’s State Core Model project and
he currently leads the team developing the CEDS Logical Model for
the National Center for Education Statistics.
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
11
Proposed Development & Establishment Timetable
The time leading up to the opening of the Somerville STEAM Academy
will manifest its focus on community-driven, rapid prototyping pro-
cesses. After this prospectus is submitted, the Superintendent will
convene a screening committee15 who will approve or reject the
15 comprising “the superintendent or a
designee, a school committee member
or a designee selected by the school
committee and a representative from
the leadership of the local teacher’s
union”
prospectus within thirty days assessing whether the prospectus: (i)
presents a sound and coherent plan for improving school perfor-
mance and student achievement; (ii) supports or enhances existing
educational efforts in the district; and (iii) reasonably can be ex-
panded into a comprehensive innovation plan.
Upon prospectus approval, sprout & co. will convene the Innova-
tion Plan Committee (IPC)16 as well as a Community Board, compris-
16 minimally (i) the applicant; (ii) the
superintendent or designee; (iii) a
school committee member or designee;
(iv) a district parent, (v) a district
principal; and (vi) two district teachers.
ing representative members—both students and families—from the
Somerville community.
Figure 4: The Innovation Plan design
process will emphasize community
engagement and lo-ﬁprototyping
activities like workshops and talks.
sprout & co. will organize the process
and work closely with the Innovation
Plan Committee to create drafts of the
plan shared with the community, City,
and District in a continuous feedback
loop.
In parallel with the development of the Innovation Plan, sprout et al
will coordinate a series of workshops and events meant to concretely
expose families in Somerville to the questions, issues, and options
being discussed and incorporated into plan drafts. The draft of the
Innovation Plan, along with discussions around it, will be hosted
publicly using systems like Google Docs. A Community Design
Group comprising representative community members will provide
short-order input on drafts and facilitate the community engagement
and feedback process.
As portions of the Innovation Plan are solidiﬁed, sprout will coor-
dinate an ongoing series of Somerville STEAM Academy “SneakPeeks”
in partnerships with families and community organizations. These
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
12
“SneakPeeks” will take the form of ﬁlm screenings, workshops, and
open houses serving three functions:
1. provide the design team concrete feedback on the proposed Inno-
vation Plan by putting people in touch with prospective staff and
characteristic educational experiences
2. connect the design team directly to the community, facilitating
honest, authentic community engagement and providing ample
room for discourse
3. publicize the school and begin recruitment of students and staff
Figure 5: SSA enrollment process
will comprise (i) public SneakPeeks
to ensure community engagement,
(ii) an interview process, and (iii) an
enrollment lottery, creating a pool
guaranteed to match Somerville High’s
demographic proﬁle.
At this time, sprout will also being the hiring process, bringing in po-
tential hires to run SneakPeeks and take part in the process of draft-
ing and discussing the Innovation Plan. After the Innovation Plan is
ﬁnalized, the public hearing held, and School Committee approval
obtained, SneakPeeks will be in full swing and enrollment interviews
will begin. This interview process will be mandated to produce a
pool which will be able to constitute an inaugural class reﬂecting
Somerville High School’s demographic proﬁle. This pool will be en-
tered into a lottery which will determine the SSA’s inaugural class.
In the summer before the SSA’s Fall 2013 opening, enrolled students
will begin their preparation in the form of internships, focused work-
shops, and social events preparing the social and academic fabric for
the Fall 2013 launch.
Tentative schedule
June 2012
prospectus submitted · screening committee convened ·
prospectus approved
July 2012
Innovation Plan Committee convened · Community De-
sign Group meetings begin
Fall 2012
SneakPeeks begin · Community Board convened · cur-
riculum & assessment materials developed · Innovation Plan v1, v2 ·
facilities selected · budget ﬁnalized · teacher approval
Winter 2012
student recruitment begins · operations & teaching staff
hired · professional development begins · Innovation Plan v3
Spring 2013
students recruited · professional development continues
· Innovation Plan ﬁnalized
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
13
Summer 2013
professional development continues · workshops
introducing students to staff and curriculum · Innovation Plan Public
Hearing · School Committee authorization.
June 2013
Enrolled students begin internships, workshops. · So-
cial events, movie screenings, ﬁeld trips coordinate throughout the
summer. · Professional development and curriculum ﬁnished.
Fall 2013
The Somerville STEAM Academy opens!
Summer 2014
First national news coverage of Somerville High
School for innovation in urban learning and teaching.
Summer 2017
First SSA class graduates, school-wide MCAS perfor-
mance in the top ten percent of the state.
Fall 2018
Second and third small-school model Innovation Schools
open in Somerville, inspired by transformations pioneered by the
SSA
Spring 2020
Three out of four students are in an Innovation School
environment weekly.
Fall 2020
“The Somerville Model” is taught at education schools
around the country after enormous success in Somerville publicized
by reports from the Kaufmann Foundation and McKinsey & Com-
pany
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
14
Administrivia
Statements of Commitment
By signing this document, I acknowledge that I have read the pro-
visions of the Massachusetts’ Innovation School statute G.L. Chap-
ter 71, Section 92 – Innovation Schools, and the Somerville STEAM
Academy Innovation School proposal, and that I approve of our
proposal and the opportunity to participate in the Massachusetts’
Innovation School initiative.
N.B. Applicant resumes are enclosed at
the end of this prospectus.
• Shaunalynn Duffy
• Michael Nagle
• Alec Resnick
• Greg Nadeau
G.L. Chapter 71, Section 92 – Innovation Schools
Section 92
(a) An Innovation School shall be a public school, operating within
a public school district, that is established for the purpose of im-
proving school performance and student achievement through
increased autonomy and ﬂexibility. An Innovation School may be
established as a new public school or as a conversion of an existing
public school. A student who is enrolled in a school at the time
it is established as an Innovation School shall retain the ability to
remain enrolled in the school if the student chooses to do so.
(b) An Innovation School may establish an advisory board of trustees.
An Innovation School shall have increased autonomy and ﬂexibil-
ity in 1 or more of the following areas:
(i) curriculum;
(ii) budget;
(iii) school schedule and calendar;
(iv) stafﬁng policies and procedures, including waivers from or
modiﬁcations to, contracts or collective bargaining agreements;
(v) school district policies and procedures; and
(vi) professional development. An Innovation School shall receive
each school year from the school committee the same per pupil
allocation as any other district school receives. An Innovation
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
15
School may retain any unused funds and use the funds in sub-
sequent school years. An Innovation School may establish a
non-proﬁt organization that may, among other things, assist the
school with fundraising. A district shall not reduce its funding
to an Innovation School as a result of the school’s fundraising
activities.
(c) An Innovation School established under this section shall be au-
thorized by the local school committee and shall operate according
to an innovation plan, which shall articulate the areas of autonomy
and ﬂexibility under subsection (b). To the extent practicable, the
innovation plan shall be based on student outcome data, includ-
ing, but not limited to:
(i) student achievement on the Massachusetts Comprehensive
Assessment System;
(ii) other measures of student achievement, approved by the com-
missioner, as appropriate;
(iii) student promotion, graduation rates and dropout rates;
(iv) achievement data for different subgroups of students, in-
cluding low-income students as deﬁned by chapter 70, limited
English-proﬁcient students and students receiving special edu-
cation; and
(v) student attendance, dismissal rates and exclusion rates. An
Innovation School shall operate in accordance with the law
regulating other public schools, except as the law conﬂicts with
this section or any innovation plans created thereunder.
(d) An Innovation School is a school in which:
(i) faculty and leadership are primarily responsible for developing
the innovation plan under which the school operates and lead-
ership is responsible for meeting the terms of the innovation
plan; or
(ii) an external partner is primarily responsible for developing
the innovation plan under which the school operates and the
external partner is responsible for meeting the terms of the
innovation plan.
(e) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit:
(i) the establishment of an Innovation School as an academy
within an existing public school;
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
16
(ii) the establishment of an Innovation School serving students
from 2 or more school districts; provided, however, that all of
the provisions of this section are met by each school district;
(iii) the simultaneous establishment of 2 or more Innovation
Schools as an Innovation Schools Zone within a school district;
or
(iv) the establishment of an Innovation School as a virtual public
school that provides instruction to students through distance
learning, including online learning programs and courses, sub-
ject to regulations adopted by the board of elementary and
secondary education.
(f) The following shall be eligible applicants for the purposes of
establishing an Innovation School:
(i) parents;
(ii) teachers;
(iii) parent-teacher organizations;
(iv) principals;
(v) superintendents;
(vi) school committees;
(vii) teacher unions;
(viii) (viii) colleges and universities;
(ix) non-proﬁt community-based organizations;
(x) non-proﬁt business or corporate entities;
(xi) non-proﬁt charter school operators;
(xii) non-proﬁt education management organizations;
(xiii) educational collaboratives;
(xiv) consortia of these groups; and
(xv) non-proﬁt entities authorized by the commissioner. Private
and parochial schools shall not be eligible to operate an Innova-
tion School.
(g) The local school committee, local teacher’s union and superin-
tendent of the district shall follow a process, consistent with this
subsection and subsections (h) to (o), inclusive, for which an ex-
isting district school may be converted to an Innovation School
or by which a new Innovation School may be established within
the district. This process shall require that an eligible applicant
proposing to establish an Innovation School prepare a prospectus
regarding the proposed school. The prospectus shall include, but
not be limited to, a description of:
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
17
(i) whether the school will be a new school or a conversion of an
existing school;
(ii) if the school is a new school, the proposed location of the
school;
(iii) if the school is a conversion of an existing school, the school
that is being proposed for conversion;
(iv) the external partners, if any, that will be involved in the
school;
(v) the number of students the school is anticipated to serve and
the number of staff expected to be employed at the school;
(vi) the overall vision for the school, including improving school
performance and student achievement;
(vii) speciﬁc needs or challenges the school shall be designed to
address;
(viii) (viii) a preliminary assessment of the autonomy and ﬂexibil-
ity under subsection (b) that the school will seek;
(ix) why such ﬂexibility is desirable to carry out the objectives of
the school;
(x) anticipated components of the school’s innovation plan;
(xi) a preliminary description of the process that shall be used
to involve appropriate stakeholders in the development of the
innovation plan; and
(xii) a proposed timetable for development and establishment of
the proposed school.
(h) Upon completion of the prospectus under subsection (g), an eli-
gible applicant shall submit the prospectus to the superintendent,
who shall within 30 days convene a screening committee con-
sisting of the superintendent or a designee, a school committee
member or a designee selected by the school committee and a rep-
resentative from the leadership of the local teacher’s union. The
screening committee shall review the prospectus for the purpose
of determining whether the prospectus:
(i) presents a sound and coherent plan for improving school per-
formance and student achievement;
(ii) supports or enhances existing educational efforts in the dis-
trict; and
(iii) reasonably can be expanded into a comprehensive innovation
plan. In the case of a new school, the committee will prepare
an impact statement describing how the new school will affect
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
18
the children and faculty in the district. Within 30 days of receiv-
ing a prospectus, the screening committee shall decide, on the
basis of a two-thirds vote, to accept or reject the prospectus, or
return the prospectus to the eligible applicant for revisions. If a
prospectus is rejected or returned, the screening committee shall
submit a detailed explanation for the decision to the applicant.
A prospectus that is rejected or returned may be revised and
resubmitted for subsequent consideration.
(i) Upon the acceptance of a prospectus by the screening committee
under subsection (h), the applicant shall form an innovation plan
committee of not more than 11 individuals within 30 days. The
purpose of the innovation plan committee shall be to:
(i) develop the innovation plan described in subsection (c);
(ii) assure that appropriate stakeholders are represented in the
development of the proposed Innovation School; and
(iii) provide meaningful opportunities for the stakeholders to
contribute to the development of such school. The size and
composition of the innovation plan committee shall be deter-
mined by the applicant; provided, however, that the committee
shall include:
(iv) the applicant;
(v) the superintendent or a designee;
(vi) a school committee member or a designee;
(vii) a parent who has 1 or more children enrolled in the school,
or in the case of a new school, from the district;
(viii) a principal employed by the district; and
(ix) 2 teachers employed by the district. The applicant shall select
the parent from among nominees submitted by parent-teacher
organizations in the district. If the district does not contain a
parent-teacher organization or if the organization does not sub-
mit nominees, the applicant shall select the parent from among
volunteers in the area or community the proposed school is
expected to serve. The applicant shall select the principal and
1 teacher from among volunteers in the district and 1 teacher
from among nominees submitted by the local teacher’s union.
(j) Upon the formation of the innovation plan committee in subsec-
tion (i), the committee shall develop the innovation plan for the
proposed Innovation School. The purpose of the innovation plan
shall be to comprehensively articulate the areas of autonomy and
ﬂexibility under subsection (b) that the proposed school will use.
The innovation plan shall include, but not be limited to:
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
19
(i) a curriculum plan, which shall include a detailed description
of the curriculum and related programs for the proposed school
and how the curriculum is expected to improve school perfor-
mance and student achievement;
(ii) a budget plan, which shall include a detailed description of
how funds shall be used differently in the proposed school to
support school performance and student achievement;
(iii) a school schedule plan, which shall include a detailed de-
scription of the ways, if any, the program or calendar of the
proposed school will be enhanced or expanded;
(iv) a stafﬁng plan, which shall include a detailed description
of how the school principal, administrators, faculty and staff
will be recruited, employed, evaluated and compensated in the
proposed school and any proposed waivers or modiﬁcations of
collective bargaining agreements;
(v) a policy and procedures plan, which shall include a detailed
description of the unique operational policies and procedures to
be used by the proposed school and how the procedures shall
support school performance and student achievement; and
(vi) a professional development plan, which shall include a de-
tailed description of how the school may provide high-quality
professional development to its administrators, teachers and
staff. In order to assess the proposed school across multiple
measures of school performance and student success, the inno-
vation plan shall include measurable annual goals including,
but not limited to, the following:
• student attendance;
• student safety and discipline;
• student promotion and graduation and dropout rates;
• student achievement on the Massachusetts Comprehensive
Assessment System;
• progress in areas of academic underperformance; and
• progress among subgroups of students, including low-
income students as deﬁned by chapter 70, limited English-
proﬁcient students and students receiving special education;
• reduction of achievement gaps among different groups of
students. A majority vote of the innovation plan committee
shall be required for approval of the innovation plan.
(k) The provisions of the collective bargaining agreements applicable
to the administrators, teachers and staff in the school shall be
considered to be in operation at an Innovation School, except
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
20
to the extent the provisions are waived or modiﬁed under the
innovation plan and such waivers or modiﬁcations are approved
under subsections (l) and (m).
(l) In the case of a school conversion, upon completion of the inno-
vation plan in subsection (j), the applicant shall submit the innova-
tion plan to teachers in the school that is proposed for conversion
for approval by secret ballot within 30 days. A two-thirds vote of
the teachers shall be required to approve the plan. Upon approval
of an innovation plan by the applicable union members the plan
shall, within 7 days, be submitted to the school committee. If a
two-thirds vote is not achieved, the innovation plan committee
may revise the innovation plan as necessary and submit the re-
vised plan to the teachers for a subsequent vote. In the case of a
new school, upon the completion of the innovation plan in sub-
section (j), the applicant, a local union and the superintendent
shall negotiate waivers or modiﬁcations to the applicable collec-
tive bargaining agreement necessary for the school to implement
the innovation plan. Upon the conclusion of the negotiations,
the innovation plan shall be submitted immediately to the school
committee. If the negotiations have not resulted in an agreement
within 40 days, either party may petition the division of labor re-
lations for the selection of an arbitrator. The division shall select
an arbitrator within 3 days of the petition from a list submitted
by the parties. The arbitrator shall conduct a hearing within 14
days of the arbitrator’s selection. The arbitrator shall consider the
parties’ positions and the needs of the students in the district. The
arbitrator’s decision shall be consistent with the contents of the
innovation plan developed by the applicant. The arbitrator shall,
within 14 days of the close of the hearing, submit a decision which
shall be ﬁnal and binding on the parties.
(m) Upon receipt of an innovation plan regarding an Innovation
School, a school committee shall hold at least 1 public hearing on
the innovation plan. After the public hearing, but not later than 60
days after the receipt of the innovation plan, the school committee
shall, on the basis of the quality of the plan and in consideration
of comments submitted by the public, undertake a ﬁnal vote to
authorize the Innovation School for a period of not more than
5 years, subject to subsection (n). Approval of the majority of
the school committee as fully constituted shall be required to
authorize an Innovation School. If the approval is not obtained, an
innovation plan committee may revise the innovation plan and:
(i) in the case of a new school, submit the revised plan to the
school committee for a subsequent vote; or
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
21
(ii) in the case of a conversion, submit the revised plan to the
teachers in the school that is proposed for conversion for a vote,
pursuant to subsection (l); provided, however, that the plan
meets the requirements for approval under subsection (l), sub-
mit the revised plan to the school committee for a subsequent
vote. A school committee shall vote on a revised plan submitted
pursuant to this subsection within 60 days of the receipt of such
plan and contract.
(n) All Innovation Schools authorized under subsection (m) shall be
evaluated by the superintendent at least annually. The superin-
tendent shall transmit the evaluation to the school committee and
the commissioner of elementary and secondary education. The
purpose of the evaluation shall be to determine whether the school
has met the annual goals in its innovation plan and assess the im-
plementation of the innovation plan at the school. If the school
committee determines, on the advice of the superintendent, that
the school has not met 1 or more goals in the innovation plan and
that the failure to meet the goals may be corrected through reason-
able modiﬁcation of the plan, the school committee may amend
the innovation plan as necessary.
After the superintendent assesses the implementation of the inno-
vation plan at the school, the school committee may, on the advice
of the superintendent, amend the plan if the school committee de-
termines that the amendment is necessary in view of subsequent
changes in the district that affect 1 or more components of the
plan, including, but not limited to, changes to contracts, collec-
tive bargaining agreements or school district policies; provided,
however, that an amendment involving a subsequent change to a
teacher contract shall ﬁrst be approved by teachers at the school
under the procedures in subsection (l). If the school committee de-
termines, on the advice of the superintendent, that the school has
substantially failed to meet multiple goals in the innovation plan,
the school committee may:
(i) limit 1 or more components of the innovation plan;
(ii) suspend 1 or more components of the innovation plan; or
(iii) terminate the authorization of the school; provided, however,
that the limitation or suspension shall not take place before the
completion of the second full year of the operation of the school
and the termination shall not take place before the completion
of the third full year of the operation of the school.
(o) At the end of the period of authorization of an Innovation School
approved under subsection (m), the leadership of the school may
the somerville steam academy — an innovation school prospectus
22
petition the school committee to extend the authorization of the
school for an additional period of not more than 5 years. Before
submitting the petition, the leadership of the school shall convene
a selection of school stakeholders, including, but not limited to,
administrators, teachers, other school staff, parents and external
partners, as applicable, to discuss whether the innovation plan at
the school requires revision and to solicit recommendations as to
the potential revisions. After considering the recommendations
of the stakeholder group, the leadership of the school and the ap-
plicable superintendent shall jointly update the innovation plan
as necessary; provided, however, that a proposal regarding a new
waiver or exemption from the local teacher’s union contract shall
be approved by teachers at the school, under subsection (l). Ap-
proval of the majority of the school committee as fully constituted
shall be required to extend the period of authorization of an In-
novation School. If the approval is not obtained, the leadership of
the school and superintendent may jointly revise the innovation
plan and submit the revised plan to the school committee for a
subsequent vote. If the school committee does not extend the au-
thorization of the school, the leadership of the school may seek the
authorization from the board of elementary and secondary edu-
cation. The board shall vote on the requested extension within 60
days of its receipt for approval of such extension.
(p) The commissioner of elementary and secondary education shall,
to the extent practicable, be responsible for the following:
(i) the provision of planning and implementation grants to eligible
applicants to establish Innovation Schools;
(ii) provision of technical assistance and support to eligible appli-
cants;
(iii) the collection and publication of data and research related to
the Innovation Schools initiative;
(iv) the collection and publication of data and research related to
successful programs serving limited English-proﬁcient students
attending Innovation Schools; and
(v) the collection and dissemination of best practices in Innova-
tion Schools that may be adopted by other public schools. The
board of elementary and secondary education shall promul-
gate regulations necessary to carry out this section. Annually,
the commissioner shall report to the joint committee on educa-
tion, the house and senate committees on ways and means, the
speaker of the house of representatives and the senate president
on the implementation and ﬁscal impact of this section.
 
 
Somerville Public Schools 
 
Education • Inspiration • Excellence 
Tony Pierantozzi, Superintendent of Schools 
42 Cross Street • Somerville, MA 02145-3246 
tpierantozzi@k12.somerville.ma.us • www.somerville.k12.ma.us 
T 617-625-6600 x6005 • F 617-666-1130 
 
Our Schools are one of the reasons why Somerville was named one of the 100 Best Communities for Young People from 2008-2010. 
June 25, 2012 
 
Mr. Alec Resnick 
339R Summer Street 
Somerville, MA  02145 
 
Dear Mr. Resnick: 
 
Thank you for submitting the Somerville High School STEAM Academy Innovation School Prospectus.  A 
screening committee comprised of School Committee Chair Paul Bockelman, Somerville Teachers 
Association President Jackie Lawrence and me was convened within 30 days of the submission of the 
Somerville High School STEAM Academy Innovation School Prospectus.  The screening committee voted 
unanimous approval of the Somerville High School STEAM Academy Innovation School Prospectus.  
Congratulations! 
 
The next step in the approval process is as follows: 
“Within 30 days of screening committee approval, the applicant creates the innovation plan committee, on 
which there can be no more than 11 members.”  
 
In a Comprehensive High School as complex as Somerville High School, knowledge of the workings of the 
school will be important for the development of the Innovation Plan.  The Screening Team recommends that 
you consider maximizing the number of Somerville High School Professional Staff on the Planning Team.  
Please contact the Somerville High School Headmaster, Mr. John Oteri, (617-625-6600, 6111) to discuss a 
process for determining Planning Team representatives. 
   
I have enclosed the Six Steps to Approval document from the Executive Office of Education for your 
information and use as you continue through the process. 
 
If I may provide any assistance to you throughout the process, please do not hesitate to contact me. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Tony Pierantozzi 
Superintendent of Schools 
 
Cc:  
Somerville School Committee 
 
Mr. John Oteri 
 
Mr. Anthony Ciccariello 
 
Ms. Jackie Lawrence 
 
Central Office Administrative Team 
Innovation School Laws & Regulations
Innovation School Statute
Section 92.
a An Innovation School shall be a public school, operating within
a public school district, that is established for the purpose of
improving school performance and student achievement through
increased autonomy and ﬂexibility. An Innovation School may
be established as a new public school or as a conversion of an
existing public school. A student who is enrolled in a school at
the time it is established as an Innovation School shall retain the
ability to remain enrolled in the school if the student chooses to
do so.
b An Innovation School may establish an advisory board of trustees.
An Innovation School shall have increased autonomy and ﬂex-
ibility in 1 or more of the following areas:(i) curriculum; (ii)
budget; (iii) school schedule and calendar; (iv) stafﬁng policies
and procedures, including waivers from or modiﬁcations to,
contracts or collective bargaining agreements; (v) school district
policies and procedures; and (vi) professional development. An
Innovation School shall receive each school year from the school
committee the same per pupil allocation as any other district
school receives. An Innovation School may retain any unused
funds and use the funds in subsequent school years. An Inno-
vation School may establish a non-proﬁt organization that may,
among other things, assist the school with fundraising. A district
shall not reduce its funding to an Innovation School as a result of
the school’s fundraising activities.
c An Innovation School established under this section shall be
authorized by the local school committee and shall operate ac-
cording to an innovation plan, which shall articulate the areas
of autonomy and ﬂexibility under subsection (b). To the extent
practicable, the innovation plan shall be based on student out-
come data, including, but not limited to: (i) student achievement
on the Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System; (ii)
other measures of student achievement, approved by the com-
missioner, as appropriate; (iii) student promotion, graduation
242
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
rates and dropout rates; (iv) achievement data for different sub-
groups of students, including low-income students as deﬁned
by chapter 70, limited English-proﬁcient students and students
receiving special education; and (v) student attendance, dismissal
rates and exclusion rates.
An Innovation School shall operate in accordance with the law
regulating other public schools, except as the law conﬂicts with
this section or any innovation plans created thereunder.
d An Innovation School is a school in which: (i) faculty and leader-
ship are primarily responsible for developing the innovation plan
under which the school operates and leadership is responsible
for meeting the terms of the innovation plan; or (ii) an external
partner is primarily responsible for developing the innovation
plan under which the school operates and the external partner is
responsible for meeting the terms of the innovation plan.
e Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit: (i) the es-
tablishment of an Innovation School as an academy within an
existing public school; (ii) the establishment of an Innovation
School serving students from 2 or more school districts; pro-
vided, however, that all of the provisions of this section are met
by each school district; (iii) the simultaneous establishment of
2 or more Innovation Schools as an Innovation Schools Zone
within a school district; or (iv) the establishment of an Innova-
tion School as a virtual public school that provides instruction
to students through distance learning, including online learn-
ing programs and courses, subject to regulations adopted by the
board of elementary and secondary education.
f The following shall be eligible applicants for the purposes of
establishing an Innovation School: (i) parents; (ii) teachers; (iii)
parent-teacher organizations; (iv) principals; (v) superintendents;
(vi) school committees; (vii) teacher unions; (viii) colleges and
universities; (ix) non-proﬁt community-based organizations; (x)
non-proﬁt business or corporate entities; (xi) non-proﬁt charter
school operators; (xii) non-proﬁt education management or-
ganizations; (xii) educational collaboratives; (xiv) consortia of
these groups; and (xv) non-proﬁt entities authorized by the com-
missioner. Private and parochial schools shall not be eligible to
operate an Innovation School.
g The local school committee, local teacher’s union and superin-
tendent of the district shall follow a process, consistent with this
subsection and subsections (h) to (o), inclusive, for which an ex-
isting district school may be converted to an Innovation School
or by which a new Innovation School may be established within
the district. This process shall require that an eligible applicant
proposing to establish an Innovation School prepare a prospectus
regarding the proposed school. The prospectus shall include,
but not be limited to, a description of: (i) whether the school will
innovation school laws & regulations
243
be a new school or a conversion of an existing school; (ii) if the
school is a new school, the proposed location of the school; (iii)
if the school is a conversion of an existing school, the school that
is being proposed for conversion; (iv) the external partners, if
any, that will be involved in the school; (v) the number of stu-
dents the school is anticipated to serve and the number of staff
expected to be employed at the school; (vi) the overall vision for
the school, including improving school performance and student
achievement; (vii) speciﬁc needs or challenges the school shall
be designed to address; (viii) a preliminary assessment of the
autonomy and ﬂexibility under subsection (b) that the school will
seek; (ix) why such ﬂexibility is desirable to carry out the objec-
tives of the school; (x) anticipated components of the school’s
innovation plan; (xi) a preliminary description of the process that
shall be used to involve appropriate stakeholders in the develop-
ment of the innovation plan; and (xii) a proposed timetable for
development and establishment of the proposed school.
h Upon completion of the prospectus under subsection (g), an
eligible applicant shall submit the prospectus to the superinten-
dent, who shall within 30 days convene a screening committee
consisting of the superintendent or a designee, a school commit-
tee member or a designee selected by the school committee and a
representative from the leadership of the local teacher’s union.
The screening committee shall review the prospectus for the pur-
pose of determining whether the prospectus: (i) presents a sound
and coherent plan for improving school performance and stu-
dent achievement; (ii) supports or enhances existing educational
efforts in the district; and (iii) reasonably can be expanded into
a comprehensive innovation plan. In the case of a new school,
the committee will prepare an impact statement describing how
the new school will affect the children and faculty in the district.
Within 30 days of receiving a prospectus, the screening com-
mittee shall decide, on the basis of a two-thirds vote, to accept
or reject the prospectus, or return the prospectus to the eligible
applicant for revisions. If a prospectus is rejected or returned,
the screening committee shall submit a detailed explanation for
the decision to the applicant. A prospectus that is rejected or
returned may be revised and resubmitted for subsequent consid-
eration.
i Upon the acceptance of a prospectus by the screening committee
under subsection (h), the applicant shall form an innovation plan
committee of not more than 11 individuals within 30 days. The
purpose of the innovation plan committee shall be to: (i) develop
the innovation plan described in subsection (c); (ii) assure that
appropriate stakeholders are represented in the development of
the proposed Innovation School; and (iii) provide meaningful op-
portunities for the stakeholders to contribute to the development
of such school. The size and composition of the innovation plan
244
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
committee shall be determined by the applicant; provided, how-
ever, that the committee shall include: (i) the applicant; (ii) the
superintendent or a designee; (iii) a school committee member or
a designee; (iv) a parent who has 1 or more children enrolled in
the school, or in the case of a new school, from the district; (v) a
principal employed by the district; and (vi) 2 teachers employed
by the district. The applicant shall select the parent from among
nominees submitted by parent-teacher organizations in the dis-
trict. If the district does not contain a parent-teacher organization
or if the organization does not submit nominees, the applicant
shall select the parent from among volunteers in the area or com-
munity the proposed school is expected to serve. The applicant
shall select the principal and 1 teacher from among volunteers in
the district and 1 teacher from among nominees submitted by the
local teacher’s union.
j Upon the formation of the innovation plan committee in subsec-
tion (i), the committee shall develop the innovation plan for the
proposed Innovation School. The purpose of the innovation plan
shall be to comprehensively articulate the areas of autonomy and
ﬂexibility under subsection (b) that the proposed school will use.
The innovation plan shall include, but not be limited to: (i) a cur-
riculum plan, which shall include a detailed description of the
curriculum and related programs for the proposed school and
how the curriculum is expected to improve school performance
and student achievement; (ii) a budget plan, which shall include
a detailed description of how funds shall be used differently in
the proposed school to support school performance and student
achievement; (iii) a school schedule plan, which shall include a
detailed description of the ways, if any, the program or calen-
dar of the proposed school will be enhanced or expanded; (iv) a
stafﬁng plan, which shall include a detailed description of how
the school principal, administrators, faculty and staff will be re-
cruited, employed, evaluated and compensated in the proposed
school and any proposed waivers or modiﬁcations of collective
bargaining agreements; (v) a policy and procedures plan, which
shall include a detailed description of the unique operational
policies and procedures to be used by the proposed school and
how the procedures shall support school performance and stu-
dent achievement; and (vi) a professional development plan,
which shall include a detailed description of how the school may
provide high-quality professional development to its administra-
tors, teachers and staff.
In order to assess the proposed school across multiple measures
of school performance and student success, the innovation plan
shall include measurable annual goals including, but not limited
to, the following: (i) student attendance; (ii) student safety and
discipline; (iii) student promotion and graduation and dropout
rates; (iv) student achievement on the Massachusetts Compre-
innovation school laws & regulations
245
hensive Assessment System; (v) progress in areas of academic
underperformance; and (vi) progress among subgroups of stu-
dents, including low-income students as deﬁned by chapter 70,
limited English-proﬁcient students and students receiving special
education; (7) reduction of achievement gaps among different
groups of students.
A majority vote of the innovation plan committee shall be re-
quired for approval of the innovation plan.
k The provisions of the collective bargaining agreements applicable
to the administrators, teachers and staff in the school shall be
considered to be in operation at an Innovation School, except
to the extent the provisions are waived or modiﬁed under the
innovation plan and such waivers or modiﬁcations are approved
under subsections (l) and (m).
l In the case of a school conversion, upon completion of the inno-
vation plan in subsection (j)„ the applicant shall submit the in-
novation plan to teachers in the school that is proposed for con-
version for approval by secret ballot within 30 days. A two-thirds
vote of the teachers shall be required to approve the plan. Upon
approval of an innovation plan by the applicable union mem-
bers the plan shall, within 7 days, be submitted to the school
committee. If a two-thirds vote is not achieved, the innovation
plan committee may revise the innovation plan as necessary and
submit the revised plan to the teachers for a subsequent vote.
In the case of a new school, upon the completion of the inno-
vation plan in subsection (j), the applicant, a local union and
the superintendent shall negotiate waivers or modiﬁcations to
the applicable collective bargaining agreement necessary for
the school to implement the innovation plan. Upon the conclu-
sion of the negotiations, the innovation plan shall be submitted
immediately to the school committee. If the negotiations have
not resulted in an agreement within 40 days, either party may
petition the division of labor relations for the selection of an arbi-
trator. The division shall select an arbitrator within 3 days of the
petition from a list submitted by the parties. The arbitrator shall
conduct a hearing within 14 days of the arbitrator’s selection.
The arbitrator shall consider the parties’ positions and the needs
of the students in the district. The arbitrator’s decision shall be
consistent with the contents of the innovation plan developed by
the applicant. The arbitrator shall, within 14 days of the close of
the hearing, submit a decision which shall be ﬁnal and binding
on the parties.
m Upon receipt of an innovation plan regarding an Innovation
School, a school committee shall hold at least 1 public hearing
on the innovation plan. After the public hearing, but not later
than 60 days after the receipt of the innovation plan, the school
committee shall, on the basis of the quality of the plan and in
246
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
consideration of comments submitted by the public, undertake
a ﬁnal vote to authorize the Innovation School for a period of
not more than 5 years, subject to subsection (n). Approval of the
majority of the school committee as fully constituted shall be re-
quired to authorize an Innovation School. If the approval is not
obtained, an innovation plan committee may revise the innova-
tion plan and: (i) in the case of a new school, submit the revised
plan to the school committee for a subsequent vote; or (ii) in the
case of a conversion, submit the revised plan to the teachers in
the school that is proposed for conversion for a vote, pursuant
to subsection (l); provided, however, that the plan meets the re-
quirements for approval under subsection (l), submit the revised
plan to the school committee for a subsequent vote. A school
committee shall vote on a revised plan submitted pursuant to
this subsection within 60 days of the receipt of such plan and
contract.
n All Innovation Schools authorized under subsection (m) shall
be evaluated by the superintendent at least annually. The super-
intendent shall transmit the evaluation to the school committee
and the commissioner of elementary and secondary education.
The purpose of the evaluation shall be to determine whether
the school has met the annual goals in its innovation plan and
assess the implementation of the innovation plan at the school.
If the school committee determines, on the advice of the super-
intendent, that the school has not met 1 or more goals in the
innovation plan and that the failure to meet the goals may be
corrected through reasonable modiﬁcation of the plan, the school
committee may amend the innovation plan as necessary. After
the superintendent assesses the implementation of the innovation
plan at the school, the school committee may, on the advice of
the superintendent, amend the plan if the school committee de-
termines that the amendment is necessary in view of subsequent
changes in the district that affect 1 or more components of the
plan, including, but not limited to, changes to contracts, collec-
tive bargaining agreements or school district policies; provided,
however, that an amendment involving a subsequent change to a
teacher contract shall ﬁrst be approved by teachers at the school
under the procedures in subsection (l).
If the school committee determines, on the advice of the superin-
tendent, that the school has substantially failed to meet multiple
goals in the innovation plan, the school committee may: (i) limit
1 or more components of the innovation plan; (ii) suspend 1 or
more components of the innovation plan; or (iii) terminate the
authorization of the school; provided, however, that the limita-
tion or suspension shall not take place before the completion of
the second full year of the operation of the school and the termi-
nation shall not take place before the completion of the third full
year of the operation of the school.
innovation school laws & regulations
247
o At the end of the period of authorization of an Innovation School
approved under subsection (m), the leadership of the school
may petition the school committee to extend the authorization
of the school for an additional period of not more than 5 years.
Before submitting the petition, the leadership of the school shall
convene a selection of school stakeholders, including, but not
limited to, administrators, teachers, other school staff, parents
and external partners, as applicable, to discuss whether the inno-
vation plan at the school requires revision and to solicit recom-
mendations as to the potential revisions. After considering the
recommendations of the stakeholder group, the leadership of the
school and the applicable superintendent shall jointly update the
innovation plan as necessary; provided, however, that a proposal
regarding a new waiver or exemption from the local teacher’s
union contract shall be approved by teachers at the school, under
subsection (l). Approval of the majority of the school commit-
tee as fully constituted shall be required to extend the period
of authorization of an Innovation School. If the approval is not
obtained, the leadership of the school and superintendent may
jointly revise the innovation plan and submit the revised plan to
the school committee for a subsequent vote. If the school com-
mittee does not extend the authorization of the school, the lead-
ership of the school may seek the authorization from the board
of elementary and secondary education. The board shall vote on
the requested extension within 60 days of its receipt for approval
of such extension.
p The commissioner of elementary and secondary education shall,
to the extent practicable, be responsible for the following: (i)
the provision of planning and implementation grants to eligi-
ble applicants to establish Innovation Schools; (ii) provision of
technical assistance and support to eligible applicants; (iii) the
collection and publication of data and research related to the
Innovation Schools initiative; (iv) the collection and publication
of data and research related to successful programs serving lim-
ited English-proﬁcient students attending Innovation Schools;
and (v) the collection and dissemination of best practices in In-
novation Schools that may be adopted by other public schools.
The board of elementary and secondary education shall promul-
gate regulations necessary to carry out this section. Annually,
the commissioner shall report to the joint committee on educa-
tion, the house and senate committees on ways and means, the
speaker of the house of representatives and the senate president
on the implementation and ﬁscal impact of this section.
[ Subsection (q) added by 2011, 68, Sec. 74 effective July
1, 2011. See 2011, 68, Sec. 221.]
q A school committee operating an Innovation School that is a
virtual public school may vote to allow students who do not
248
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
reside in the district to enroll in the virtual public school pur-
suant to section 12B of chapter 76; provided, however, that the
vote and policy is consistent with department of elementary and
secondary education regulations governing enrollment at such
schools; provided further, that any student enrolled in a virtual
public school shall have no right to attend any other school oper-
ated by that school committee. Notwithstanding subsection (b),
an Innovation School that is a virtual public school may receive
each school year from the school committee less than the same
per pupil allocation as any other district school receives.
[ Subsection (r) added by 2011, 68, Sec. 74 effective July
1, 2011 until October 27, 2011. Deleted by 2011, 142, Sec.
17. See 2011, 68, Sec. 221.]
r Failure by a school district to transfer funds to an Innovation
School, as required in subsection (b) shall result in a deduction
of the amount therein from the home school district’s chapter 70
per pupil allotment for the following ﬁscal year.
Innovation School Regulations
48.01: Scope, Purpose, and Authority
1. Purpose. The purpose of 603 CMR 48.00 is to provide uniform
rules and procedures governing the establishment of innovation
schools.
2. Authority. 603 CMR 48.00 is promulgated under the authority of
M.G.L. c.69, s.1B; c.71, s.92.
48.02: Definitions
As used in 603 CMR 48.00, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, terms shall have the following meanings:
• academy. An innovation program situated within an exist-
ing public school. The academy operates different instructional
and other programs from the school in which it is situated. The
academy will be included in the reporting of the school within
which it is situated for the purposes of enrollment, accountabil-
ity, and other school-level determinations. Students in innovation
academies will receive a program code from the Department of
Elementary and Secondary Education to facilitate monitoring of
outcomes of the initiative.
• board. The Board of Elementary and Secondary Education or a
person duly authorized by the Board.
• commissioner. The Commissioner of Elementary and Sec-
ondary Education or his/her designee.
innovation school laws & regulations
249
• department. The Department of Elementary and Secondary
Education.
• eligible student. A person eligible to enroll in a Massachusetts
public school who is under the age of 22 and who has not at-
tained a high school diploma or its equivalent.
• home district. The municipal or regional school district that
is ﬁscally responsible for an eligible student’s enrollment in a
virtual innovation school.
• innovation plan. An educational and operational plan for the
administration of an innovation school, established pursuant to
M.G.L. c.71, s.92(c).
• innovation school. A school or academy authorized by a
local school committee under the provisions of M.G.L. c.71, s.92.
• innovation schools zone. Two or more innovation schools
operating within a particular school district in accordance with
certain factors described in 603 CMR 48.04(2).
• lead district. Among two or more school districts sponsoring
a single innovation school, the school district that is responsible
for coordinating the formation of a screening committee. The
lead district will be the district that will host the proposed in-
novation school and whose policies, including, but not limited
to, transportation and discipline of students, will be in effect
at the proposed innovation school, unless clearly stated in the
approved innovation plan.
• sponsoring district. A municipal or regional school district
responsible for authorization and oversight of an innovation
school.
• teacher. For the purposes of a vote to approve conversion to
an innovation school or academy, any person working half-time
or more in a school or school district under a license listed in 603
CMR 7.04(3)(a), (b), or (d).
• virtual innovation school. An innovation school whose
students receive 80 percent or more of their academic instruc-
tion on-line at a location other than a public school building.
Public schools where on-line courses are offered as an adjunct to
classroom instruction shall not be considered virtual innovation
schools.
48.03: General Provisions
1. administrative bulletins. The Board and the Department
may, from time to time, issue administrative bulletins to inter-
pret, implement, and provide guidance on 603 CMR 48.00.
250
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
2. non-discrimination. Innovation schools shall be open to
all eligible students, on a space available basis, and shall not
discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, creed,
sex, ethnicity, sexual orientation, mental or physical disability,
age, ancestry, athletic performance, special need, or proﬁciency
in the English language or a foreign language.
3. compliance with laws and regulations. As provided in
M.G.L. c. 71, s. 92(c), a school committee, or committees in the
case of innovation schools approved by multiple districts, that
approves an innovation plan shall ensure that the innovation
school operates in accordance with all laws regulating other pub-
lic schools, except as the law conﬂicts with M.G.L. c. 71, s. 92(c)
or any innovation plans created thereunder. School committees
shall take particular care to ensure compliance with laws and
regulations protecting the health, safety, and well-being of stu-
dents and governing the compulsory attendance of school-age
children.
If an innovation plan committee is proposing an innovation plan
that may conﬂict with laws (including regulations) governing
other public schools, the committee shall, before presenting the
plan to the school committee for approval, request approval from
the Commissioner for any provision in the plan that may conﬂict
with such laws. The Commissioner’s approval shall be based
on his determination that the plan is consistent with 603 CMR
48.03 (2) and with the state’s obligations under the education
clause of the Massachusetts Constitution, Mass. Const., pt. II,
ch. V, s. II, as deﬁned by a court of competent jurisdiction, and
that the provision in the plan that may conﬂict with such laws
is necessary to advance the mission or educational programs of
the innovation school. If the Commissioner does not approve the
proposed provision in the plan, the innovation plan committee
may ask the Board to review the matter and the Board shall
make the ﬁnal decision.
4. waivers. Upon the written request of the Commissioner, the
Board may waive any provision of 603 CMR 48.00 for good
cause.
48.04: Specific Provisions
1. innovation school serving two or more school dis-
tricts. If an eligible applicant, as identiﬁed in M.G.L. c.71,
s.92(f), seeks to establish an innovation school that will serve
students from two or more school districts, the superintendents
of those districts shall jointly decide which district will be the
lead district for purposes of the innovation school. The applicant
shall prepare a prospectus for the proposed school and sub-
mit it to the superintendent of the lead district. The prospectus
shall be reviewed by a screening committee convened by the su-
innovation school laws & regulations
251
perintendent of the designated lead district and constituted of
individuals from the lead district. If the prospectus is accepted
by two-thirds of the screening committee, the applicant shall
form an innovation plan committee.
The applicant may compose the innovation plan committee of
individuals, as identiﬁed in M.G.L. c.71, s.92(i), from any of the
sponsoring districts, including the lead district, whose students
will be served by the proposed innovation school.
The innovation plan must specify the tuition arrangement be-
tween the sponsoring districts.
The innovation plan must be submitted for approval to the
school committees of each sponsoring district that will be served
by the proposed innovation school. Each sponsoring district’s
school committee must separately approve the submitted inno-
vation plan in order for the innovation school to be authorized or
re-authorized. The innovation plan may specify the procedure by
which an innovation plan may be revised and re-submitted for
approval if one or more sponsoring district school committees
reject the initial innovation plan.
2. innovation schools zone. A school district may establish an
Innovation Schools Zone, whereby the school district operates
two or more innovation schools in accordance with common
instructional themes or areas of focus, or in accordance with
other factors as approved by the local school committee.
3. screening committee’s consideration of a revised
prospectus. If the screening committee returns the prospectus
to the eligible applicant for revisions, the applicant may submit a
revised prospectus to the screening committee for consideration.
Within 30 days of receiving a revised prospectus, the screen-
ing committee shall decide, on the basis of a two-thirds vote, to
accept or reject the prospectus, or return the prospectus to the
eligible applicant for further revisions.
4. innovation plan approval process for conversion
schools and academies.
In the case of converting an established program into an academy,
the innovation plan must include a description of the teachers in
the school to whom the innovation plan will be submitted for
approval. Two-thirds of votes cast by the teachers in that election
shall be required to approve the innovation plan. In the case of
proposing a new program as an academy, the applicant shall fol-
low the process laid out in M.G.L. c.71, s. 92(l) for establishing a
new school.
In the case of a school conversion or the conversion of an es-
tablished program into an academy, the innovation plan shall
describe the process and schedule for seeking approval of the
innovation plan by the teachers who must approve the plan. The
252
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
innovation plan shall describe the process for conducting the
vote, including absentee voting. The innovation plan shall en-
sure that the process allows the teachers sufﬁcient time to review
and consider the plan before the vote. The applicant, the school
district, and the local teacher’s union shall coordinate to carry
out the process described in the innovation plan. A teacher on
approved leave from the school at the time of the election may
vote in such election. A teacher who is retiring or who knows
that he/she will not be employed at the school the following year
shall not vote in such election. Two-thirds of votes cast by the
teachers in that election shall be required to approve the plan.
5. reporting requirement. The superintendent of a sponsor-
ing district must notify the Commissioner within 30 days of
the sponsoring district school committee’s authorization or re-
authorization of an innovation school. The superintendent shall
include a copy of the approved innovation plan in the notiﬁca-
tion to the Commissioner.
6. amendments to innovation plans. An applicant may
amend an operating innovation plan during its 5-year autho-
rization period. If the proposed amendment would directly affect
the major autonomies established in the existing innovation plan,
the applicant/operator must follow the innovation school ap-
proval process laid out in M.G.L. c.71, s.92(i)-(m), beginning with
the innovation plan committee and continuing through to ﬁnal
school committee approval. In the case of any other revision to
the plan, the applicant shall provide notice to the teachers and
the district superintendent of the revision, and the district super-
intendent shall note the change in his/her annual evaluation of
the innovation school, which shall be transmitted to the district
school committee(s) and the Commissioner pursuant to M.G.L.
c.71, s.92(n). Any proposed amendment to the operating inno-
vation plan that would require a new waiver or exemption from
the teacher contract shall be approved by teachers at the school,
pursuant to M.G.L. c.71, s.92(l) and 603 CMR 48.04.
7. failure by a school district to support an authorized
innovation school. The operators of an authorized innova-
tion school who encounter any failure by a sponsoring district
or districts to support the school, including, but not limited to,
failure to provide the autonomies and ﬂexibilities approved in
the school’s innovation plan, may petition the Commissioner for
the selection of a mediator or an arbitrator. The Commissioner
shall select a mediator or an arbitrator within 3 days from a list
submitted by the parties. If a mediator is selected, the mediator
shall conduct a mediation session with the parties within 14 days
of his/her selection. If an arbitrator is selected, the arbitrator
shall conduct a hearing within 14 days of his/her selection. If a
mediator is selected, the mediator shall strive to reach a consen-
sus consistent with the contents of the innovation plan developed
innovation school laws & regulations
253
by the applicant, and then notify the Commissioner of that reso-
lution. If an arbitrator is selected, the arbitrator’s decision shall
be consistent with the contents of the innovation plan developed
by the applicant. The arbitrator shall, within 14 days of the close
of the hearing, submit a decision to the parties and the Commis-
sioner that shall be ﬁnal and binding on the parties. The costs of
the mediation or arbitration shall be borne by the parties.
48.05: Virtual Innovation Schools
1. enrollment. The innovation plan for a virtual innovation
school shall specify the manner in which a student may apply
for admission to such school, and the criteria that will be used
to select students for admission. A virtual innovation school
may give preference in enrollment to students residing in the
sponsoring district. No school district or school shall compel a
student to enroll in a virtual innovation school. Students may
not enroll directly in a virtual innovation school through the
inter-district school choice program established under M.G.L.
c.76, s.12B. Nothing in 603 CMR 48.00 shall prohibit a virtual
innovation school from enrolling out-of-state students pursuant
to M.G.L. c.71, s.6A.
2. enrollment limits. The following enrollment limits shall
apply to virtual innovation schools:
a Each school shall have a maximum enrollment of 500 students.
b For schools that have no admissions criteria other than grade
level, at least 25% of the enrollment shall be from the sponsor-
ing district.
c For schools where enrollment is targeted to serve a specialized
student population, such as students with medical conditions
that interfere with school attendance or students who have
been temporarily or permanently excluded from public school
attendance, at least 10% of the enrollment shall be from the
sponsoring district.
d No district shall be required to pay tuition for students attend-
ing virtual innovation schools in other districts for more than
2% of its total district enrollment.
e Districts shall not be responsible for tuition payments for
students enrolled in excess of these limits.
f If the virtual innovation school is established by the school
committees of two or more districts, the combined enrollment
of all sponsoring districts shall be used to calculate the limits
imposed by 603 CMR 48.05(2)(b) and (c).
3. curriculum, instruction and assessment. The innovation
plan for a virtual innovation school shall provide for:
a a curriculum aligned with the Massachusetts curriculum
frameworks;
254
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
b administration of required state-wide assessments in a proc-
tored environment consistent with test administration guide-
lines;
c student participation recordkeeping to monitor attendance
and demonstrate compliance with the student learning time
requirements in 603 CMR 27.00;
d student access to appropriate computer equipment, telecom-
munications services, and related technical support, to be
provided by the sponsoring district as needed;
e student access to, and guidance on the use of, library and
digital media resources;
f guidelines for age-appropriate oversight of student partic-
ipation by parents, guardians, or other adults, along with
appropriate training for such oversight.
4. educators. All educators leading classes or providing educa-
tional administration services in a virtual innovation school shall
hold a current Massachusetts educator license appropriate to
their assigned duties. Said educators may be employed through
the sponsoring district, through another Massachusetts public
school district, through an educational collaborative, or through
a contract with an educational management organization. The
school’s innovation plan shall provide for periodic individual
teacher conferences, via teleconference or in-person meetings,
with students and students’ parents or guardians.
5. guidance services. The school’s innovation plan shall pro-
vide all enrolled students with appropriate access to guidance
services, including but not limited to future school and career
planning, monitoring of the student’s overall academic progress,
and facilitating student and family support services as needed.
Appropriate information and guidance shall also be provided to
students considering enrolling in a virtual innovation school to
assist in their decision.
6. special education services. The sponsoring district shall
be responsible for the provision of all services required by the
individualized education programs (IEPs) of students enrolled in
a virtual innovation school.
7. procurement of educational management services.
A sponsoring district may contract with an educational collab-
orative established pursuant to M.G.L. c.40, s.4E or with and
external partner, including a for-proﬁt or non-proﬁt corporation
for the provision of all or part of the instructional and technical
services required for the operation of a virtual innovation school.
Contracts with a for-proﬁt or non-proﬁt corporation, other than
an educational collaborative, shall be subject to the procurement
requirements of M.G.L. c.30B.
innovation school laws & regulations
255
8. funding. The sponsoring district shall annually set the per
pupil tuition rate for students enrolled in a virtual innovation
school, provided that said rate shall not exceed the maximum
tuition rate permitted under M.G.L. c.76, s.12B, and provided
further that said rate shall apply to students residing in the spon-
soring district and students residing in other Massachusetts dis-
tricts. Tuition payments shall be prorated for students enrolled
for less than a full year. In addition to said per pupil tuition rate,
the costs of additional services required by a student under an
individualized education program shall be paid by the student’s
home district pursuant to the provisions of 603 CMR 10.07. Tu-
ition payments shall be made quarterly.
9. reporting requirements. Virtual innovation schools shall
comply with all reporting requirements established by the De-
partment for public schools, and shall also submit such reports
speciﬁcally relating to virtual innovation schools as the Depart-
ment may require. The Department shall establish a separate
school code for each virtual innovation school, notwithstanding
that the administration of said school may be part of or shared
with another district school.
Regulatory Authority: M.G.L. c. 69, §1B; c. 69, §§1J and 1K, as
amended by St. 2010, c. 12, §3; c. 71, §38G.
Bibliography
(2011). Building the brain’s “air trafﬁc control” system: How early
experiences shape the development of executive function. Working
Paper 11, Center on the Developing Child at Harvard University.
(2012). Valve handbook for new employees.
(2013, April). Appendix f – science and engineering practices in
the ngss.
(2013). Massachusetts general law - part i - title xii - chapter 71 -
section 92.
Abelson, H. and A. A. Di Sessa (1986). Turtle geometry: The com-
puter as a medium for exploring mathematics. the MIT Press.
Achieve, I. Parcc ﬁeld test administration and timeline.
Adelman, C. (2006). The toolbox revisited: Paths to degree com-
pletion from high school through college. US Department of Educa-
tion.
Anderson, C. S. (1982). The search for school climate: A review of
the research. Review of educational research 52(3), 368–420.
Armstrong, T. (1996). A holistic approach to attention deﬁcit
disorder. Educational leadership 53(5), 34–36.
Association, N. M. S. (2003). This we believe: Successful schools
for young adolescents: A position paper of the National Middle School
Association. National Middle School Association.
Astin, A. W. et al. (2012). Assessment for excellence: The philosophy
and practice of assessment and evaluation in higher education. Rowman
& Littleﬁeld.
Astone, N. M. and S. S. McLanahan (1991). Family structure,
parental practices and high school completion. American Sociologi-
cal Review, 309–320.
Athanassiou, N., J. M. McNett, and C. Harvey (2003). Critical
thinking in the management classroom: Bloom’s taxonomy as a
learning tool. Journal of Management Education 27(5), 533–555.
Azevedo, R. and A. F. Hadwin (2005). Scaffolding self-regulated
learning and metacognition–implications for the design of
computer-based scaffolds. Instructional Science 33(5), 367–379.
258
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Azoulay, P., W. Ding, and T. Stuart (2009). The impact of academic
patenting on the rate, quality and direction of (public) research
output*. The Journal of Industrial Economics 57(4), 637–676.
Baldoni, M., C. Baroglio, I. Brunkhorst, N. Henze, E. Marengo, and
V. Patti (2006). A personalization service for curriculum planning.
In LWA, pp. 17–20.
Barker, R. G. and P. V. Gump (1964). Big school, small school: High
school size and student behavior. Stanford University Press.
Barone, C., A. I. Aguirre-Deandreis, and E. J. Trickett (1991).
Means—ends problem-solving skills, life stress, and social support
as mediators of adjustment in the normative transition to high
school. American Journal of Community Psychology 19(2), 207–225.
Battistich, V., D. Solomon, M. Watson, and E. Schaps (1997). Car-
ing school communities. Educational Psychologist 32(3), 137–151.
Bell, L. (1988). Local ﬁnancial management in schools: efﬁciency,
economy and administration. School Organization 8(2), 121–129.
Bell, S. (2010). Project-based learning for the 21st century: Skills
for the future. The Clearing House 83(2), 39–43.
Bello, M. A. and V. Loftness (2010). Addressing inadequate invest-
ment in school facility maintenance.
Berger, R. (2003). An Ethic of Excellence: Building a Culture of Crafts-
manship with Students. ERIC.
Bernstein, D. J. (2008). Peer review and evaluation of the intel-
lectual work of teaching. Change: The Magazine of Higher Learn-
ing 40(2), 48–51.
Bickerton, B. (2013, October). Mass drive-in conference.
Bingham, L. B., T. Nabatchi, and R. O’Leary (2005). The new
governance: Practices and processes for stakeholder and citizen
participation in the work of government. Public administration
review 65(5), 547–558.
Bishop, A. J. (1991). Mathematical enculturation: A cultural perspec-
tive on mathematics education, Volume 6. Springer.
Blackmore, J. A. (2005). A critical evaluation of peer review via
teaching observation within higher education. International Journal
of Educational Management 19(3), 218–232.
Blair, D. (2009). The child in the garden: An evaluative review
of the beneﬁts of school gardening. The Journal of Environmental
Education 40(2), 15–38.
Blumenfeld, P., B. J. Fishman, J. Krajcik, R. W. Marx, and
E. Soloway (2000). Creating usable innovations in systemic re-
form: Scaling up technology-embedded project-based science in
urban schools. Educational Psychologist 35(3), 149–164.
bibliography
259
Borghans, L., A. L. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and B. Ter Weel
(2008). The economics and psychology of personality traits. Journal
of Human Resources 43(4), 972–1059.
Bosworth, K. (1994). Developing collaborative skills in college
students. New Directions for Teaching and Learning 1994(59), 25–31.
Boud, D., R. Cohen, and J. Sampson (1999). Peer learning and
assessment. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education 24(4),
413–426.
Bouffard-Bouchard, T., S. Parent, and S. Larivee (1991). Inﬂuence
of self-efﬁcacy on self-regulation and performance among junior
and senior high-school age students. International Journal of Behav-
ioral Development 14(2), 153–164.
Bowen, D. E., G. E. Ledford, and B. R. Nathan (1991). Hiring for
the organization, not the job. The Executive 5(4), 35–51.
Boys, J. (2010). Towards creative learning spaces: Re-thinking the
architecture of post-compulsory education. Routledge.
Braitenberg, V. (1986). Vehicles: Experiments in synthetic psychology.
MIT press.
Brudney, J. L. (1999). The effective use of volunteers: Best practices
for the public sector. Law and Contemporary Problems 62(4), 219–255.
Bruffee, K. A. (1999). Collaborative learning: Higher education, inter-
dependence, and the authority of knowledge. ERIC.
Buchmann, C., D. J. Condron, and V. J. Roscigno (2010). Shadow
education, american style: Test preparation, the sat and college
enrollment. Social Forces 89(2), 435–461.
Buckley, F. J. (1999). Team teaching: what, why, and how? Sage.
Burchard, J. D., E. J. Bruns, and S. N. Burchard (2002).
The
wraparound approach. Community treatment for youth: Evidence-
based interventions for severe emotional and behavioral disorders 2,
69–90.
Carskadon, M. A., C. Acebo, and O. G. Jenni (2004). Regulation of
adolescent sleep: implications for behavior. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 1021(1), 276–291.
Chickering, A. W. and L. Reisser (1993). Education and Identity. The
Jossey-Bass Higher and Adult Education Series. ERIC.
Clotfelter, C. T., H. F. Ladd, and J. L. Vigdor (2010). Teacher labor
markets, segregation and salary-based policies to combat inequity
across schools. Society for Research on Educational Effectiveness.
Connell, D. (2013, November). Personal communication with
debbie connell.
260
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Cooper, H., B. Nye, K. Charlton, J. Lindsay, and S. Greathouse
(1996). The effects of summer vacation on achievement test scores:
A narrative and meta-analytic review. Review of Educational Re-
search 66(3), 227–268.
CORNISH, L. (2012). Mixed-grade elementary-school classes and
student achievement. International Guide to Student Achievement,
122.
Craver, K. W. (1994). School library media centers in the 21st century:
Changes and challenges. Libraries Unlimited.
Daily, C. M., D. R. Dalton, and A. A. Cannella (2003). Corporate
governance: Decades of dialogue and data. Academy of Manage-
ment Review 28(3), 371–382.
Dalio, R. (2011). Principles.
D’amour, D. and I. Oandasan (2005). Interprofessionality as the
ﬁeld of interprofessional practice and interprofessional education:
An emerging concept. Journal of interprofessional care 19(S1), 8–20.
Davenport, T. H. and L. Pruzak (2000). Working knowledge: How
organizations manage what they know. Harvard Business Press.
Davis, J. R. (1995). Interdisciplinary courses and team teaching: New
arrangements for learning. American Council on Education and the
Oryx Press Phoneix, AZ.
Deal, T. E. and K. D. Peterson (1999). Shaping school culture: The
heart of leadership. ERIC.
DeBerard, M. S., G. Spielmans, and D. Julka (2004). Predictors of
academic achievement and retention among college freshmen: A
longitudinal study. College Student Journal 38(1), 66–80.
Deninger, M. and R. O’Donnell (2009, March). Special education
placements and costs in massachusetts. Education research brief,
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Educa-
tion, http://www.doe.mass.edu/research/.
Dewey, J. (2007). Experience and education. Free Press.
Doherty, A. (2012). " teacher, i showed her how to do that!": Teach-
ing early-years children through mixed-age play. Primary Sci-
ence 122, 24–26.
Drake, S. M. and R. C. Burns (2004). Meeting standards through
integrated curriculum. ASCD.
Driscoll, D. P. (2006).
Massachusetts science and technol-
ogy/engineering curriculum framework. Technical report, Mas-
sachusetts Department of Education.
Drucker, P. F. (2009). Managing in a time of great change. Harvard
Business Press.
bibliography
261
Duckworth, A. L., C. Peterson, M. D. Matthews, and D. R. Kelly
(2007). Grit: perseverance and passion for long-term goals. Journal
of personality and social psychology 92(6), 1087.
Duckworth, E. R. (2001). " Tell me more": Listening to learners ex-
plain. Teachers College Press New York.
Duckworth, E. R. and E. Duckworth (1996). " the having of won-
derful ideas" & other essays on teaching & learning.
Dutton, T. A. (1987). Design and studio pedagogy. Journal of
Architectural Education, 16–25.
Eubank, R. and J. D. Hart (1992). Testing goodness-of-ﬁt in re-
gression via order selection criteria. The Annals of Statistics 20(3),
1412–1425.
Fantuzzo, J. W., R. E. Riggio, S. Connelly, and L. A. Dimeff (1989).
Effects of reciprocal peer tutoring on academic achievement and
psychological adjustment: A component analysis. Journal of educa-
tional psychology 81(2), 173.
Farrell, M. B. (2013). Tech ﬁrms call for mandatory computer
classes.
Ferran, N., E. Mor, and J. Minguillón (2005). Towards personal-
ization in digital libraries through ontologies. Library Manage-
ment 26(4/5), 206–217.
Filippatou, D. and S. Kaldi (2010). The effectiveness of project-
based learning on pupils with learning difﬁculties regarding aca-
demic performance, group work, and motivation. International
journal of special education 25(1), 17–26.
Florida, R. (2002). The creative class. The rise of the creative class.
Foster, J. (2013, September). Personal communication with jake
foster, dese director of curriculum for ste.
Fountain, J. E. (2001). Building the virtual state: Information technol-
ogy and institutional change. Brookings Institution Press.
French, D. (2013, August). Personal communication with dan
french. Regarding voting and editing process between Innovation
Plan and School Committee votes.
Friedman, I. A. (1991). High and low-burnout schools: School
culture aspects of teacher burnout. The Journal of Educational
Research 84(6), 325–333.
Furco, A. (1996). Service-learning: A balanced approach to expe-
riential education. Expanding boundaries: Serving and learning 1,
1–6.
262
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Gandara, P. and J. Fish (1994). Year-round schooling as an av-
enue to major structural reform. Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis 16(1), 67–85.
Gardner, H. (1985). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelli-
gences. Basic Books (AZ).
Gardner, H. (1994). The Arts and Human Development: A Psycho-
logical Study of the Artistic Process; with a New Introduction. Basic
Books.
Gardner, J. E., C. A. Wissick, W. Schweder, and L. S. Canter (2003).
Enhancing interdisciplinary instruction in general and special
education thematic units and technology. Remedial and Special
Education 24(3), 161–172.
Gibbons, P. (2002). Scaffolding language, scaffolding learning: Teaching
second language learners in the mainstream classroom. Heinemann
Portsmouth, NH.
Girard, B. (2009). The Google way: How one company is revolutioniz-
ing management as we know it. No Starch Press.
Goldschmid, B. and M. L. Goldschmid (1976). Peer teaching in
higher education: a review. Higher Education 5(1), 9–33.
Goldschmidt, G. and D. Tatsa (2005). How good are good ideas?
correlates of design creativity. Design Studies 26(6), 593–611.
Goode, J. (2010). Connecting k-16 curriculum & policy: making
computer science engaging, accessible, and hospitable for un-
derrepresented students. In Proceedings of the 41st ACM technical
symposium on Computer science education, pp. 22–26. ACM.
Goodson, I. and I. F. Goodson (1992). Studying teachers’ lives.
Psychology Press.
Goos, M., D. Lincoln, A. Coco, S. Frid, P. Galbraith, M. Horne,
L. Jolly, A. Kostogriz, T. Lowrie, T. Short, et al. (2004). Home,
school and community partnerships to support children’s numeracy.
Department of Education, Science and Training Canberra.
Greenberg, I. (2007). Processing: creative coding and computational
art. Apress.
Harry, B. (1992). Cultural diversity, families, and the special education
system: Communication and empowerment. Teachers College Press.
Haskell, W. L., I. Lee, R. R. Pate, K. E. Powell, S. N. Blair, B. A.
Franklin, C. A. Macera, G. W. Heath, P. D. Thompson, A. Bauman,
et al. (2007). Physical activity and public health: updated recom-
mendation for adults from the american college of sports medicine
and the american heart association. Medicine and science in sports
and exercise 39(8), 1423.
bibliography
263
Hehir, T., T. Grindal, and H. Eidelman. Review of special educa-
tion in the commonwealth of massachusetts.
Hehir, T. and L. I. Katzman (2012). Effective inclusive schools: De-
signing successful schoolwide programs. John Wiley & Sons.
Henderson, A. T. (2007). Beyond the bake sale: The essential guide to
family-school partnerships. New Press.
Hetland, L. (2013). Studio Thinking 2: The Real Beneﬁts of Visual Arts
Education. Teachers College Press.
Higgins, S., E. Hall, K. Wall, P. Woolner, and C. McCaughey (2005).
The impact of school environments: A literature review. The Centre
for Learning and Teaching, School of Education, Communication and
Language Science, University of Newcastle. Accessed online on 10, 04–
08.
Hofstadter, D. (1979). Gödel, Escher, Bach: an eternal golden braid.
New York: Basic Books.
Huba, M. E. and J. E. Freed (2000). Learner centered assessment
on college campuses: Shifting the focus from teaching to learning.
Community College Journal of Research and Practice 24(9), 759–766.
Jacobson, R. and M. J. Blank (2011). Expanding the learning day:
An essential component of the community schools strategy. New
directions for youth development 2011(131), 55–67.
Janiga, S. J. and V. Costenbader (2002). The transition from high
school to postsecondary education for students with learning
disabilities a survey of college service coordinators. Journal of
Learning Disabilities 35(5), 463–470.
Jolliffe, I. (2005). Principal component analysis. Wiley Online Library.
Kannel-Ray, V., P. J. Zeller, W. E. Laceﬁeld, et al. (2009). Academic
case management: Promising interventions for closing achieve-
ment gaps in multicultural urban settings. ERS Spectrum 27(3),
19–30.
Kats, G. and E. Capital (2003). Green building costs and ﬁnancial
beneﬁts. Massachusetts Technology Collaborative Boston, MA.
Kegan, R. and L. L. Lahey (2001). How the way we talk can change
the way we work: Seven languages for transformation. Jossey-Bass.
Kidd, C., H. Palmeri, and R. N. Aslin (2012). Rational snacking:
Young children’s decision-making on the marshmallow task is
moderated by beliefs about environmental reliability. Cognition.
Kuhn, S. (2001). Learning from the architecture studio: Implica-
tions for project-based pedagogy. International Journal of Engineer-
ing Education 17(4/5), 349–352.
264
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Labaree, D. F. (1986). Curriculum, credentials, and the middle
class: A case study of a nineteenth century high school. Sociology
of Education 59(1), 42–57.
Labaree, D. F. (1997). How to succeed in school without really learning:
The credentials race in American education. Yale University Press.
Lakatos, I., P. Feyerabend, and M. Motterlini (1999). For and
against method: including Lakatos’s lectures on scientiﬁc method and
the Lakatos-Feyerabend correspondence. University of Chicago Press.
Larose, S. and M. Boivin (1998). Attachment to parents, social sup-
port expectations, and socioemotional adjustment during the high
school-college transition. Journal of Research on Adolescence 8(1),
1–27.
Latrobe, K. H. (1998). The emerging school library media center:
Historical issues and perspectives. Libraries Unlimited.
Lawson, B. (2006). How designers think: the design process demystiﬁed.
Routledge.
Lee, V. E. and D. T. Burkam (2003). Dropping out of high school:
The role of school organization and structure. American Educational
Research Journal 40(2), 353–393.
Lee, V. E., J. B. Smith, and R. G. Croninger (1997). How high
school organization inﬂuences the equitable distribution of learn-
ing in mathematics and science. Sociology of education, 128–150.
Levine, E., T. Sizer, T. Peters, D. Littky, and E. Washor (2002). One
kid at a time: Big lessons from a small school. Teachers College Press
New York.
Levine, S. (2010). School lunch politics: The surprising history of
America’s favorite welfare program. Princeton University Press.
Lipham, J. M. (1981). Effective Principal, Effective School. ERIC.
Little, J. W. (1982). Norms of collegiality and experimentation:
Workplace conditions of school success. American educational
research journal 19(3), 325–340.
Lubienski, C. (2004). Charter school innovation in theory and
practice: Autonomy, r&d, and curricular conformity. Taking account
of charter schools: What’s happened and what’s next, 72–90.
Lundberg, S. (2013). The college type: Personality and educational
inequality. Journal of Labor Economics 31(3), 421–441.
MacNeil, A. J., D. L. Prater, and S. Busch (2009). The effects of
school culture and climate on student achievement. International
Journal of Leadership in Education 12(1), 73–84.
Maeda, J. (2011, October). Stem to steam.
bibliography
265
March, J. G. (1978). American public school administration: A
short analysis. The School Review 86(2), 217–250.
Massey Jr, F. J. (1951). The kolmogorov-smirnov test for goodness
of ﬁt. Journal of the American statistical Association 46(253), 68–78.
Mather, D. and B. Hanley (1999). Cohort grouping and preservice
teacher education: Effects on pedagogical development. Canadian
Journal of Education/Revue canadienne de l’education, 235–250.
May, P. J. (1992). Policy learning and failure. Journal of public policy,
331–354.
McLaughlin, M. W. and J. E. Talbert (2006). Building school-based
teacher learning communities: Professional strategies to improve student
achievement, Volume 45. Teachers College Press.
McMullen, S. C. and K. E. Rouse (2012). The impact of year-round
schooling on academic achievement: Evidence from mandatory
school calendar conversions. American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy 4(4), 230–252.
McPartland, J. M. and S. M. Nettles (1991). Using community
adults as advocates or mentors for at-risk middle school students:
a two-year evaluation of project raise. American journal of education,
568–586.
Mediratta, B. and J. Bick (2007). The google way: give engineers
room. The New York Times 21.
Meier, D. (2002). The power of their ideas: Lessons for America from a
small school in Harlem. Beacon Press.
Meltzer, L. (2011). Executive function in education: From theory to
practice. Guilford press.
Mergendoller, J. R., T. Markham, J. Ravitz, and J. Larmer (2006).
Pervasive management of project based learning: Teachers as
guides and facilitators. Handbook of Classroom Management: Re-
search, Practice, and Contemporary Issues, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum, Inc.
Merriam, S. (1983). Mentors and protégés: A critical review of the
literature. Adult Education Quarterly 33(3), 161–173.
Meyer, D. (2013). dy/dan.
Meyer, D. K. and J. C. Turner (2002). Using instructional discourse
analysis to study the scaffolding of student self-regulation. Educa-
tional Psychologist 37(1), 17–25.
Meyer, M. A., J. E. Cross, Z. S. Byrne, B. Franzen, and S. Reeve
(2013). Green school building success: Innovation through a
ﬂat team approach. Constructing Green: The Social Structures of
Sustainability, 219.
266
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
Mimura, Y. (2008). Housing cost burden, poverty status, and
economic hardship among low-income families. Journal of Family
and Economic Issues 29(1), 152–165.
Mitchell, S., T. S. Foulger, K. Wetzel, and C. Rathkey (2009). The
negotiated project approach: Project-based learning without leav-
ing the standards behind. Early Childhood Education Journal 36(4),
339–346.
Morgan, J. M. and J. K. Liker (2006). The Toyota product development
system. Productivity press New York.
Morse, A. (2011). Oversight of ﬁnancial management in local
authority maintained schools.
Nahapiet, J. (2009). Capitalizing on connections: social capital
and strategic management. Social capital: Reaching out, reaching in,
205–236.
Newell, S., M. Robertson, H. Scarbrough, and J. Swan (2009). Man-
aging knowledge work and innovation. Palgrave Macmillan.
Odden, A. and C. Busch (1998). Financing Schools for High Perfor-
mance: Strategies for Improving the Use of Educational Resources. The
Jossey-Bass Education Series. ERIC.
Otley, D. (1994). Management control in contemporary orga-
nizations: towards a wider framework. Management accounting
research 5(3), 289–299.
Page, E. E. and A. M. Stone (2010). From harlem children’s zone
to promise neighborhoods: Creating the tipping point for success.
Georgetown Public Policy Institute, Washington, DC.
Pahl, G. and W. Beitz (1988). Engineering design: a systematic
approach. NASA STI/Recon Technical Report A 89, 47350.
Pang, B. and L. Lee (2008). Opinion mining and sentiment analy-
sis. Foundations and trends in information retrieval 2(1-2), 1–135.
Papert, S. (1980a).
Constructionism vs. instructionism.
In
Speech by video to a conference of educators in Japan. Available
WWW:[http://www. papert. org/articles/const_inst/const_inst5. html].
Papert, S. (1980b). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful
ideas. Basic Books, Inc.
Papert, S. and I. Harel (1991). Situating constructionism. Construc-
tionism, 1–11.
Park, K. (2009). Park’s textbook of preventive and social medicine.
Bhanot.
Piaget, J. (1930). The child’s conception of physical causality. Transac-
tion Publishers.
bibliography
267
Pintrich, P. R. and E. V. De Groot (1990). Motivational and self-
regulated learning components of classroom academic perfor-
mance. Journal of educational psychology 82(1), 33.
Pring, R. (2012). Teacher as researcher. Theory and Practice of
Curriculum Studies (RLE Edu B), 17.
Pyatt, G. (1976). On the interpretation and disaggregation of gini
coefﬁcients. The Economic Journal 86(342), 243–255.
Rheingold, A., J. Seaman, and R. Berger (2014). Assessment
across boundaries: How high-quality student work demonstrates
achievement, shapes practice, and improves communities. In
Assessing Schools for Generation R (Responsibility), pp. 115–131.
Springer.
Rip, A. (2004). Strategic research, post-modern universities and
research training. Higher Education Policy 17(2), 153–166.
Rivers, W. P. (2001). Autonomy at all costs: An ethnography
of metacognitive self-assessment and self-management among
experienced language learners. The modern language journal 85(2),
279–290.
Roam, D. (2009). The back of the napkin (expanded edition): Solving
problems and selling ideas with pictures. Penguin.
Robin, J. What project based learning isn’t.
Rooney, A. L. and P. R. Van Ostenberg (1999). Licensure, accredita-
tion, and certiﬁcation: approaches to health services quality. Center for
Human Services, Quality Assurance Project.
Scott, J. C. (1998). Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve
the human condition have failed. Yale University Press.
Series, A. A. E. C. (2009). Qualities of quality: Understanding
excellence in arts education.
Sheldon, S. B., M. G. Sanders, B. S. Simon, and K. C. Salinas
(2008). School, family, and community partnerships: Your handbook
for action. Corwin-volume discounts.
Silvernail, D. L. and D. M. Lane (2004). The impact of maine’s one-
to-one laptop program on middle school teachers and students.
Maine Education Policy Research Institute (MEPRI), University of
Southern Maine.
Simon, H. A. (1996). The sciences of the artiﬁcial. MIT press.
Simpson, J. A., E. S. Weiner, et al. (1989). The Oxford english dictio-
nary, Volume 2. Clarendon Press Oxford.
Stables, G. J., E. M. Young, M. W. Howerton, A. L. Yaroch,
S. Kuester, M. K. Solera, K. Cobb, and L. Nebeling (2005). Small
268
the somerville steam academy innovation plan
school-based effectiveness trials increase vegetable and fruit con-
sumption among youth. Journal of the American Dietetic Associa-
tion 105(2), 252–256.
Stern, S. (2001). Valuing housing subsidies in a new measure of
poverty: A statistical match of the american housing survey to
the current population survey. Housing and Household Economics
Statistics Division, Working Paper, US Census Bureau.
Strauss, R. S., D. Rodzilsky, G. Burack, and M. Colin (2001).
Psychosocial correlates of physical activity in healthy children.
Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 155(8), 897.
Strong, W. B., R. M. Malina, C. J. Blimkie, S. R. Daniels, R. K. Dish-
man, B. Gutin, A. C. Hergenroeder, A. Must, P. A. Nixon, J. M.
Pivarnik, et al. (2005). Evidence based physical activity for school-
age youth. The Journal of pediatrics 146(6), 732–737.
Tanner, C. K. (2000). The inﬂuence of school architecture on aca-
demic achievement. Journal of Educational Administration 38(4),
309–330.
Tate, R. (2012). The 20% Doctrine. HarperCollins.
Theodos, B. (2010). Inclusive public housing: Services for the hard
to house.
Tough, P. (2012). How children succeed: Grit, curiosity, and the hidden
power of character. Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt (HMH).
Tufte, E. R. and P. Graves-Morris (1983). The visual display of quanti-
tative information, Volume 2. Graphics press Cheshire, CT.
Turker, A., ˙I. Görgün, and O. Conlan (2006). The challenge of
content creation to facilitate personalized e-learning experiences.
International Journal on E-Learning 5(1), 11–17.
Tyack, D. B. (1976). Ways of seeing: An essay on the history of
compulsory schooling. Harvard Educational Review 46(3), 355–389.
Ulrich, W. and N. McWhorter (2011). Business Architecture: The Art
and Practice of Business Transformation. Meghan-Kiffer Press.
Underhill, P. and C. Link (2013). Keeping the community and its
economy healthy. Communities.
Van Kannel-Ray, N., W. E. Laceﬁeld, and P. J. Zeller (2008). Aca-
demic case managers: Evaluating a middle school intervention for
children at-risk. Journal of MultiDisciplinary Evaluation 5(10), 21–29.
VanDenBerg, J. E. (1996). Individualized services and supports
through the wraparound process: Philosophy and procedures.
Journal of Child and Family Studies 5(1), 7–21.
Victor, B. Up and down the ladder of abstraction.
bibliography
269
Volante, L. (2004). Teaching to the test: What every educator
and policy-maker should know. Canadian Journal of Educational
Administration and Policy 35(Sept. 25).
Vygotsky, L. (1987). Zone of proximal development. Mind in
society: The development of higher psychological processes, 52–91.
Wagner, M. M. and J. Blackorby (1996). Transition from high
school to work or college: How special education students fare.
The Future of Children, 103–120.
Walker, A. (2011). ‘creativity loves constraints’: The paradox of
google’s twenty percent time. ephemera, 369.
Warschauer, M., D. Grant, G. D. Real, and M. Rousseau (2004).
Promoting academic literacy with technology: Successful laptop
programs in k-12 schools. System 32(4), 525–537.
Weinstein, C. S. (1979). The physical environment of the school:
A review of the research. Review of educational Research 49(4), 577–
610.
Whitman, N. A. and J. D. Fife (1988). Peer Teaching: To Teach Is To
Learn Twice. ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Report No. 4, 1988. ERIC.
Wing, J. M. (2006). Computational thinking. Communications of the
ACM 49(3), 33–35.
Winson, A. (2008). School food environments and the obesity
issue: content, structural determinants, and agency in canadian
high schools. Agriculture and Human Values 25(4), 499–511.
Wolf, A. (1995). Competence-based assessment. Open University
Press Buckingham.
Wolfson, A. R. and M. A. Carskadon (1998). Sleep schedules and
daytime functioning in adolescents. Child development 69(4), 875–
887.
Wolfson, A. R. and M. A. Carskadon (2003). Understanding ado-
lescent’s sleep patterns and school performance: a critical ap-
praisal. Sleep medicine reviews 7(6), 491–506.
Wood, C. (2005). Making choice a reality in secondary education.
London: Social Market Foundation.
Yitzhaki, S. (1979). Relative deprivation and the gini coefﬁcient.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 321–324.
