Looking at proteins: representations, folding, packing, and design
Biophysical Society National Lecture, 1992
Jane S. Richardson, * David C. Richardson, * Neil B. Tweedy, * Kimberly M. Gernert, * Thomas P. Quinn,
Michael H. Hecht,* Bruce W. Erickson,s Yibing Yan,s Robert D. McClain, Mary E. Donlan, and Mark C. Surles
*Deparment of Biochemistry, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27710; *Departments of Chemistry and Molecular Biology,
Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544-1009; and 5Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina 27599-3290 USA
ABSTRACT
Looking at proteins is an active process of interpretation and selection, emphasizing some features and deleting others.
Multiple representations are needed, for such purposes as showing motions or conveying both the chain connectivity and the three-di-
mensional shape simultaneously. In studying and comparing protein structures, ideas are suggested about the determinants of tertiary
structure and of folding (e.g., that Greek key #3 barrels may fold up two strands at a time). The design and synthesis of new proteins
"from scratch" provides a route toward the experimental testing of such ideas. It has also been a fruitful new perspective from which to
look at structures, requiring such things as statistics on very narrowly defined structural categories and explicit attention to "negative
design" criteria that actively block unwanted alternatives (e.g., reverse topology of a helix bundle, or edge-to-edge aggregation of ~
sheets).
Recently, the field of protein design has produced a rather unexpected general result: apparently we do indeed know enough to
successfully design proteins that fold into approximately correct structures, but not enough to design unique, native-like structures. The
degree of order varies considerably, but even the best designed material shows multiple conformations by NMR, more similar to a
"molten globule" folding intermediate than to a well ordered native tertiary structure. In response to this conclusion, we are now working
on systems that test useful questions with approximate structures (such as determining which factors most influence the choice of
helix-bundle topology) and also analyzing how natural proteins achieve unique core conformations (e.g., for side chains on the interior
side of a (3 sheet, illustrated in the kinemages).
INTRODUCTION
Protein crystallography is rather like a dog chasing cars.
Both
are probably foolish and certainly heroic en-
deavors. But in both cases, the real problem is: suppose
you actually manage to catch one, what in the world do
you do with it (Victor Bloomfield, 1979, personal com-
munication).
Our answer to that, other than chewing on the tires,
has always been that you look at them. Looking, and
especially seeing, is an active process of interpreting, of
finding and emphasizing patterns, of adding things and
deleting things. This is particularly clear in the case of
proteins, for two reasons:
First, proteins are so complex that showing every atom
is almost immediately rejected as hopelessly confusing.
Color plate 1 a shows an all-atom brass model of a small
protein, which is only a little more illuminating than a
list of all the x, y, z's. But even in the days before com-
puter graphics, we found ways to show meaningful sub-
sets of the information, as in plates 1, b and c, where the
T. P. Quinn's Present address is Department of Biochemistry,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 6521 1.
R. D. McClain's present address is Nalco Chemical Co., Sugar Land,
TX 77487.
M. E. Donlan's present address is Molecular Simulations Inc.,
Waltham, MA 02154.
M. C. Surles' present address is San Diego Supercomputer Center,
San Diego, CA 92186.
Address correspondence to Jane Richardson.
Abbreviations used: PDB, Brookhaven Protein Data Bank (Bernstein
et al., 1977).
backbone fold is emphasized by adding UV-fluorescent
dye in tygon tubing and then the atoms are deleted by
turning off the room lights. Kinemage 1 shows a similar
progression from confusion to simplification, for a com-
puter graphics example.
Second, for something smaller than the wavelength of
visible light, there is no such thing as showing how it
really looks on the molecular level. This is healthy be-
cause it encourages experimentation with multiple repre-
sentations. Each representation emphasizes different
features of the structure and can help you see those fea-
tures in the first place (while helping you ignore other
things, for better and for worse).
Representations of proteins in one,
three, and four dimensions
The two most traditional representations for molecules
are either stick figures for the bonds or spheres for the
atoms, paralleling the two major types of physical mod-
els: brass-rod "Kendrew" models (e.g., plate
1 a) and
plastic-ball "CPK" models (e.g., plate 2). CPK models
are very informative during the process of putting them
together, but the completed models all look alike. Com-
puter versions ofCPK models have successfully imitated
their appearance and most of their disadvantages (the
fact that the inside is completely hidden, and the diffi-
culty of identifying an atom or group), without, so far,
imitating the real virtue of CPKs, which is the physical
"feel" for the bumps, constraints, and degrees of free-
dom one obtains by manipulating them.
1186
0006-3495/92/11/1186/24
$2.00
Biophys. J. © Biophysical Society
Volume 63
November 1992
1186-1209
1186
0006-3495/92/11/1186/24
$2.00
PLATE I
Brass Kendrew model ofthe Staphylococcal nuclease mole-
cule (Arnone et al., 1971 ), with Tygon tubing tied along the backbone
and filled with fluorescent dye. (a) (top left) With just room lights; (b)
(top right) room plus UV light; (c) (bottom) UV light only, to empha-
size the course of the polypeptide chain.
PLATE 2
Plastic CPK space-filling model of the Felix molecule
(Hecht et al., 1990), with sulfurs of the SS bridge showing in
yellow.
Richardson et at.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1187
Richardson et al.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1187
PLATE 3
A thin slice through ribonuclease A (PDB file 5RSA; Wlo-
dawer and Sjolin, 1983), with vectors for the Ca's (white) and active
site His (blue). Dots outline the exposed surface (Connolly, 1983)
color-coded with green (C), red (0), blue (N), and yellow (H). Most
dots are yellow.
Brass models or stick figures concentrate on the bond
connectivity of the molecule, while CPK models or
atom-sphere figures concentrate on the outside shape in
three dimensions. In fact, one ofthe most basic and fasci-
nating things about protein structures is that they are
inherently both one- and three-dimensional at the same
time. The interplay between those two aspects is crucial
to protein folding, evolution, mobility, and much of
function; therefore, it is desirable to show both together,
and several types of representation at least attempt to
do so.
Dot surfaces (Connolly, 1983) are primarily a way of
showing outside surface, but they have the advantage
that you can see through them, so that a stick model can
be included inside. When working interactively, one can
in fact be aware of both the identity and connectivity of
the amino acids and of the three-dimensional shapes
they are creating. As for all protein representations,
stereo helps, color helps, real-time rotation helps, and all
together are even better. In static two-dimensional il-
lustrations,
comprehensibility unfortunately requires
showing just a thin slice. Plate 3 is such a slice through
ribonuclease, outlining with dots the surface shape of a
cross-section through the active site. The dots are color-
coded by atom type; there are a few patches of red or
blue, but primarily the dots are yellow, which is the color
for hydrogens. This slide was made before we learned
that to make sense ofthe dot surfaces, hydrogens should
be colored to match the atom they bond to. However,
this version makes the very important point that the pro-
tein surface consists almost entirely ofhydrogens. That is
true both for the outside, which contacts solvent and
other molecules, and also for the internal contact sur-
faces between parts of the protein. We will return to this
point later.
Ribbon
schematics,
either hand-drawn
(plate
4;
Richardson, 1985) or computer-generated (Fig. 1; Car-
son and Bugg, 1986), also attempt to combine one and
three dimensions. Obviously, they show the path of the
polypeptide chain, with cues that try to make the con-
nectivity and relative positions unambiguous. However,
they also reflect important parts of the interactions in
three dimensions. For instance, the plane ofthe A-strand
arrows or of the helical ribbons follows the hydrogen-
bonding direction, so that when the planes of neighbor-
ing arrows turn in synchrony you perceive them as be-
longing together in a unified sheet.
Plate 5 shows another such attempt, for pancreatic
trypsin inhibitor, made from wooden closet pole with a
mitre/bevel saw. It uses distance, angle, and dihedral
values for successive a-carbon positions, in the same way
as a wire backbone model (Rubin and Richardson,
1972), but the wood is thick enough so that the parts ofit
almost touch at hydrogen-bonding distance. The con-
nectivity is clear, but there is also the strong feeling of a
compact but nonintersecting chain in three dimensions.
It is also possible to show explicitly the interactions
PLATE 4
Ribbon schematic drawing of the ribonuclease A back-
bone. Helices are shown as red spirals and a strands as arrows, with
the outside of the sheet blue and the inside lilac.
1188
Biophysical Journal
Volume
1188
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November 1992
FIGURE 1
Computer-drawn ribbon schematic ofa serine protease mol-
ecule (PDB file 2SGA; James et al., 1980). It has two domains of
antiparallel d structure, with the active-site side chains in a cleft be-
tween them.
between parts of a protein chain. One simple method is
adding H-bond lines to a stick figure (as in Kinemage 1 ),
using dotted or thinner or less brightly colored lines than
for the covalent bonds. Van der Waals contacts can be
represented directly with a modified form ofdot surface,
as shown in Fig. 2 and later in Kinemage 7. These
"small-probe contact dots" (used in Richardson and
Richardson, 1987, 1989b) are calculated by bumping a
small radius probe around the surface ofeach atom, as in
the standard Connolly algorithm. However, instead of
leaving dots only on the open areas where the probe
touches nothing else, you do the opposite and leave dots
only on the contact portions, where the probe does touch
another atom. Wherever two atoms come within half an
Angstrom of actually touching, there will be a patch of
dots from each side, color coded by atom type so that
hydrophobic contacts are green and hydrogen bonds are
slightly intersecting pairs of blue and red patches. This
lets you evaluate in fine detail the goodness of fit be-
tween two pieces of molecule. The example is a slice
through a helix-helix contact, showing that close to half
of each sidechain's contact is with backbone atoms.
Another important part oflooking at proteins is exam-
ining electron density maps for x-ray crystal structures,
or the experimental constraints and preferably even the
spectra for NMR structures. This lets one evaluate levels
of accuracy, both for the structure as a whole and for
particular parts of it, and shows subtleties that are not
very well reflected in the coordinate data, such as the
relationships of multiple, partially occupied waters, the
contacts between molecules, or the nature of disordered
regions.
An additional complication is that protein structures
are really four-dimensional, because conformational
changes are often very important. Movements are ex-
tremely difficult to study or show with physical models,
but once you know the end states they are easy to show
on the computer, either as both structures superimposed
or by switching back and forth between them. For exam-
ple, some mutants ofT4 lysozyme have the two domains
in different relative positions in the crystal structures
(e.g., Jacobson et al., 1992). Plate 6 is a superposition of
three of those structures, showing the "hinge bending"
motion of the domains. Kinemage 2 "animates" those
same changes and also a relative twisting motion of the
domains that occurs between other crystal structures.
The animation allows the eye to perceive much more
subtle and/or more complex changes. For an explana-
tion of kinemages,
see Richardson and Richardson,
1992.
Much ofwhat we have discussed about types of repre-
sentations is directed toward the researcher trying to find
new, significant relationships in a protein structure. But
a second, especially crucial role ofmodels, drawings, and
computer graphics is to make explicit a relationship that
you have found, enabling other people to see it as well.
This often can be done just by making the relevant part a
heavier line or a brighter color, or by deleting most of
everything else, but it always requires explicit effort. The
total process oflooking scientifically at proteins involves
communication as well as perception.
FIGURE 2
"Small probe" dots to show the van der Waals contacts
between the A helix and its neighbors in the four-helix bundle ofmyo-
henerythrin (PDB file 2MHR; Sheriffet al., 1987). The central leucine,
for instance, touches both sidechains (e.g., the Phe ring) and also back-
bone of other helices.
Richardson et al.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1189
Richardson et al.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1189
PLATE 6
Domain motions in T4 phage lysozyme (PDB file 3LZM;
Jacobson et al., 1992). Ca's ofthe NH2 terminal domain are superim-
posed, for wild-type (pinktint), disulfide mutant (yellowtint), and M61
mutant (white).
PLATE 5
Wooden model ofthe Ca backbone ofbasic pancreatic tryp-
sin inhibitor (PDB file 5PTI; Wlodawer et al., 1984), sized to nearly
touch at H-bonding distance.
Looking at protein "folds" for clues to
the folding process
One consideration that always seems present for us when
looking at a protein structure is the question ofhow it got
that way. That is probably because it was Chris Anfinsen
who first got us interested in solving and studying pro-
tein structures, and like him we have always considered
the major aim to be understanding protein folding. To
represent that problem in a general way, plate 7 shows
the one-dimensional sequence of pancreatic trypsin in-
hibitor and the three-dimensional structure into which it
folds, with a ribbon backbone and full sidechains. As a
metaphor for that process, plate 8 shows a flat sheet of
paper and the object into which it can be folded by ori-
gami. In both cases, the starting material is simple and
has few interesting properties, but the final product has
complex structure and biological function: BPTI inhibits
trypsin, and the canary might fly or sing. Also, in both
cases, it is not obvious how the pattern of creases in the
paper or the order of amino acids in the sequence pro-
duces the final structure. In the absence ofan instruction
book, one way of learning some ofthe folding rules is to
study, for instance, origami pieces of many kinds of
birds, to see how the paper layers in the wings are
arranged relative to the tails, and then correlate that with
PLATE 8
An origami canary versus the creased piece of paper from
which it was folded.
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November 1992
PLATE 7
3-D structure of trypsin inhibitor (ribbon backbone, stick
figure side chains) versus the one-dimensional amino-acid sequence
from which it folds.
(ill.,
!t
1190
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November 1992
the crease patterns on the pieces of paper. We will now
look at several different groups of protein structures to
see if there are illuminating regularities in their arrange-
ment that suggest what can or cannot be true about their
folding.
The first such structure/folding issue concerns the or-
ganization of parallel a/# structures. Since each strand
goes in the same direction in a parallel
sheet, the con-
nections need to get back around to the starting end of
the sheet somehow; they do this in what is called a cross-
over connection, which lies across one surface of the
sheet and often includes an a-helix. Fig. 3 shows that the
crossover has a choice of two possible directions to go;
one choice gives a right-handed spiral and the other a
lefthanded one. You can test the handedness by moving
your thumb from the first strand to the second strand
and letting the fingers curl around to follow the path of
the connection; if that works with the right hand, the
crossover is righthanded. The interesting thing is that in
real proteins, with only one well documented counter-
example, crossover connections are always right-handed
(Richardson, 1976). That fact puts very strong con-
straints on all of the structures in the parallel a/l# cate-
gory.
The simplest parallel a/(3
structures are the singly
wound barrels, of which triose phosphate isomerase is
the classic example (plate 9 shows a side view, and Fig. 4
an end view). They contain a central cylinder of eight
parallel A strands, surrounded by an outer cylinder of
eight helices from the right-handed crossover connec-
tions. The chain goes up in a strand, around in a helix
loop, and back into the next strand over; it winds around
the barrel, always in the same direction and moving over
by one strand each time. As an analogy to this structure
type, plate 10 shows the Castel del Monte in Apulia,
Italy. The central courtyard is the hydrophobic core,
with the main part of the castle as the
barrel, the eight
towers as the helices, and the entrance as the chain ter-
mini. This is obviously a sound structural design, al-
though the castle is not as graceful as the protein because
it is not twisted and it does not have the interplay ofthe
sequence winding through the structure. The protein
a
Triose Phosphate Isomerase
FIGURE 4
Hand-drawn ribbon schematic of the classic "TIM barrel"
fold of triose phosphate isomerase (PDB file ITIM; Banner et al.,
1975), in end view. Arrows show the central ring of eight parallel ,
strands, surrounded by an outer ring of eight helices in the crossover
connections.
version would not work as well under the demands of
gravity, however.
The commonest a/(
structure is the doubly wound
sheet, many of which are nucleotide-binding domains,
as first discovered in a comparison of lactate dehydroge-
nase with flavodoxin (Fig.
5; Rao and Rossmann,
1973). When initially discovered, such pairs of struc-
tures were considered so similar as surely to be related,
but later it was realized that they represented especially
favorable arrangements that could also arise by conver-
gent evolution. Kinemage 3 demonstrates why this
structure is called "doubly wound", by building up the
chain sequentially from NH2 to COOH terminus. It
starts in the middle of the sheet and winds to the left,
depositing helical crossovers on the back side of the
sheet, and then switches back to the middle and winds to
the right, putting helical loops on the front side. This
tertiary structure is shaped by the demands of using
right-handed crossovers, protecting both sides ofthe par-
allel
sheet, and preferring to move over by only one
strand at a time. The reverse doubly wound structure,
which would wind from the edges in to the center and
have the COOH-terminus in the middle, seems equally
plausible a priori. However, it does not ever occur, either
Looking
at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1191
FIGURE 3
Connections between parallel strands in i# sheet: (a) right-
handed vs. (b) left-handed crossover connections. Right-handed ones
predominate overwhelmingly in the known protein structures.
11-11'
b
Richardson et a].
Looking at Proteins: Representabons, Folding, Packing, and Design
1191
PLATE 9
Ribbon schematic drawing of triose phosphate isomerase
(PDB file ITIM; Banner et al., 1975), showing the central eight-
stranded parallel d barrel as green arrows and the outer ring ofa-helices
as brown spirals.
because of a preference to start folding at the NH2-ter-
minus, or because perhaps all of these doubly wound
proteins are actually related to one another after all. It
still remains a puzzle, in fact, why all crossovers are
right-handed (the resulting structure should be some-
what more stable, but not enough to account for such an
overwhelming preference); perhaps an early folding step
involves a concerted, handed, loop formation, but there
is no firm backing for such a process in what is under-
stood of the energies involved.
The second structure/folding issue concerns the for-
mation of antiparallel
sheets. As an introduction to the
relevant features, Kinemage 4 and Fig. 6 both show a f
hairpin out of trypsin inhibitor. It is a two-stranded
ribbon with the usual f-sheet twist (Chothia, 1973),
which is right-handed as you look along the strand direc-
tion; the twist is an indirect consequence of the handed-
ness of the amino acids. For antiparallel sheet, the back-
bone hydrogen-bonds come
in
pairs,
alternating
a
narrow pair and a wide pair. The sidechain direction also
alternates from one side of the sheet to the other, with
adjacent sidechain pairs on the two strands in register.
Therefore, on one side of the ribbon (the top side here)
sidechains stick out from between narrow pairs of H-
bonds, and on the other (back) side they stick out from
between wide pairs of H-bonds. Salemme (1983) has
shown that those two sides of a ,B ribbon are not quite
equivalent, and that conformational preferences cause
the ribbon to curl somewhat toward the narrow-pair
side. That can be seen in this example, which has a rather
pronounced curl toward the side facing us. Another obvi-
ous property of f hairpins is that the two strands are
neighbors in the sequence, since they arejoined by a turn
at one end. For protein structure in general, entropy fa-
vors the interaction of two adjacent pieces of the chain
rather than two that are distant in the sequence.
Indeed, in A sheet proteins, such as the immunoglobu-
lin domain in plate 1 1, most ofthe connections are hair-
pins between adjacent strands (shown in purple). Some
proteins have all their connections adjacent, but the
great majority include connections that skip over several
strands, like the blue ones in plate
11 which skip two
strands and cross over an end of the barrel. We call this
arrangement a Greek key structure (Richardson, 1977),
because if you visualize the : sheet as a cylinder, open it
out flat and make a "topology" diagram of how the
strands are connected, you end up with a pattern (Fig. 7)
that looks like the classic design used to decorate Greek
vases (see plate 12). This is one of the natural patterns
that lets a line do something interesting without crossing
over itself, but the question remains as to why this
should be a favored structure for proteins, especially
since it violates the adjacency rule. This puzzled us at
first, but we think the only plausible explanation lies in a
favored folding pathway. Ifthe protein initially formed a
long, two-stranded : ribbon with the normal twist, then
that pair of strands could curl up into a structure that
PLATE 10
Castel del Monte (Apulia, Italy), which has an eight-
fold structure around a central opening and eight outer towers,
each containing a right-handed spiral stair. Photo courtesy of
Kasper Kirschner.
1192
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November
1192
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November 1992
direction of curl and experimental results such as the
organization seen in newly determined
barrel proteins,
all give circumstantial support to the concept of Greek
keys folding as two-stranded ribbons; however, there is
still absolutely no direct experimental evidence on this
issue.
Plate 13 a shows 'y crystallin, with its six : strands (out
of eight) of Greek key topology highlighted; the paired
strands have the same color, shading from yellow at the
ends to dark orange near the central hairpin turn. This
representation emphasizes our ideas about how these do-
mains might fold. Of course that is not the only useful
thing to show in this structure. Plate 13 b color codes the
sheet structure of each domain, with one four-stranded
sheet in yellow and the other in green; this emphasizes
the packing ofthe
sheets in the final structure. Plate 13
c shows
-y crystallin from an evolutionary perspective,
where the color coding shows four-strand units that are
homologous in both sequence and structure. Each unit
includes three strands from one sheet and one from the
opposite sheet. There was almost certainly one duplica-
tion of the four-strand unit to make the domain struc-
ture, and another duplication to create two similar do-
mains (all three representations show the twofold rela-
tionship between the domains). These are three very
different descriptions, but all ofthem are reasonable and
informative. One advantage, in fact, of these schematic
drawings is that people realize they involve subjective
FIGURE 5
Schematic ribbon drawing of the classic "doubly-wound"
backbone fold ofthe nucleotide-binding domain from lactate dehydro-
genase (PDB file 6LDH; Abad-Zapatero et al., 1987). The chain starts
in the middle ofthe ,B sheet and winds to the front with loops at the left,
then skips back to the middle and winds toward the rear with loops at
the right (animated in Kinemage 3).
produces the Greek key topology automatically,
as
shown in Fig. 8. The Greek key connections make sense
if the protein is going together two strands at a time
rather than one strand at a time.
To appreciate the organization ofa Greek key protein,
see Kinemage
5, which explores the eight-stranded
Greek key ,B barrel ofsatellite tobacco necrosis virus pro-
tein (STNV). First the eight strands are built up sequen-
tially from N H2 to COOH terminus, and then instead
they are built up by the strand pairs of the proposed
Greek key hairpin. Fig. 9 shows this strand pairing on a
schematic drawing ofSTNV. For all ofthe known Greek
key barrel structures, the optimal strand pairing when
judged by number of strands and number of H-bonds is
also the one with its hydrophobic sidechains on the side
of preferred curl (see above), which should promote its
curling together and then self-associating during folding.
Recent findings, both theoretical ideas like the preferred
FIGURE 6
Stick figure, in stereo, of the two-stranded a hairpin from
basic pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI; PDB file 5PTI; Wlodawer et
al., 1984), taken from Kinemage 4. Main chain atoms, H-bonds, and
side chains on the inside curve of the hairpin are shown; those side
chains are between narrow pairs of H-bonds.
Rihrsne
t
odn,Pcig
n
ein19
1193
Richardson et al.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
an entirely different perspective which has suggested new
and very productive questions to ask and things to look
for in those structures. The following discussion will try
to give a brief idea of what the design process is like,
describe some ofthose new perspectives on what to look
for, and summarize where we think the field stands at
present.
The first step in a protein design is the choice of a
tertiary structure type and of the specific backbone
framework that is to be the design goal. A "de novo"
design is one that is not based on, or homologous to, any
specific natural protein, although it usually is meant to
embody the simplest common core ofsome set ofsimilar
proteins. The two designs we have worked on the most,
Betabellin and Felix, are based on proteins like the two
shown in plates 14 and 15: Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase
to represent antiparallel
barrels and cytochrome b562
to represent four-helix bundles.
Plate 16 shows a ribbon drawing of Betabellin, which
has a four-stranded, simply connected up-and-down d
sheet in the front and another identical sheet in the back
(Richardson and Richardson, 1987, 1989a). Betabellin
is made by peptide synthesis, and in the original form
incorporated a two-armed cross-linker which attached to
PLATE 11
Ribbon schematic drawing of an immunoglobulin VL do-
main, with near-neighbor connections between 3 strands in purple and
"Greek key" connections in blue.
interpretation. It is worth remembering, though, that the
same thing is true of computer drawings; the message
that gets communicated is strongly dependent on deci-
sions about viewpoint, coloring, and what to include and
not to include.
Testing the ideas from looking:
protein design
As is evident from the Greek key discussion, it is often
frustrating to have the protein structures suggest hypothe-
ses about their folding, but to have no way of testing
those ideas experimentally. More than ten years ago, we
decided that one possible way to answer such questions
would be by trying to design new proteins from scratch.
De novo design is the inverse ofthe prediction problem:
instead of starting from a sequence and predicting the
three-dimensional structure it will fold into, you start
with a proposed structure, choose a sequence that would
fold into that structure, and then make
it and
see
whether indeed it does. The design project ties in closely
with looking at proteins, from two different directions:
first, it allows us to test some ofthe ideas that came from
looking at known structures; and second, it has provided
PLATE 12
The traditional "Greek key" border pattern, on an Attic
white lekythos (5th century B.C.; National Museum, Athens).
1194
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November
1992
1194
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November 1992
FIGURE 7
Stylized "Greek key" patterns ofincreasing complexity, all with the counterclockwise swirl direction ofprotein ,3 barrels viewed from the
outside. One ofthe motifs has arrows to show how the ,B strands fit in, and one has shading between the strands that curl around together as a pair.
the resin at the top of the drawing, and from which the
two identical half-chains could be synthesized at the
same time (Unson et al., 1984). There is a disulfide
bridge across the inside ofthe a barrel, like the one which
connects the two sheets of an immunoglobulin domain.
The hairpin turns are meant to be short, separated by
6-residue antiparallel a strands, so that each sheet in-
cludes 32 residues.
a
N/
Necrosis Virus
FIGURE 9
The Greek key ,B barrel of satellite tobacco necrosis virus
(STNV; PDB file 2STV; Jones and Liljas, 1984), with matched shad-
ing on the preferred pair of strands that wind around side-by-side to
form the structure. Alternative animations are shown in Kinemage 5.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1195
FIGURE 8
Hypothetical scheme for how a two-stranded # ribbon
could fold up into a ,B barrel, with the original preference of twist and
curl directions automatically producing the Greek key topology, the
swirl handedness, and the choice of strand pairing that are seen in the
known structures of this type.
Richardson et al.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1195
versions, in
eright at the top
of the first helix (looking from outside); Felix was de-
signed to tur
to the left at the top of its first helix, like
the less common examples,
so that
success would be
somewhat stronger evidence that we could actually con-
trol the topology.
We have also worked on several other de novo designs,
mostly
summarized
in
Richardson
and
Richardson,
..1989a. They include one singly wound and one doubly
wound parallel-a/fl
structure, and also Betadoublet, a
sandwich similar to Betabellin but with a quite different
interal arrangement of side chains and made by gene
synthesis and expression (Quinn et al., 199=1
The
design
process
involves
many
considerations,
N ! 11some quite straightforward and others less obvious. On
2
~~~~~~~~~~~~~the
straightforward side, the designed sequence should
for instance predict the correct secondary structures by
various algorithms, and the model should put hydropho-
PLATE 13Ribbonschemcbic sidechains on the inside and hydrophilics on the out-
side (e.g., the helix wheel in plate 17). We have tried, in
~
~ ~..
..
~~
fact,
to take into account everything people know,
or
(shadedSrom
trctre
andng
toelo
make
thedle best
co
pr
mie
betweenha
ac
think they know,
about
the determinants of protein
those criteria when they conflict. A given design is also
influenced by how it will be made, such as includling an
NH2-terminal Met and convenient restriction sites in the
Felix sequence.
Then
there
interesting general
geneofmore subtle considerations that had not oc-
curred to us before starting. One is that we spend more
and more of our design effort on avoiding alternative
structures, and the other is that we often need to collect
statistics on very much more narrowly defined categories
than is usually done.
To illustrate this latter point, for choosing sequence to
form helices it was not good enough to consider overall
helix propensity
or even to
use
occurrence in centers
versus first and last turns, so we needed to tabulate occur-
PLATE 13
Ribbon schematic drawings of the two-domain y-crystallin
molecule (PDB file lGCR; Wistow et al., 1983), colored according to:
(a) (top) the six r strands that are paired in the Greek key folding model
(shadedfrom orange to yellow); (b) (middle) the two
n
sheets that pack
against each other in the folded structure; (c) (bottom) the four-regions
along the sequence that originated
as gene duplications (blue,
cyan,
yellow, and red).
Felix
is a four-helix bundle of 79 residues made by
gene synthesis and expression methods (Hecht
et
al.,
1990); its structure and sequence are shown schemati-
cally in Fig.
Felix uses 19 different amino acids, in a
nonrepeating,
native-like
sequence. As in most helix-
bundle proteins, each a-helix in Felix is connected to its
PLATE 14
Ribbon schematic (in stained glass) of the Cu, Zn superox-
nearest neighbor, going up and down around the bundle.
ide dismutase subunit (PDB file 2 SOD; Tamner et al., 1982), with the
Cytochrome b562 is an example ofthe commoner oftwo
antiparallel f# barrel in shades of blue.
1196
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November
1992
1196
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November 1992
PLATE 15
A natural four-helix bundle protein: backbone rib-
bon ofcytochrome b562 (PDB file 256B; Lederer et al., 1981 )
in purple, with red heme.
rence frequencies in individual specific positions relative
to the helix ends. This meant defining the exact end-
points in a robust way. Most helices have a residue at
each end with the peptide on one side definitely part of
the helix and the peptide on the other side definitely
doing something else (such as the Ca marked as "C-cap"
in plate 18); some definitions include that residue as
helical but most do not. The key to this difficulty is to
give the ambiguous position a new name and use it as the
reference endpoint: we call it the N-cap residue when at
/b hellIn
the beginning ofthe helix and the C-cap when at the end.
That choice gives much
stronger correlations with
amino acid
occurrence frequencies than definitions
based either on X,
angles or on hydrogen bonding
(Richardson and Richardson, 1988). For instance, in a
plot of the normalized occurrence frequencies ofAsn in
each position relative to the N-cap (the vertical dotted
line in plate 19 a), some adjacent positions vary by fac-
tors of 4. For Gly the C-cap position is a factor of 12
preferred over C -
1 or C + 1, and fully one-third of all
helices end with Gly. In more generally defined statistics,
few preference factors are as great as 2 or 3. A strong,
specific preference is clearly useful when you are trying
to control exactly where a helix should end.
Of course, in order to understand such statistics, we
need to look at the protein structures to see what is actu-
ally going on. Plate 19 b is a superposition of 17 helices
that start with an Asn in the N-cap position. The aspara-
gine side-chains are shown in green, because in black and
white they look exactly like peptides. There is an H-bond
from the Asn sidechain 06 to one of the backbone NH
i_
_
:
PLATE 17
End view of the first a-helix of Felix, laid out as a "helix
wheel" with residue labels at the Cj# positions. Hydrophobics are in
orange and hydrophilics in blue, showing the buried and exposed sides
of the helix.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1197
PLATE 16
Ribbon schematic drawing ofthe designed structure of Be-
tabellin (Richardson and Richardson, 1987), with two identical four-
stranded ,B sheets (pink and blue) joined by a two-armed crosslinker
(yellow).
Richardson et al.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1197
FelLx
FIGURE 10
The designed amino-acid sequence of Felix (PDB files
1,3FLX; Hecht et al., 1990), shown on a ribbon drawing of the in-
tended four-helix bundle tertiary structure. The bundle is a "left-turn-
ing" one (that is, it turns left at the top ofthe first helix), and there is a
disulfide between helices 1 and 4.
I-'
0
E
TJ
N
E
0
v
co
0
'--4
x
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
-1.0.
200
X (nm)
FIGURE 12
The circular dichroism (CD) spectrum measured for Fe-
lix, as produced by in vivo expression of the synthetic gene (Hecht et
al., 1990). It shows the expected double minima characteristic ofa-he-
lix.
FIGURE
1i
Stylization ofthe transformation between left-turning and
right-turning helix bundles, with helices A and B as the reference pair,
in end view. The hydrophobic half of their surfaces is shaded, with a
triangular notch and projection to symbolize the A-B interaction in the
original bundle, and SS for the disulfide. On the right-hand side ofthe
figure, helices A and B have rotated inward like meshed gears; this
brings their smooth contacts together and makes a hydrophobic surface
for the rest of the bundle on the bottom rather than the top, so the
sequence proceeds the other way around the bundle. In the right-turn-
ing version, the two Cys point outward from opposite sides ofthe mole-
cule.
groups exposed in the first helical turn, which mimics
very closely the helical H-bond geometry that the pre-
vious peptide along the chain might have made. In effect
the Asn side-chain competes with the polypeptide chain
for interacting at the previous open H-bonding site, thus
making it more likely that the helix will begin at the Asn.
Asp is also a good N-cap; it is almost as good as Asn for
the H-bond, and it has the added advantage of a favor-
able interaction with the helix dipole (Shoemaker et al.,
1987). The N-cap H-bond geometry does not work for
Gln or Glu, or for any sidechain at the C-cap; however,
the C-caps can use the special type ofglycine interaction
shown in plate 18. Both Pro and Glu, for quite different
reasons, are highly favored at the N-cap +
1 position.
In general, the strongest preferences are seen when cat-
egories are defined narrowly; this means, unfortunately,
that the database of known structures is still not nearly
large enough for the purposes of protein design (or, one
would suppose, for good prediction). But each time the
118BohsclJunl
250
1198
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November 1992
One example ofnegative design involves trying to con-
trol the directionality ofthe four-helix bundle in Felix. A
helix wheel, like the one in plate 17, shows that about
half the surface of a helix is hydrophilic and half hydro-
phobic. However, for a four-helix bundle, the interior
hydrophobic side actually consists of two sections, each
ofwhich forms a contact to one neighboring helix. Plates
20 and 21 show how this arrangement fits into the con-
text of the bundle: each helix cylinder has a blue hydro-
Asn
3.0-
il
|*
II
>
PLATE 18
The "C-cap" residue ofan a-helix: the ambiguous residue at
the COOH-terminal end that is halfin and halfout ofthe helix. ItsCa is
in the right position, but its 0,y6 values are non-helical and it starts the
chain off in a new direction. In this case the C-cap is a Gly in La
conformation, which can make two H-bonds in the reverse order.
database doubles in size, we will be able to gather reliable
statistics on twice as many specifically defined subcate-
gories.
The second general lesson we have learned about the
design process is the necessity for what we think of as
"negative design". The worst problem with any kind of
molecular modeling is that showing a sequence fits well
with one particular structure does nothing to prove there
is not another structure it fits even better. Both modeling
and design are still quite unreliable processes, as one can
tell by the fact that no one ever builds a model ofa given
sequence into a certain structure and decides it does not
fit. In making our designs, we now spend a lot of our
effort trying to ensure incompatibility with the more ob-
vious alternative structures. The most interesting part
has been looking at the structures of natural proteins
from this inside-out perspective and trying to figure out
what they are doing to actively avoid structural alterna-
tives. We are beginning to find some sequence choices
that do nothing favorable for the native structure but are
needed to keep the protein from doing something else all
or part of the time.
PLATE 19
Asn as a helix N-cap: (a) (top) Single-position helix prefer-
ences for Asn, referred to the N-cap and C-cap positions (vertical dotted
lines). Asn has the strongest relative N-cap preference of any amino
acid. (b) (bottom) Superimposed a-helices (yellow) with Asn N-caps
(green), showing that the Asn side chain can H-bond to an exposed
backbone NH and mimic the conformation of a helical peptide.
Richardson
et
al.
Looking
at Proteins:
Representations,
Folding, Packing,
1199~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Richardson et a].
Looking at Proteins: Representabons, Folding, Packing, and Design
1199
Thus, to produce a four-helix bundle with a specific
topology we must somehow control which pairing ofhe-
lix-helix contacts is preferred. For Felix we built models
of both possible structures and tried to make the side-
chains fit well in the left-turning form and badly in the
right-turning form. We also tried to make the connec-
tions work better in the left-turning form. Most impor-
tantly, however, we designed a disulfide as away ofdistin-
guishing which of the two structures is actually formed.
Cys 11 and Cys 71 in Felix lie midway along the first and
last a-helices, in good geometry to form a disulfide in the
left-turning bundle. However, as seen in Fig. 11, for a
right-turning bundle they point outward and are quite
far apart. Therefore, ifthe disulfide forms easily and pro-
duces monomers the bundle must be left turning, while a
right turning topology or a mixture should cross-link be-
tween molecules and make a mess. Since no one has yet
obtained a three-dimensional structure of any complete
designed protein, it is very valuable to have simpler
probes of tertiary structure.
PLATE 20
Positioning of the two hydrophobic contact surfaces (or-
ange and yellow) on one helix of a left-turning four-helix bundle.
philic half, and a yellow and an orange stripe to show the
two hydrophobic contact surfaces. On each helical turn,
the chain passes first through the orange stripe and then
through the yellow stripe. Helices a and b (and c and d)
put their yellow surfaces together and helices b and c
(and d and a) put their orange surfaces together, and the
chain turns to the left at the top ofthe first helix. This is
only one of two possible arrangements, which a native
protein never confuses although the contacts all look
very much alike to people. In the alternative bundle to-
pology, helices a and b put orange surfaces together and
the chain turns to the right.
Fig. 11 is another way ofvisualizing this bundle-topo-
logy choice, using the a - b helix pair as reference. The
contacts with bumps and cutouts correspond to yellow
stripes and the smooth contacts to orange stripes. The
left side ofthe figure shows the left-turning arrangement;
imagine grabbing that a - b helix pair and rotating them
90° like two meshing gearwheels, ending up with their
smooth surfaces together as on the right side. Now the
leftover hydrophobic sides are on the bottom surface of
the a - b pair rather than the top surface, so the other
two helices must pack at the bottom and end up produc-
ing a right-turning bundle.
PLATE 21
Contact surfaces for all four helices in a left-turning four-he-
lix bundle. Yellow surfaces interact front to back (helices a-b and c-d)
and orange surfaces side to side (b-c and d-a).
1200
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November 1992
1 200
Biophysical Joumal
Volume 63
November 1992
BETAB9
60z
S-EoOF
~~~
<
E~~~~~~~~-0.2
/
E
a -0.4
30%
%..
0
200
210
220
230
240
250
Wavalorn9th
(nm)
FIGURE 13
Comparison of elution profiles of Felix with the disulfide
F1GURE
15
CD spectrum measured for Betabellin 9,
as produced by
reduced and oxwdized. At moderatiime
Sinem
peptide synthesis (Richardson and Richardson, 1989a), showing the
can be oxidized with no formation of multimeric species. Since cross,
saecaatrsi
fmde
etdsi
ofrain
linking would be expected for a right-turming bundle and most other
alternative structures, the cleanly monomeric disulfide provides cir-
cumstantial evidence for correctness ofthe designed tertiary structure.
The final result of the design process is just one word,
like some sort of magical incantation. For Felix, it is:
MPEVAENFQQCLERWAKLSVGGELAHMANQA-
AEAILKGGNEAQLKNAQALMHEAMKTRKYSE-
QLAQEFAHCAYKARASQ. Then one must produce
and characterize the protein, in order to find out how
good the design actually was. The answer, in general, is
that they are quite surprisingly good, but still not quite
good enough. Felix, for instance (Hecht et al., 1990), is
helical (Fig. 12), soluble, seems to bury its tryptophan,
and the disulfide forms cleanly within the monomer
(Fig. 13), indicating that it forms some sort of helical
bundle and has a left-turning rather than a right-turning
topology, as intended. It shows cooperative unfolding
with denaturant or temperature, but not very coopera-
tive;
it
is only marginally stable.
Its nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectrum
looks only partway
be-
tween that of an unfolded and a native protein, presum-
ably indicating disorder. We have designed and pro-
duced several minor changes to the Felix sequence, but
their behavior is not demonstrably better.
Betabellin also seems to form approximately the right
structure, but it took three cycles of redesign changes
before it was soluble enough to study. The first change
was to add ten more charges to the outside, which was all
hydrophilic but originally had only four charges. A sheet
peptides are notoriously insoluble, at least partly because
et a be//ln
7
the hydrophobic amino acids are almost all ,B formers
while the charged residues prefer helix; however, native
FIGURE 14
Ribbon drawing of the designed structure for Betabellins 9,
proteins are quite soluble, and we need to learn how to
and later, with a disulfide between the two identical # sheets but with-
emulate them. In this case the extra charges helped, but
out the original cross-linker joining the two COOH-termini (see plate
not as dramatically as we had hoped. The second change
16 for comparison).
was to omit the cross-linker between the two halves of
Richardson et at.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1201
Richardson et a].
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1201
Jt X
A~3
FIGURE 18
Hypothetical scheme of stages in the process of protein
folding, with the formation first of partial secondary structure, then of
approximate tertiary structure, and finally the minor but crucial rear-
rangements into a unique and well ordered native structure. Protein
designs achieve approximately correct structures, but have not yet
managed that final step.
FIGURE 16
Simplified drawings ofType I vs. Type I' tight turns, show-
ing that Type I has a twist incompatible with the twist direction of ,B
hairpins.
Betabellin (see Fig. 14), for which there was no empiri-
cal database of structural information. This allowed the
individual sheet peptides to be purified more easily, the
disulfide formed well, the solubility improved signifi-
10.0
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
ppm
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November 1992
I
FIGURE 17
One-dimensional NMR spectrum of Betabellin 12, which uses D-Pro,D-Asp at the turns (McClain et al., 1992). Taken in deuterated
DMSO at 25°C, on a Bruker 600 MegaHertz spectrometer at Glaxo, Inc. (see plate 22 for a two-dimensional spectrum).
r-i
-.31
1 202
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November 1992
I
-01
f--\-
-01
-.Dl
.56
8.4
9.2
.:0
7.8
7.:6
.4.
Dl
(pp.)
to;
PLATE 22
Two-dimensional NMR of Betabellin 12: superimposed
NOESY (red contours) and COSY (blue and green tetradpeaks) spec-
tra in the NH - CaH "fingerprint" region (25°C, in deuterated
DMSO; chemical shift reference: DMSO at 2.500 ppm). Dispersion of
resonances was sufficient for sequential assignment.
cantly, and the CD spectrum of Betabellin 9 (Fig. 15)
looked like that for a model : peptide. The third change
was in the tight turns. After our original Betabellin de-
sign, Sibanda and Thornton ( 1985 ) studied turns for the
narrowly defined subset oftight : hairpins and found an
overwhelming preference for the otherwise rare Type I'
PLATE 23
Ribbon schematic of the prealbumin dimer (PDB file
2PAB; Blake et al., 1978). The blue and green subunits do H-bond at
their inner fl sheet edges, like the sort ofinteraction we wish to prevent
in Betabellin; however, interaction at the outer edges is prevented with
a strongly curved strand in the top sheet and a very short strand in the
bottom sheet.
PLATE 24
The outer edges ofthe ,B sandwich in concanavalin A (PDB
file 2CNA; Reeke et al., 1975), with a single inward-pointing lysine
sidechain (marked in white) to help prevent edge-to-edge aggregation.
Backbone is emphasized with a three-strand yellow ribbon, and the
contacts of inward-pointing sidechains are shown with small-probe
dots.
and Type II' conformations, which fit the fi sheet twist
nicely (see Fig. 16) but include one or two positive k
angles which are unfavorable for non-glycine L-amino
acids. For Betabellin 12, we took advantage of peptide
synthesis to put a D-Pro,D-Asp sequence at each of the
turns to favor a Type I' conformation, and indeed this
material was better than any previous version (McClain
et al., 1992).
The most impressive improvement for Betabellin 12
was in its NMR spectrum, which looks rather native-
like, with good spectral dispersion (Fig. 17) and large
numbers of NOE (nuclear Overhauser) cross-peaks.
NMR is a very valuable tool for assessing designed pro-
teins, although it mainly tells you things you did not
want to hear, such as that your material is not pure or
that there is not a unique conformation. In this case,
however, we were able to make a sequential assignment
of almost all the proton resonances. Plate 22 shows a
superposition
of two-dimensional COSY
(through-
bond) and NOESY (through-space) spectra in the NH-
CaH fingerprint region. The short range NOEs show
that regions ofsequence designed as a strands are consis-
tent with extended strands, and there are definitely turns
in the right places. However, there are somewhat more
COSY peaks than there should be, which is indicative of
more than one conformation. Even more disturbingly, it
turned out that none ofthe NOEs are "long range" in the
sequence, or represent tertiary-structure interactions
rather than local conformation. One way of stating the
problem is that there are three aromatic residues in the
unique half-sequence, and none of those ring protons
Richardson et al.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1203
0
0
0*
@
e
.,
0.
0
(
Im
.4
0
a
....
Richardson et al.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1 203
PLATE 25
The outer edge ofthe (# sandwich in satellite tobacco necro-
sis virus (PDB file 2STV; Jones and Liljas, 1984), with a proline (yel-
low), a , bulge (purple), and three inward-pointing charged sidechains
(2 Lys and an Arg; blue) to prevent edge-to-edge aggregation.
have any NOEs to another residue. At least one of the
tyrosines should be on the inside, and if the Betabellin
structure were unique and native-like it should have
many NOEs to other parts of the protein. Betabellin
forms good
structure as judged by CD and Raman
evidence (McClain et al., 1992), and it must put the
hydrophobic sides together most of the time to be this
soluble. Presumably, what the NMR data tell us is that
there are multiple ways of putting together those
strands and positioning the side chains, probably in very
rapid equilibrium, so that too many conformations are
being averaged to show any long range NOEs.
Betabellin, then, Felix, and all other designed proteins
that have been characterized to this extent, seem to be-
have more like "molten globules" (Ohgushi and Wada,
1983), or partially folded proteins, than they do like nat-
ural proteins with a unique native structure. Kinemage 6
shows two different computer models that were built for
Felix. They were built by different people and slightly
different strategies, but both incorporate all the design
criteria and have been carefully adjusted and minimized.
They are very similar, but the animation between them
shows that the helix angles change a bit and some side
chains move quite significantly. If the real Felix protein
can sample conformations this different, then it would
indeed appear rather like a molten globule.
In summary, the field of protein design has recently
come out to a rather unexpected general result: it is ap-
parently well within the present state of knowledge to
design and make entirely new proteins that fold up to
approximately the intended three-dimensional struc-
ture, but no one yet knows enough to achieve a unique,
native-like structure. Initial expectations were wrong
about which was the hard step: it is near the end rather
than near the beginning. IfFig. 18 represents an approxi-
mation of the folding process, then these designs have
managed nucleation and initial structure formation but
are currently stuck partway through the process; the ends
are not tucked in and there are multiple conformations
on the inside. We had initially expected that once one got
this close, it would be easy to improve the structure by
making individual "mutations" and accumulating the
best ones. However, it now appears that there are proba-
bly problems in several parts of our designs, and the de-
gree ofdisorder will not change appreciably ifwe manage
to fix just one of them. The natural proteins apparently
still know some tricks we don't know about successfully
avoiding alternative structures and settling into a dy-
namic but unique conformation.
Protein design: future directions
Given the conclusions above, our own research program
in protein design is now responding with developments
in three different directions. First of all, we have not
given up entirely on making individual changes aimed at
improving the designed proteins. As an example, al-
though Betabellin and Betadoublet
are enormously
more soluble than our early attempts, they still are not as
soluble as natural : sheet proteins. Since we have already
ensured the charge and hydrophilicity ofthe surface side-
chains, we now believe that the problem is apt to be
aggregation by H-bonding between the edge strands of
different molecules. In other words, we made the struc-
ture too idealized and too neat. This is yet another case
of negative design: an otherwise excellent and stable A
sheet will not work if it aggregates with itself or other
molecules, so it is necessary to "mess up" the edge strand
in some way that will prevent those interactions.
We have surveyed the structures of natural
sheet
proteins (especially the open edges of
sandwiches) to
see how they deal with this edge problem, and always
find at least one blocking feature on each exposed edge.
The prealbumin in plate 23 illustrates both the kind of
edge-to-edge dimerization we wish to avoid, and also the
strong twist and very short edge strand that help prevent
1204
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November
1204
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November 1992
24, but there is an inward-pointing lysine on one ofthose
strands that would mean burial of two like charges if it
interacted with another Con A dimer. Plate 25 shows the
edge of the satellite tobacco necrosis virus, which uses
every trick in the book to block ,B H-bonding: an exposed
proline ring to get in the way, a ,B-bulge to kink the
strand, and three inward-pointing positive charges.
Other proteins use a very pronounced or unusual twist,
or a flap that covers the exposed strand edge. The most
reliable of these strategies to use in a designed protein is
probably the inward-pointing charged sidechain, which
we now plan to incorporate into our a sheet designs.
That will not help the uniqueness problem, but it may
give us material better suited for biophysical measure-
ments.
The second new direction involves capitalizing on the
fact that design ofapproximate structure has been shown
possible. For instance, ifwe can design a left-turning he-
lix bundle then we can presumably design minimal
changes that will convert it into a right-turning helix
bundle. That would be very worthwhile because it would
allow us to test alternative hypotheses about the factors
most influential in determining that choice between to-
__~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~F
PLATE 26
A simple interactive operation using SCULPT: (a) (top) the
starting model is a Type I tight turn; (b) (middle) the user grabs the
carbonyl 0 and tugs on it to rotate the peptide, passing slowly through a
region with unfavorable bumps (shown aspink sectors); (c) (bottom) it
then settles into the Type II conformation.
PLATE 27
SCULPT was used to turn the Felix model "inside out", to
go from a left-turning bundle to a right-turning bundle. Plate 27, a (top)
further aggregation at the outer edge ofthe prealbumin
and b (bottom), shows the beginning and ending states for one pair of
sheets. Concanavalin A also forms a
sheet dimer; the
helices, which rotate like meshed gears from making orangecontacts to
outer edges of its sheets are quite regular, as seen in plate
making yellow contacts.
Richardson et al.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1205
Richardson et a].
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1 205
FIGURE 19
Stick figure, in stereo, for part of the inner side of a large
antiparallel ,B sheet from concanavalin A (PDB file 2CNA; Reeke et al.,
1975), taken from Kinemage 7. Three ofthe Phe side chains have the
"perpendicular" XI conformation that puts them over the nearest-
neighbor side-chain across a narrow pair of H-bonds.
pologies. This effort is closely tied in with a collaborative
project to improve the tools for doing de novo modeling
in general, by developing what we call a protein "sculpt-
ing" tool.
So far, the process ofmolecular modeling has involved
two completely distinct aspects: (a) purely geometrical,
interactive modeling in real time that allows one to twist
bonds but also to move one atom on top ofanother; and
(b) batch calculations that incorporate the physical
forces but cannot be steered. The SCULPT program lets
the user apply tugs to the model while a real-time force
calculation follows along, letting atoms either move out
of the way if bumped or move closer together if they
interact favorably. Tugs are added by clicking on atoms
and dragging in the direction of applied force, repre-
sented on the graphics screen by a coiled spring. One can
also tie down parts ofthe molecule with "nails". Plate 26
is a simple sequence illustrating an operation with
SCULPT: the starting model is a Type I tight turn (plate
26 a); the user grabs the carbonyl 0 and tugs on it to
rotate the peptide, passing slowly through a region with
unfavorable bumps (shown as pink sectors in plate 26 b)
and then settling into the Type II conformation (plate
26 c).
SCULPT was used to turn the Felix model "inside
out", to go from a left-turning bundle to a right-turning
bundle. Plate 27, a and b, shows the beginning and end-
ing states for one of the helix-helix contacts, which ro-
tates in the gear-wheel fashion of Fig.
11 from orange
contacts to yellow contacts. The connecting loop un-
winds from one helix and winds up onto the other by
about one residue. The loop conformation and some
sidechains were improved by some hand tugging and the
model extensively minimized. We are now using this
pair of models to choose appropriate (but minimal) se-
quence changes for the right-turning bundle, including a
different disulfide for that form. We plan to make four
forms (each sequence with the right and the wrong pairs
of Cys) and use this system to test systematically the
relative influence of various factors in determining bun-
dle topology.
The third direction for future work is a serious attempt
to understand internal packing interactions and the de-
terminants of unique versus multiple structures. As an
example, we will look at what determines side chain con-
formations, especially for aromatics, on the surface of
sheets. Kinemage 7 or Fig. 19 show the buried side ofthe
large, flat sheet in Concanavalin A, with only the back-
bone, the H-bonds, and sidechains on the interior side of
the sheet included. Since this is an antiparallel sheet, the
H-bonds are perpendicular to the strands, and they alter-
nate a narrow pair with a more widely spaced pair be-
tween any two neighboring strands, as we saw above for
the two-stranded a ribbons in BPTI or STNV. Every
other sidechain along a strand points inward, and their
Ca - C: vectors are approximately perpendicular to the
plane of the sheet.
As suggested schematically in plate 28, each side chain
has three choices of x' angle. For Phe, Tyr, and Val,
which are common and influental on the inside of,
sheets, that threefold choice describes their possible con-
formations very well to the first approximation, since x2
prefers to be near 900. (When x' changes, the C: does
not move. Its position is rigidly determined by the back-
bone, and any bumps it makes must be relieved by ad-
justments of the backbone conformation. If it were not
for glycine, we could more reasonably consider C: part
ofthe main chain rather than part ofthe side chain.) For
Trp, Leu, and Ile, x2 is also a major factor, while in all
cases there can be departures from the canonical values
where necessary. However, high resolution structures
have shown that these departures are much smaller and
FIGURE 20
Closeup, in side view, ofthe Phe 195-Ala 50 pair from the
Con A # sheet. There is extensive contact between the Ala methyl and
the Phe ring, and the Phe Ca-C3 bond leans backward slightly.
1206
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November
1992
1206
Biophysical Joumal
Volume 63
November 1992
PLATE 28
The three major sidechain conformational choices, illus-
trated for one phenylalanine on a (3 sheet from concanavalin A. The
native conformation (x1 near +60°) is shown in solid green and the
other two alternatives as open outlines.
less common than one would have supposed (Ponder
and
Richards,
1987;
Richardson
and
Richardson,
1989b). Therefore, to consider packing and uniqueness
for a
sheet interior, we will begin by analyzing the
threefold choice of each side chain and the patterns of
how those choices influence one another.
The three staggered x' conformations are: (a) -60°,
with Cy opposite the mainchain CO; (b) 1800, with C-y
opposite the mainchain N; (c) +600, with Cy opposite
the CaH, perpendicular to the backbone. (Since we will
concentrate on aromatics here, we do not need to worry
about the choice ofreference atom for C13-branched resi-
dues.) For sidechains in general, the "a" x
I conforma-
tion is preferred, "b" a bit less so, and "c" is relatively
rare (Janin and Wodak, 1978). For aromatic sidechains
on the buried sides of
sheets, however, the perpendicu-
lar "c" conformation is quite common (Richardson and
Richardson, 1989b).
The Con A
sheet of Kinemage 7 has 3 buried aro-
matics in the perpendicular x l conformation, each inter-
acting with a different amino acid as partner across the
narrow H-bond pair: Phe 197 with Gly 48, Phe 195 with
Ala 50, and Phe 128 with Phe 11 1. In that x
I orientation,
the aromatic ring lies almost directly on top of the Ca
and C
ofthe residue on the neighboring strand, across a
narrow pair of H-bonds (see plate 28). Looking at Phe
195 along the plane of the
sheet (see Fig. 20 or Kine-
mage 7), we can see that the Ca - C
vector leans back
somewhat from vertical, pushed away by the methyl
group ofAla 50. For Phe 197, whose partner is a Gly, the
Ca - C13 vector leans forward somewhat in order for the
Phe ring to touch the backbone of the Gly.
These van der Waals contacts can be shown explicitly
with small probe dots (Kinemage 7). If the dot contacts
are calculated with implicit H (the usual method, which
increases each heavy atom radius to produce the correct
total volume for the atom plus its hydrogens), they show
a large contact on each face ofthe ring but almost noth-
ing around the edges; the Phe-Ala contact overlaps a lit-
tle and the Phe-Gly looks sparse. This is because the aro-
matic ring H's and the Gly CaH have asymmetrical posi-
tions around their heavy atoms and are not at all well
represented by radially symmetric, implicit H. Dot con-
tacts calculated with explicit H atoms (Kinemage 7)
show excellent, detailed fit all around the ring, with the
large flat surface ofthe Ala methyl or the Gly CaH fitting
right up against the side of the ring and other groups
touching the H atoms around the edge. This emphasizes
again the necessity of including the H atoms in any seri-
ous analysis either ofinternal packing or ofbinding sites.
One reason, then, for the x l = +600 conformation for
aromatics on buried sides of : sheets is that with a small
adjustment of the backbone one way or the other they
can make a good contact with either a Ca group ofGly or
a C: group on some other side chain. In fact, for a small
residue like Gly or Ala, the only surrounding position on
the same sheet that can occupy the space above it is a
large sidechain with x
I = +60° across the narrow pair of
H-bonds. Statistically, on buried sides of
sheets, an
aromatic which is across a narrow H-bond pair from a
Gly or Ala will almost invariably adopt the x' = +60°
conformation.
Let's look now at Phe 128 across from Phe 111 to see
what happens ifthe partner side chain is longer than Ala
(Kinemage 7). Phe 11 1 has xl = 180°, pointing away
from 128, and the contact of the Phe 128 ring with the
Phe 111 C#Hs looks almost identical to what we saw for
Ala. However, when a buried aromatic is across from a
side chain longer than Ala, it only adopts the x' = +60°
conformation half to one-third of the time. The reason
for this difference is obvious, of course: the partner side
chain also has a choice of conformation, and if it lies
toward the aromatic, the aromatic must move out ofthe
way into one of the other x
I positions. This emphasizes
that the entire set ofsheet residues are making conforma-
tional choices and those choices all interact with their
neighbors. This system is rather like a spin glass in phys-
ics, where each lattice point has a choice of up or down
spins, but the spins all interact with their neighbors.
We need to find out, then, not only what is the best set
of conformations for any given sequence on a sheet, but
we also need to learn the rules for which arrangements of
side chains on a sheet produce a unique best conforma-
tion and which produce multiple equivalent choices.
This understanding is presumably necessary before we
can design new proteins with unique, truly native-like
conformations, and it also will tell us a lot about how
natural proteins design their structures, either during
evolution or during folding.
Finally, our ideas about looking at proteins can be
summarized by one trivial statement and a few outrage-
ous ones:
Richardson et al.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1207
Richardson et al.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1207
(a) Viewpoint and selectivity are both crucial: to
make sense ofcomplex things, you need to look at them
in the right way, and add or delete parts.
(b) What makes proteins interesting as structures is
that they are inherently both one-dimensional and three-
dimensional at the same time.
(c) f-carbons are part of the backbone.
(d) Contacts are all hydrogens.
(e) Negative design, to actively block alternatives, is
just as important to protein structure as positive design.
(f) The hardest part of protein folding, or protein de-
sign, is the last little bit.
We would like to thank the Biophysical Society officers and meeting
organizers, the Keck Center for Computational Biology, AV Asso-
ciates, and Evans and Sutherland, whose extensive help made possible
the big-screen interactive graphics used for the Biophysical Society
1992 National Lecture, on which this article is based.
Graphics credits are as follows: Plates 20, 21, and 28: VIEW, by Larry
Bergman, on a Silicon Graphics Iris 34OGTX. Plates 26 and 27:
SCULPT, by MCS, on a Silicon Graphics Iris 34OGTX (SCULPT and
VIEW are projects of the GRIP molecular graphics group in the Com-
puter Science Department at UNC Chapel Hill, led by Fred Brooks).
Plates 7, 15, 17-19, 24-25, and Fig. 1: CHAOS, by DCR, on an Evans
& Sutherland ESV (Salt Lake City, UT). Plate 6, Figs. 19, 20, and all
Kinemages: PREKIN and MAGE, by DCR, on a Mac Ilci. Plate 17
and Fig. 22: NMR data plotted with FELIX, by Dennis Hare. Plates 9,
13, 23, and Figs. 3-16 and 18: hand-drawn by JSR. Plates 4 and 16:
drawn by JSR and air-brushed by Mike Zalis. Plate 14: stained glass by
Karen Williams, Alpine, TX. The schematic drawings are copyrighted
by J. S. Richardson.
The research summarized here was supported principally by NIH GM-
15000, and also in part by ONR, NASA, the Life Sciences Foundation,
the MacArthur Foundation, Merck, Glaxo, and other NIH grants.
Receivedfor publication and in finalform 3 August 1992.
REFERENCES
Abad-Zapatero, C., J. P. Griffith, J. L. Sussman, and M. G. Rossmann.
1987. Refined crystal structure ofdogfish M4 apo-lactate dehydroge-
nase. J. Mol. Biol. 198:445-467.
Arnone, A., C. J. Bier, F. A. Cotton, V. W. Day, E. E. Hazen, Jr., D. C.
Richardson, J. S. Richardson, and A. Yonath. 1971. A high resolu-
tion structure ofan inhibitor complex ofthe extracellular nuclease of
Staphylococcus aureus: experimental procedures and chain tracing.
J. Biol. Chem. 246:2303-2316.
Banner, D. W., A. C. Bloomer, G. A. Petsko, D. C. Phillips, C. I.
Pogson, I. A. Wilson, P. H. Corran, A. J. Furth, J. D. Milman, R. E.
Offord, J. D. Priddle, and S. G. Waley. 1975. Structure of chicken
muscle triose phosphate isomerase determined crystallographically
at 2.5 Angstroms resolution using amino acid sequence data. Nature
(Lond.). 255:609-614.
Bernstein, F. C., T. F. Koetzle, G. J. B. Williams, E. F. Meyer, M. D.
Brice, J. R. Rodgers, 0. Kennard, T. Shimanouchi, and M. Tasumi.
1977. The Protein Data Bank: a computer-based archival file for
macromolecular structures. J. Mol. Biol. 112:535-542.
Blake, C., M. Geisow, S. Oatley, B. Rerat, and C. Rerat. 1978. Struc-
ture of prealbumin: secondary, tertiary, and quatemary interactions
determined by Fourier refinement at 1.8A. J. Mol. Biol. 121:339-
356.
Carson, M., and C. E. Bugg. 1986. Algorithm for ribbon models of
proteins. J. Mol. Graphics 4:121-122, 207.
Chothia, C. 1973. Conformation of twisted ,B-pleated sheets in pro-
teins. J. Mol. Biol. 75:295-302.
Connolly, M. L. 1983. Solvent-accessible surfaces of proteins and nu-
cleic acids. Science (Wash.). 221:709-713.
DeGrado, W. F., Z. R. Wasserman, and J. D. Lear. 1989. Protein
design: a minimalist approach. Science (Wash. DC). 243:622-628.
Hecht, M. H., J. S. Richardson, D. C. Richardson, and R. C. Ogden.
1990. De novo design, expression, and characterization of Felix: a
four-helix bundle protein of native-like sequence. Science (Wash.
DC). 249:884-891.
Jacobson, R. H., M. Matsumura, H. R. Faber, and B. W. Matthews.
1992. Structure of a stabilizing disulfide bridge mutant that closes
the active-site cleft of T4 lysozyme. Protein Sci. 1:46-57.
James, M., A. Sielecki, G. Brayer, L. Delbaere, and C.-A. Bauer. 1980.
Structure of product and inhibitor complexes of Strep. griseus pro-
tease A at 1.8 A resolution: a model for serine protease catalysis. J.
Mol. Biol. 144:43-88.
Janin, J., and S. Wodak. 1978. Conformation of amino acid side-
chains in proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 125:357-386.
Jones, T. A., and L. L. Liljas. 1984. Structure ofsatellite tobacco necro-
sis virus after refinement at 2.5 Angstroms resolution. J. Mol. Biol.
177:735-767.
Lederer, F., A. Glatigny, P. H. Bethge, H. D. Bellamy, and F. S. Math-
ews. 1981. Improvement of the 2.5 Angstrom resolution model of
cytochrome b562 by redetermining the primary structure and using
molecular graphics. J. Mol. Biol. 148:427-448.
McClain, R. D., Y. Yan, R. W. Williams, M. E. Donlan, and B. W.
Erickson. 1992. Protein engineering of betabellin 12. In Peptides:
Chemistry and Biology (Proceedings of the 12th American Peptide
Symposium). J. A. Smith and J. E. Rivier, editors. ESCOM, Leiden.
364-365.
Ohgushi, M., and A. Wada. 1983. 'Molten globule state': a compact
form of globular proteins with mobile side-chains. FEBS Lett.
164:21.
Ponder, J. W., and F. M. Richards. 1987. Tertiary templates for pro-
teins: use of packing criteria in the enumeration of allowed se-
quences for different structural classes. J. Mol. Biol. 193:775-791.
Quinn, T. P., N. B. Tweedy, J. S. Richardson, and D. C. Richardson.
1991. A de novo designed f3 sheet protein. Abstract for Protein Soci-
ety meeting, Baltimore.
Rao, S. T., and M. G. Rossmann. 1973. Comparison of super-secon-
dary structure in proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 76:241-256.
Reeke, G. N., Jr., J. W. Becker, and G. M. Edelman. 1975. The cova-
lent and three-dimensional structure ofconcanavalin A: IV. Atomic
coordinates, hydrogen bonding, and quaternary structure. J. Biol.
Chem. 250:1525-1547.
Richardson, J. S. 1976. Handedness of crossover connections in ,B
sheets. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 73:2619-2623.
Richardson, J. S. 1977. f, sheet topology and the relatedness ofproteins.
Nature (Lond.). 268:495-500.
Richardson, J. S. 1981. The anatomy and taxonomy of protein struc-
tures. Adv. Protein Chem. 34:167-339.
Richardson, J. S. 1985. Schematic drawings of protein structures. In
Diffraction Methods for Biological Macromolecules. H. W. Wyck-
off, C. H. W. Hirs, and S. N. Timasheff, editors. Methods Enzymol.
I1 Sb:359-380.
Richardson, J. S., and D. C. Richardson. 1987. Some design principles:
Betabellin. In Protein Engineering. D. Oxender and C. F. Fox, edi-
tors. Alan R. Liss, New York. 149-163.
Richardson, J. S., and D. C. Richardson. 1988. Amino-acid prefer-
ences for specific locations at the ends of a-helices. Science (Wash.
DC). 2.40:1648-1652..
1208
Biophysical Journal
Volume 63
November 1992
Richardson, J. S., and D. C. Richardson. 1989a. The de novo design of
protein structures. Trends Biochem. Sci. 14:304-309.
Richardson, J. S., and D. C. Richardson. 1989b. Principles and pat-
terns of protein conformation. In Prediction of Protein Structure
and Principles ofProtein Conformation. G. Fasman, editor. Plenum
Press, New York. 1-98.
Richardson, D. C., and J. S. Richardson. 1992. The Kinemage: a tool
for scientific communication. Protein Sci. 1:3-9.
Rubin, B. H., and J. S. Richardson. 1972. The simple construction of
protein a-carbon models. Biopolymers. 11:2381-2385.
Salemme, F. R. 1983. Structural properties of protein ,8-sheets. Prog.
Biophys. MoI. Bio. 42:95-133.
Shoemaker, K. R., P. S. Kim, E. J. York, J. M. Stewart, and R. L.
Baldwin. 1987. Tests of the helix dipole model for stabilization of
a-helices. Nature (Lond.). 326:563-567.
Sibanda, B. L., and J. M. Thornton. 1985. # hairpin families in globular
proteins. Nature (Lond.). 316:170-174.
Surles, M. C. 1992. An algorithm with linear complexity for interac-
tive, physically-based modeling of large proteins. SIGGRAPH '92
"Computer Graphics". 26:221-230.
Tainer, J. A., E. D. Getzoff, K. M. Beem, J. S. Richardson, and D. C.
Richardson. 1982. Determination and analysis of the 2 Angstrom
structure of copper, zinc superoxide dismutase.
J. Mol. Bio.
160:181-217.
Unson, C. G., B. W. Erickson, D. C. Richardson, and J. S. Richardson.
1984. Protein engineering: design and synthesis of a protein. Fed.
Proc. 43:1837.
Wistow, G., B. Turnell, L. Summers, C. Slingsby, D. Moss, L. Miller, P.
Lindley, and T. Blundell. 1983. X-ray analysis ofthe eye lens protein
,y-II crystallin at 1.9 A resolution. J. Mol. Bio. 170:175-202.
Wlodawer, A., and L. Sjolin. 1983. Structure ofribonuclease A. Results
ofjoint neutron and x-ray refinement at 2.0 A resolution. Biochemis-
try. 22:2720-2728.
Wlodawer, A., J. Walter, R. Huber, and L. Sjolin. 1984. Structure of
bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor: Results of joint neutron and
x-ray refinement of crystal form II. J. Mol. Biol. 180:301-329.
Richardson et al.
Looking at Proteins: Representations, Folding, Packing, and Design
1209
