The Intelligent Voice-lnteractive Interface 
Christopher Schmandt 
Eric A. Hulteen 
Architecture Machine Group 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
"Put That There" is a voice and gesture interactive 
system implemented at the Architecture Machine 
Group at MIT. 
It allows a user to build and modify 
a graphical database on a large format video dis- 
play. 
The goal of the research is a simple, 
conversational interface to sophisticated computer 
interaction. 
Natural language and gestures are 
used, while speech output allows the system to 
query the user on ambiguous input. 
This project starts from the assumption that speech 
recognition hardware will never be 100% accurate, 
and explores other techniques to increase the use- 
fulness (i.e., 
the "effective accuracy") of such a 
system. 
These include: 
redundant input channels, 
syntactic and semantic analysis, and context- 
sensitive interpretation. 
In addition, we argue 
that recognition errors will be more tolerable if 
they are evident sooner through feedback and 
easily corrected by voice. 
INTRODUCTION 
The input to "Put That There" is done by talking 
and pointing; this results in a system that is 
both highly interactive and requires little 
training. 
Both talking and pointing are ways of 
communicating which are second nature to people 
but which computers, up until this time, have had 
difficulty 
understanding. 
The system responds 
either graphically, by drawing on the screen, or 
vocally, using either a speech synthesizer or a 
digital audio playback system. 
The particular 
application in which the demonstration is embedded 
is the manipulation of shipping on a map of the 
Caribbean. 
The user can create, modify the shape 
or color, move, copy, name, annotate, and delete 
the ships by pointing and talking, as well as 
question the system about where particular ships 
and map features are located. 
The system has some 
memory so that ships can be restored to previous 
descriptions or relocated to former positions. 
It is possible to reconfigure the input/output 
structure by telling the system to stop listening, 
@1981 ASSOCIATION FOR COMPUTING MACHINERY 
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that 
the copies are not made or distributed for direct commerical advantage, the ACM 
copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is 
given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. 
To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. 
to stop talking and instead write its messages on 
the screen, or to use the digitized voice instead 
of the synthesized one. 
The details of the 
system~ 
capabilities have been described elsewhere 
(I), in this paper we detail the algorithms which 
make the systems operation possible. 
To operate "Put That There" the user sits in a 
chair facing a thirteen foot diagonal rear pro- 
jected video screen in the "media room". 
This 
multi-media facility 
was built as an environment 
for experiments in interaction using multiple 
input/output channels. 
The user wears a headset 
microphone for the speech recognizer and the 
gesture recognizer is attached to a watchband worn 
at the wrist. 
The speech recognizer, a Nippon Electric Company 
DP-IO0 (2), is capable of recognizing up to five 
words, from a 120 word vocabulary, of connected 
speech. 
Connected speech recognition was a 
necessary precondition of this research; any 
attempt to create a natural interface would fail 
if the user had to speak each work discretely. 
The gesture recognition is accomplished using a 
three dimensional digitizer built by Polhemus 
Navigation Sciences (3), which returns the position 
and attitude of a sensor with respect to a radiator 
forty times a second. 
A "gesture" consists of 
extension of the arm in the direction of the 
screen. 
The system computes from the sensor infor- 
mation the vector defined by the arm position and 
draws a cursor on the screen. 
SPEECH RECOGNITION ENHANCEMENTS 
"Put That There" is primarily a voice-interactive 
system, with gesture and visual feedback as 
ancillary input and output channels. 
The essence 
of the interaction is maintaining an intelligent 
conversation with the computer, where the 
intelligence is directed toward understanding both 
the user's speech and the task he/she wishes to 
accomplish. 
I 
The work reported herein was supported by the 
Cybernetics Technology Division of the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency, under 
Contract No. MDA-903-77-C-O037. 
363 
Figure l: In running "Put That There", the user points at the large 
screen using a position sensing device strapped to his wrist. He 
speaks to the system through the head-mounted microphone. 
In exploring the application of speech recognition 
hardware to interactive systems, one quickly 
realizes that currently available speech 
recognizers, despite manufacturers' claims, are 
far from I00% accurate. This is particularly 
evident with connected speech recognizers, which 
are nonetheless more attractive for many applica- 
tions, as they allow more natural spoken input. 
Although recognition technology is improving (with 
more of the processing happening at the chip level), 
we expect that the hardware will never come close 
to the human ear's ability to understand the 
complexities of variable pitch, intonation, and 
coarticulation. In fact our work starts from 
this assumption, exploring methods of overcoming 
shortcomings in speech input technology to take 
advantage of speech as a natural and intuitive 
human communication channel. 
As a stand alone device, the speech recognizer is a 
context-free pattern matcher; it compares frequency 
spectra amplitude array samples of audio input with 
previously trained reference patterns. 
Upon 
completing a recognition, it communicates with the 
host computer ASCII codes for the recognized words. 
At this point we begin to apply context-sensitive 
speech processing. Although this analysis can be 
roughly divided into syntactic and semantic phases, 
the system will in fact branch back and forth 
between these phases, punctuated with spoken 
queries to the users, until it can execute a com- 
plete command. 
The syntactic analysis compares the recognized 
parts of speech to model command sequences. Some 
commands require objects, those objects may need 
to be of a particular class (e.g. a type of ship), 
etc. 
In addition, some commands may translate into 
two models depending on syntax; "make that blue" 
means change it to blue, while "make a green 
freighter there" means create one. While matching 
input words against the command templates, the 
syntactic phase also builds up a data structure 
reflecting the current state of knowledge about 
the recognized speech. 
At any stage of analysis, the software can question 
the user, through either the speech synthesizer or 
digital audio system. Each of these queries fills 
in missing or ambiguous elements of the command 
template, and any step of analysis is re-entrant 
by virtue of the stored command state structure. 
In particular, the syntactic analyzer will continue 
to ask questions and return to itself until it has 
adequate input to branch to routines handling 
unique commands. 
At this point, semantic analysis begins (or resumes 
if more information has been requested). In this 
phase, the system tries to gather enough infor- 
mation to complete the action required by a command 
The obvious first step is the meaning of the 
recognized speech; i.e., has the user asked to move 
something that is moveable (a ship) or something 
364 
that isn't (an island) or do we not yet know what 
the user wants to move? In the latter case, we 
again have the option of asking the user "what 
object" but first attempt intelligent interaction 
by looking at three sources of information to fill 
in the missing semantic data. 
SPEECH ADJUNCTS 
The first of these is gesture; specifically, was 
the user pointing at anything while speaking? Key 
elements of the gesture recognition are whether 
the user was reaching out in a pointing gesture, 
indicating intent, and approximate simultaneity of 
pointing and speaking. For example, if the user 
says "move that", while reaching out and pointing 
at some particular object, it is sufficient to 
recognize the word "move", as the gesture is what 
really specifies the object being referenced. 
user's intent. This must usually be done in con- 
junction with information about the present state 
of the graphical database. If, for example, the 
speech recognizer hears "blue oil tanker" and one 
does not presently exist, the system assumes that 
the user wants to create one. On the other hand, 
if one or more blue oil tankers are already in use, 
it is time to ask "what command?". 
At any stage of this analysis, questions may be 
asked of the user, resulting in an intelligent 
conversation between the operator and the machine. 
A person will be much more tolerant of imperfect 
speech recognition if the system's questions 
indicate of some degree of comprehension rather 
than if it simply says "please repeat that". 
The 
machine can continue to ask questions, incorporate 
the response into the syntactic model, and perhaps 
ask yet more questions, until a unique command is 
understood, at which point control passes to a 
particular subroutine programmed to complete that 
task with parameters passed from the analytic 
phase. 
REDUNDANT INPUT CHANNELS 
A key component of this experiment is the presence 
of redundant channels of input. The lack of 
accuracy in the speech input channel, to whatever 
extent it is present, requires that there be other 
ways for the computer to find out what the user 
wants done. In "Put That There" the second channel 
is gesture recognition. The ability of the compu- 
ter to find out where the user is pointing allows 
it to continue to function when errors or omissions 
occur in the speech input. 
Figure 2: Gesture Recognition Hardware. Close up 
of the radiator and sensor pair of the six-degree 
of freedom digitizer. 
The second source of added information is 
knowledge of the current state of the database. 
This is particularly powerful when combined with 
several assumptions of the user~ intent, as 
described below. Cross-referencing a command with 
the database of existing shipping prevents 
attempting meaningless operations e.g. branching 
to a subroutine to move a "green freighter" when 
one does not exist. This process can also point 
out ambiguities which the user may not realize; if, 
for example, the user requests an operation on some 
type of ship when there are several instances of 
that type already in existence, the system will ask 
"which one". 
A final source of intelligence exhibited by the 
system is the making of assumptions about the 
In addition to providing the computer with alter- 
native input channels, the presence of redundant 
inputs has benefits for the user, over and above 
the increased performance of the system. There 
are many situations in the operation of a complex 
system where the operator is already using one or 
several of the available input channels for other 
purposes but still wants to command the system. 
For example, in an airplane cockpit situation a 
pilot may be flying manually engaging hands and 
eyes yet want to change the frequency of the radio; 
voice would be the natural channel over which to 
make that change. At another moment the plane may 
be flying on autopilot and the pilot talking to the 
copilot. In that situation it would be best to 
change the radio frequency by hand rather than 
interrupt the conversation. 
The point is that there is no single channel of 
input (whether it be voice, gesture, eye tracking, 
or touch) to which any command should be limited; 
all command functions should be activated by any 
input channel all of the time. 
In many cases the 
user may use more than one of the channels at the 
same time, such as when he points and says "move 
that". 
Complex interactive interfaces should be 
designed with a systemic approach. Speech recog- 
365 
nition should not be used to replace the pushing 
of particular buttons but rather all functions be 
controllable by all modes of input. 
In the "Put That There" system as it exists today 
there are only two input channels 
- voice and 
gesture. 
The Architecture Machine Group has pur- 
chased an eyetracker which we hope to integrate 
into the system, in the near future, as a third 
input channel. 
One could imagine the situation 
where the user said "move that" and instead of 
pointing at 
something merely looked at it. 
This 
would allow a style of interaction that is even 
more "human", analogous to the situation every 
night at the dinner table when one says "please 
pass me that" while looking at the bowl of 
vegetables. 
for example, the system cannot decide which of two 
objects are referred to it asks "which one". On 
the other hand, given a command (such as "move") 
without any object it asks "what object". 
The 
words "which" and "what" are specific indications 
of the system's knowledge. 
Graphical feedback also aids the user. When the 
system determines which object is being referred 
to, it indicates this by outlining the object. 
This serves to reassure the user that the system 
has understood, giving encouragement. Before 
answering the system's questions it is helpful for 
the user to know what has already been comprehended. 
If the graphical feedback indicates the wrong ship 
the user can quickly abort the command sequence. 
CONCLUSION 
The focus of the work embodied in "Put That There" 
is on the person-machine interface. It is a 
demonstration of a style of interaction between a 
sophisticated computer based system and a human 
being. 
It is a realized argument for providing 
multiple channels of input/output in order to allow 
people to communicate with machines in a manner 
that is natural to them, as well as a testbed for 
ongoing research into the implementation of new 
channels of communication. 
Figure 3: From a chair ten feet away, the user 
interacts with the large display. 
FEEDBACK 
Feedback is a very important aspect of interactive 
systems, When using the typical computer interfac~ 
a keyboard, feedback comes in the form of each key 
being echoed after it is hit; the feedback is 
unambiguous and immediate. When using speech 
recognition equipment for input such feedback does 
not exist (nor would it be appropriate). 
This lack 
of immediate feedback requires some degree of 
trust, on the part of the user, that the system 
understands what was said and what it should do. 
It also requires that the feedback, when it does 
arrive, be specific enough to assure the user of 
the system's comprehension. 
Feedback occurs in both verbal and graphical forms 
in "Put That There". The system's verbal responses 
are quite detailed, asking precise questions. If, 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The insight of Dr. Richard Bolt underlay the con- 
ceptual framework and interactive philosophy of the 
research described in this paper. His efforts are 
duly appreciated. 
REFERENCES 
I. 
Bolt, R.A., Put-That-There: Voice and Gesture 
at the Graphics Interface. Computer Graphics, 
Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH '80, Vol. 14. 
No. 3, 1980, 262, 270. 
2. 
3. 
Kato, Yasuo, Words into action: 
A commercial 
system. IEEE Spectrum, June 1980, p 29. 
Rabb, F.H., Blood, E.B., Steiner, T.O., & Jones, 
H.R. Magnetic position and orientation tracking 
system. IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and 
Electronic Systems. AES-15, No. 5, September 
1979, 709-718. 
366 
