Journal of Biomolecular Structure & Dynamics, /SSN 07 39-1102 
Volume 5, Issue Number 5 (1988), "'Adenine Press (1988). 
Physical Models for Exploring DNA Topology 
Abstract 
Nadrian C. Seeman* 
Department of Chemistry 
New York University 
New York, NY 10003 
1\vo types of physical models have been developed for treating DNA molecules whose topology 
is of interest The two model motifs combine jacks-and-straws molecular representations 
with flexible tubing in different proportions. Both motifs present a low-resolution construct 
of DNA that retains helix axes, strand individuality and the distinguishabiity of the major 
and minor grooves. Molecules whose double helix axes are branched are modelled by stiff 
double helices and flexible branch sites. Supercoiled and knotted DNA molecules are modelled on 
a smaller scale, in a system in which a flexible backbone is supported by a series of stiffhelical 
struts; removal of this scaffolding immediately reveals the linking of the strands. The models 
are light and easy to construct. They may be used either for demonstrations or as a research 
tool that assists the interpretation data. 
Introduction 
Molecular models of DNA abound in classrooms and laboratories throughout the 
world, as befits the central role of this molecule in the chemistry of genetics. Most of 
these models are designed to demonstrate the static features of about one tum of 
double helix: the twofold symmetry of the phosphate-sugar chains, the major and 
minor grooves, the complementarity of the purine and pyrimidine bases (1 ), and the 
recognition sites available for regulatory proteins (2). The large expense associated 
with accurate ball and stick or space-filling models of DNA has recently led to frequent 
replacement of physical models by computer graphics molecular representations 
(e.g., 3). This is appropriate for those applications in which DNA may be treated as a 
static or nearly-static structure. 
As our knowledge ofDNAgrows, new concepts have come into play, for which inexpensive 
physical models are necessary. Chief among these new areas are those involving 
new topology for DNA strands or helix axes: supercoiling (e.g., 4), DNA branched 
junctions in recombination chemistry (e.g., 5-7) or macromolecular engineering (8), 
and DNA knot and catenane formation (e.g., 9-11). Topology is frequently more 
important than actual structure when treating these concepts: It is the linking, knotting 
or braiding of DNA which is the feature of interest, particularly in molecules for 
which the actual 3-D structures involved are either unknown or not unique. All 
*Recipient of an NIH Research Career Development Award 
997 
998 
Seeman 
Legends for Color Folios 
Figure 1: lsomerizations of Holliday Recombination Intermediates. The Holliday 
recombination intermediate in the parallel Sigal-Alberts conformation and its transfor-
mations are illustrated. This structure consists offour strands (red, green, orange and 
blue), each of which participates in two double helices. The 5' end of each strand is 
indicated by the small piece of tubing perpendicular to the circumferential segment 
on one end. Note that in this figure trigonal clusters have been distorted, so that the 
minor groove is approximately 150°, and the major groove is approximately 210°. 
The Sigal-Alberts conformations shown are characterized by the stacking of two of 
the double helices on each other, with one of the strands unperturbed in each helix; 
here, the unperturbed strands are the red and the orange strands. Two conformers of 
this crossover isomer are shown, the braided structure (a), in which the green and 
blue strands are braided at the crossover point, and (b) the unbraided structure, in 
which the green and blue strands cross over between helices but are not otherwise 
braided. (a) and (b) can be interconverted by a 360° rotation of one double helix (either 
red or orange) perpendicular to its axis, about the central horizontal through the 
crossover. Isomerization between alternative Holliday crossover isomers is illus-
trated in panels b-f. The five panels illustrate the qualitative steps necessary to 
undergo isomerization from one crossover structure to the other, without generating a 
braided structure, such as shown in (a). These steps are similar, but in a different 
sequence from those outlined by Meselson and Radding (24): We start with (b), a 
Sigal-Alberts crossover structure with parallel helix axes, in which the green and blue 
strands form the crossover. In (c) the helix axes have been reoriented antiparallel, by 
rotating the left (red) double helix. In (d), the stacks have been broken, so that the four 
helix axes are distinct. In (e), the stacks have been reformed, with the blue and green 
strands continuous, and the red and orange strands forming the crossover, while the 
helix axes are antiparallel. In (f), the top helix has been rotated a half-turn to make the 
helix axes parallel, thus completing the isomerization. 
Figure 2: Macrocyclic Tetramers Formed by Ligation of Nucleic Acid Junctions. Anti-
parallel Sigal-Alberts structures have been used for these constructions. (a) This 
square structure is formed from the ligation of 4-arm nucleic acid junctions which 
have been separated by two full turns of DNA. Note the continuous red strand which 
forms a closed cycle. The presence of closed cyclic strands(assayed by resistance to 
the enzyme Exonuclease Ill) is the experimen1al evidence for the closure depicted (25). 
(b) Two successive corners are highlighted, and the black reporter-straw, attached 
near each corner, indicates that the two junctions have formed a similar structure, 
although rotated 90°. (c) Ligation of identical4-arm junctions separated by 1.5 turns 
of DNA, but not formed into a macrocycle. Reference to the black reporter-straw 
shows that all the junctions have the same structure. (d) A square structure is formed 
from the ligation of 4-arm nucleic acid junctions which have been separated by 1.5 
turns of DNA. Note that the red strand again forms a continuous cyclic chain. (e) The 
black reporter-straw highlights the fact that two successive junctions adopt very dif-
ferent structures. It was only through use of these models that a structural model for 
the experimentally observed cyclization of the tetrameric species was obtained. 
DNA Topological Models 
999 
Legends for Color Folios 
Figure 3: Negatively Supercoiled Circular DNA (a) A circular DNA molecule. The 
opposite strands are color coded, black and yellow. The helix axis is white, but 
interrupted once a turn by a green segment. (b) This molecule has been negatively 
supercoiled. (c) Local denaturation has been emulated by removal of the scaffolding. 
Note thatthis has relaxed the entire molecule. (d) The denatured segments of (c) have 
been formed into a cruciform structure, which is an available option if the sequence has 
two-fold symmetry. Note that the transition from (b)to (c) to(d) has been accomplished by 
altering the scaffolding (helix axis + radial struts), but without breaking the Tygon 
backbone structures. 
Figure 4: Exploration of Knotting Structures of DNA. This figure illustrates that one 
can use the scaffolded system as an experimental system for the exploration of the 
knotted structures which result when DNA molecules are passed through one another. (a) 
A "Double-Shamrock" molecule formed by ligating together two 4-arm junctions 
which have three closed loops at the ends of their arms. (b) The top two loops have 
been passed through each other. (c) The scaffolding has been removed, and the knot 
which has been formed is revealed. Passing different loops of this structure through 
each other results in different knots. 
5: A Simple Trefoil Knot Made from DNA or RNA This knot is made from a cyclic 
single strand of DNA or RNA con1aining four pairing regions, each approximately a single 
turn long, interspersed with non-pairing DNA. The first region (red) is complementary 
to the third (blue), and the second region (orange) is complementary to the fourth 
(green). (a) The intact model, with its twofold symmetry axis approximately vertical in 
the plane of the figure. (b) The scaffolding has been removed to reveal thatthis system 
forms a trefoil knot. 
1000 
Seeman 
three of these areas deal with large DNA molecules, too large for the convenient display 
of atomic concepts, such as the hydrogen-bonding complementarity of the bases. 
Although nucleic acid branched junction constructs have been modelled with computer 
graphics (12), the molecular features of systems with unknown structures are most 
easily treated with physical models. 
An ideal physical model accurately represents the structural and dynamic features 
of the molecule on the scale selected All molecular scientists are familiar with jacks-
and-straws models, which are useful in directly representing the geometry of nuclear 
centers in small molecules. However, models in which every atom is represented are 
not convenient for exploring the properties DNA molecules whose topology is a 
significant feature. Supercoiled DNA has been represented traditionally with inter-
wound flexible tubing. Such models are often confusing, when used to demonstrate 
that topological consequences derive from the helical nature of DNA 
I present here two types of models, combining jacks and straws with tubing. In one type 
of model, stiffhelices made from jacks and straws are the dominant motif, with flexible 
tubing representing short joints between them. This model is useful in modelling 
the various features of Holliday recombination intermediates (13), as well as other 
nucleic acid junction constructs (8). In the second type of model, jacks and straws 
form a scaffolding for the assembly of tubing; removal of the scaffolding reveals the 
topologyofthe structure. Superhelical and knotting properties are readily modelled 
with this system. The details presented apply to classical B-DNA (1), but simple 
modifications permit construction or incorporation of other forms of DNA, such as 
left-handed Z-DNA (14). 
Stiff Helices with Flexible Joints 
It is often desirable to construct a low-resolution model of DNA in which as many 
features as possible are preserved from our higher-resolution knowledge of the structure 
(15). The model described in this section represents every residue of the double helix 
by three straws: one along the helix axis, one along the radius, and one along the 
helix circumference. All straws and jacks used here are Framework Molecular 
Models (16), purchased from Prentice-Hall. The model has been constructed from 
jacks and straws on the lcm/ Angstrom scale. The helix axis is formed from trigonal 
(bipyrimidal) valence clusters, using the "p-orbital" pair of prongs for the addition 
of3.4 em straws that correspond to the helical translation. A 12-cm straw strut is then 
attached to two of the three trigonal directions corresponding to radii of the double 
helix; using different colors forindividual strands clarifies the model. Use of the 12-cm 
length generates a van der Waals radius for the DNA (17), with the resultant helical 
pathway beyond the actual phosphate radius. These two radial straw struts, plus the 
3.4 em helical translation straw representthe internal portion of the nucleotide pair: 
the base and the sugar, except for those atoms which form the 6 backbone torsion 
angles (e.g., 18). 
The 120° angle between the two 12 em straws corresponds to the minor groove of the 
DNA, while the 240° angle also formed by the straws generates the major groove. 
DNA Topological Models 
1001 
This is not a large distortion from the actual angles (about 146° and 214 o (19)); the 
proper angle may be generated with two pairs of pliers, if necessary. However, as 
seen below, the trigonal cluster may be used directly for many applications. The use 
of trigonal clusters also permits the modelling of triple-stranded DNA molecules 
(20). Octahedral clusters should be substituted by those wishing to use this system to 
model the four-stranded DNA structures which have been postulated (21,22). 
An octahedral or trigonal cluster containing a "T" is then attached to the end of each 
pair of straw struts. These struts are next joined to their similarly colored mates by 
another straw, 8.2 em long. This straw corresponds to the helical contour length 
from residue to residue (for a classical 10-fold DNA) at this radius. These final 
segments model the backbone of the double helix, which is not represented by the 
radial struts. One must be careful to twist the individual links in the proper direction 
to get a right-handed helix. It is also useful to remember that, when looking at the 
vertical helix axis, from the minor groove side, the strand on one's right has its 5' end 
at the top and its 3' end at the bottom; by the twofold symmetry of the molecule, the 
strand on the left has its 5' end at the bottom and its 3' end at the top. Because these 
components are not inherently chiral, it is often useful to hook a short straw on an 
unused valence direction to denote the 5' end (Figure 1 ). 
Flexible segments may be incorporated into the structure by the introduction of 
flexible tubing in intimate contact with the straws. I use Tygon tubing, 1/8" i.d., 1/4" 
o.d, 1/16" walL A short piece of straw(about 1 em) is inserted into each end of the piece of 
tubing. This piece is used to replace a backbone segment at a site where flexibility is 
desired. Because the straw domains are so large and so stiff, the tubing behaves as a 
totally flexible connector, a universal joint with no angular constraints. The ftxed 
length of the flexible segment adds the one constraint which corresponds to existing 
knowledge: ftxed maximum extent of chain. 
Figure 1 illustrates the use of these models to explain central features in recombination 
chemistry. Figure 1 shows a braided (a) and unbraided (b) Holliday intermediate in 
the" closed" or parallel-helix Sigal-Alberts conformation (23). These two structures 
differ with regard to their crossover strands which are braided (linked) (Figure la) or not 
(Figure 1 b) at the crossover site. Braided structures are not believed to exist. Panels 
b-f of Figure 1 demonstrate the qualitative steps involved in the isomerization between 
two alternative crossover structures. The large number of steps involved are necessary 
to avoid forming a braided structure, such as the one in Figure la (24). 
Nucleic acid junctions have recently been suggested for use as the structural scaffolding in a 
biochip memory device (25). Figure 2 illustrates a simpler macromolecular engineering 
application, the formation of closed macrocyclic structures from ligated nucleic acid 
junctions (5,26). Figure 2a shows a cyclic structure formed from 4 nucleic acid junctions 
separated by two turns of DNA, while Figure 2b indicates that each ofthe junctions 
forming a comer of the square is identical. Figure 2c illustrates a linear structure with the 
same junction structures, but now separated by 1.5 turns of DNA, rather than 2. 
Figure 2d shows a macrocyclic square formed from this linear molecule. For this case, the 
alternate comers of the second structure are different, as highlighted in Figure 2e. 
1002 
Seeman 
Scaffolded Flexible Tubing Models 
These models use the same materials as those described above. The proportion of 
flexible Tygon tubing segments has increased, so that the backbones are all tubing; 
the straws only constitute helix axes and radial struts between the axis and the tubing 
backbones. Of course short pieces of straw are still inserted at the ends of each piece 
of tubing to connect itto the jacks. These models are builtto a smaller scale, and they 
allow actual model-building experiments, in order to explore the topological and 
structural consequences of various actions on the DNA molecule. The materials 
chosen have convenient flexibilities, so that the molecule responds appropriately in 
supercoiling relaxation demonstrations. Using the sametubingin larger proportion, and 
on a smaller scale makes it behave as a stiffer component of the system. Knot formation 
and the topological results of supercoiling are readily seen to be consequences of the 
Watson-Crick helical turns of the DNA molecules. 
The models are constructed on the 2 mm/ Angstrom scale. It is not possible to rep 
resent every residue on this smaller scale, as was possible with the first models. I 
have chosen to include about 3 radial struts per tum, rather than 10, as above. More 
than 2 struts are necessary, in order to retain the chirality of the helix within a single 
tum. Retention of the trigonal clusters from the previous motif results in retention of 
the distinguishability of the major and minor grooves, even on this scale. I use 2.2 em 
helix axis segments, 2.4 em struts and 6.2 em lengths of tubing. A certain amount of 
experimentation(+/- a few millimeters) is necessary to get lengths which fit the 
builder's personal quirks in putting things together. 
An understanding of the role of supercoiling has become essential for comprehen-
sion of the regulation of the genetic information carried by DNA( e.g., 27). Figure 3a 
shows a circular double helical DNA molecule built with this modelling system. 
Figure 3b shows the same molecule which has been negatively supercoiled. Note 
that the axes of the double helices form a right-handed helical arrangement, as they 
are supposed to (28) with negative supercoiling. Figure 3c shows how denaturing a 
short region of the molecule relaxes the supercoiling. Figure 3d indicates that the 
same relaxed structure can be made more stable if right-handed cruciforms are 
formed from the denatured region, if this is appropriate for the sequence (29-31). 
Knotted and concatenated structures are becoming increasingly important aspects 
of the replication and recombination of DNA molecules (9-11 ). The relationship 
between coils, interwinds and knots is very difficult to grasp without the help of 
models. Figure 4 shows how this modelling system can be used to figure out the 
topology which results when a branched structure has two loops interwound, as can 
be done by a topoisomerase, given large enough loops (32). In Figure 4a, I show a 
Double-Shamrock, formed by ligating together two 4-arm nucleic acid junctions. In 
Figure 4b, I have passed one strand through another, to create an interwound system. In 
Figure 4c, the scaffolding has been removed, and the knot structure of the system is 
evident from inspection. Different structures, with interlocks separated by different 
numbers of coils will yield different knots. 
DNA Topological Models 
1003 
Figure 5a shows another nucleic acid (DNA or RNA) knotting system, a single-
stranded circle, containing four sequences one tum long, interspersed with non-
pairing regions. The first sequence (red) is complementary to the third (blue), while 
the second sequence (orange) is complementary to the fourth (green). The three 
dimensional structure can be twofold symmetric; this is evident from Figure 5a. 
Removal of the scaffolding in Figure 5b shows that this arrangement defines a backbone 
structure containing a trefoil knot 
Discussion 
The two types of models described above are extremely simple and reasonably inex-
pensive to make with commercially available parts. Besides being easy to construct, 
these models are very light; for example, the model in Figure 1 weighs less than 200 
grams; it can be dismantled to fit in a coat pocket and reassembled in less than 1 hour. 
Thus, they are easy to transport for demonstrations and lectures. They become 
"working" models, rather than heavy, rigid edifices consigned to the insides of glass 
cases. If damage occurs, repair is very easy to accomplish. 
Since the topological properties ofDNA are global, rather than local, it is necessary 
to make models on a small enough scale to form complete closed molecules. Some 
of the structural details of the DNA helix have been elided in these models, and 
some are slightly distorted, but the relevant features which larger DNA systems 
require have been conserved. Thus, we have taken a "forest, rather than trees" 
approach, while maintaining awareness of the basic structual aspects which generate 
the topological phenomena in the first place. Exploration of this system can lead to 
fruitful model-building exercises which clarify the nature of the 
topological 
systems critical to the function of DNA as genetic material. 
Acknowledgements 
This research has been supported by Grants GM-29554 and ES-00117 from the NIH. 
References and Footnotes 
1. Watson, J.D. and Crick, F.H.C.,Nature, 171,737-738 (1953). 
2. Seeman, N.C., Rosenberg, J.M., and Rich, A, Proc.NatAcad.Sci. (USA) 73, 804-808 (1976). 
3. Robinson, B.H., Molecular Graphics Program, COMPress, Wentworth, NH (1986). 
4. Sinden, R.R.,.I. Chern. Ed, 64,294-301 (1987). 
5. Seeman, N.C., .I. Theor. Biol, 99,237-247 (1982). 
6. Kallenbach, N.R., Ma, R.-I., and Seeman, N.C.,Nature(London), 305,829-831 (1983). 
7. Kallenbach, N.R., and Seeman, N.C., Comments on Cellular and Molecular Biophysics, 4, 1-16 (1986). 
8. Seeman, N.C., .I. Biomol Str. and Dyns, 3, 11-34 (1985). 
9. Liu, L.F., Depew, R.E. and Wang, J.C., .1. Mol. Bioi., 106, 439-452 (1976). 
10. White, J.H. and Cozzarelli, N.R., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. (USA), 81, 3322-3326 (1984). 
11. Wasserman, SA and Cozzarelli, N.R., Science, 232,951-960 (1986). 
12. Seeman, N.C., .I. Mol. Graphics, 3, 34-39 (1985). 
13. Holliday, R., Genet. Res., 5, 282-304 (1964). 
14. Rich, A, Nordheim, A and Wang, AHJ.,Ann. Rev. Biochem., 53,791-846 (1984). 
15. Dickerson, R.E. and Drew, H.R.,J. Mol. Bioi., 149,761-786 (1981). 
16. Brumlik, G.C., Barrett, E.J. and Baumgarten, R.L.,.I. Chern. Ed., 41,221-223 (1964). 
1004 
Seeman 
17. Brian, AA, Frisch, H.L. and Lerman, L., Biopolymers, 20, 1305-1328 (1981). 
18. Seeman, N.C., Rosenberg, J.M., Suddath, F.L., Kim, J.J.P., and Rich, A, J. Mol. Bioi., 104, 109-
144 (1976). 
19. Harel. D., Unger, Rand Sussman, J.L., Trends in Biochem. Sci., 11, 155-156 (1986). 
20. Felsenfeld, G., Davies, D.R, and Rich, A,J. Am. Chem. Soc., 79 2023-2024 (1957). 
21. McGavin, S., Heredity, 39, 15-25 (1977). 
22. Wilson, J., Proc. Nat. Acad Sci. (USA), 76, 3641-3645 (1979). 
23. Sigal, N. and Alberts, B.,J. Mol. Bioi., 71,789-791 (1972). 
24. Meselson, M.S. and Radding, C.M., Proc. Nat. Acad Sci. (USA), 72, 358-361 (1975). 
25. Robinson, B.H. and Seeman, N.C., Protein Engineering 1, 295-300 (1987). 
26. Ma, R-1., Kallenbach, N.R., Sheardy, RD., Petrillo, M.L., and Seeman, N.C., Nucl. Acid Res., 14, 
9745-9753 (1986). 
27. Wang, J.C.,Ann. Rev. Biochem., 54,665-697 (1985). 
28. Bauer, W.R., Crick, F.H.C., and White, J.C., Sci. Am. 243(7), 118-133 (1980). 
29. Gellert, M., Mizuuchi, J.K., O'Dea, M.H., Ohmori, H. and Tomizawa, J., Cold Spring Harbor Symp. 
Quant. Bioi., 43, 33-40 (1979). 
30. Lilley, D.MJ., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. (USA), 77, 6468-6472 (1980). 
31. Panayotatos, N. and Wells, RD., Nature (London), 289, 466-470 (1981). 
32. Wang, J.C., Sci. Am., 247(1) 94-109 (1982). 
Date Received: November 20, 1987 
Communicated by the Editor N.R. Kallenbach 
