Architecture with GIDEON, a program for design in
structural DNA nanotechnology
Jeffrey J. Birac 1, William B. Sherman, Jens Kopatsch, Pamela E. Constantinou,
Nadrian C. Seeman *
Department of Chemistry, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA
Received 27 December 2005; received in revised form 15 March 2006; accepted 16 March 2006
Available online 19 April 2006
Abstract
We present geometry based design strategies for DNA nanostructures. The strategies have been implemented with GIDEON—a graphical
integrated development environment for oligonucleotides. GIDEON has a highly ﬂexible graphical user interface that facilitates the development
of simple yet precise models, and the evaluation of strains therein. Models are built on a simple model of undistorted B-DNA double-helical
domains. Simple point and click manipulations of the model allow the minimization of strain in the phosphate-backbone linkages between these
domains and the identiﬁcation of any steric clashes that might occur as a result. Detailed analysis of 3D triangles yields clear predictions of the
strains associated with triangles of different sizes. We have carried out experiments that conﬁrm that 3D triangles form well only when their
geometrical strain is less than 4% deviation from the estimated relaxed structure. Thus geometry-based techniques alone, without detailed
energetic considerations, can be used to explain certain general trends in DNA structure formation. We have used GIDEON to build detailed
models of double crossover and triple crossover molecules, evaluating the non-planarity associated with base tilt and junction misalignments.
Computer modeling using a graphical user interface overcomes the limited precision of physical models for larger systems, and the limited
interaction rate associated with earlier, command-line driven software.
# 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: GIDEON; Geometrical molecular modeling; Graphical user interface; DNA; DNA models; DNA tensegrity triangle; DNA double crossover; DNA
triple crossover
1. Introduction
DNA based self-assembly has emerged as one of the premier
techniques for the construction of complex nanoscale structures
[1]. The double helix itself is a fairly rigid structure, having a
persistence length of about 500 A˚ [2]. Further, sticky-end
cohesion can join duplexes in a sequence speciﬁc manner [1].
After cohesion, the local product structure is essentially the
same structure as a regular DNA duplex [3].
Structural DNA nanotechnology (SDN) emerged when
methods were developed for constructing immobile, branched
junctions—mostly immobile Holliday junctions [4], three-arm
junctions [5], and bulged three-arm junctions [6]. It was hoped
that these junctions could serve as motifs to assemble into
larger organized networks. When it was observed that the
junctions were quite ﬂexible [5,7,8], however, novel strategies
had to be developed to build well ordered arrays.
The general approach to constructing rigid motifs was to
combine several individual junctions into a better-structured
motif [8–10]. As each junction was added to a structure, new
geometric constraints were introduced which reduced the
ﬂexibility of the system, in some cases below the ﬂexibility of
the underlying DNA duplexes [11]. At that point, geometrical
modeling emerged as a primary concern in the design of SDN
motifs. In 1985, a FORTRAN program was written to facilitate
modeling self-assembled DNA branched structures [12]. The
orientation of this program was the use of virtual atoms,
representing a polynucleotide by connected single backbone
atoms, with struts connecting to the helix axis; this is the level
of detail needed to model large nucleic acid constructs. This
www.elsevier.com/locate/JMGM
Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling 25 (2006) 470–480
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ned.seeman@nyu.edu (N.C. Seeman).
1 Address requests involving the program to this author at
jeff.birac@subirac.com.
1093-3263/$ – see front matter # 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jmgm.2006.03.005
software was command line driven, with only line-drawn
graphics available. The program never came into common
usage, and when the computer platform was retired, the
software was never ported to a modern system. Nucleic acid
modeling programs, NAMOT [13] and NAMOT2 [14], were
developed by Tung and Carter in the middle 1990s, but these
programs have an all-atom orientation, containing more visual
information than is easily handled by the molecular architect
working on typical SDN scales. In 1988, a simple physical
model method was developed from jacks and straws, with the
aim of establishing and clarifying the topology of assembled
structures [15]. Both modeling methods were based on the
same, highly simpliﬁed representation; the nucleotides were all
perfectly uniform; the nucleosides were represented by radial
struts going from the helix axis to the helix; the phosphate
backbone of each nucleotide was represented by a helical
segment that extended to the next nucleotide. Finally, along the
helix axis, there was a strut separating each nucleotide pair from
the ones stacked above and below it.
This simpliﬁed modeling approach proved highly useful. It
was vital in the design of double crossover (DX) molecules, and
facilitated the design of a wide variety of other motifs and
nanomechanical devices [9,16–22]. As larger and more
complex SDN constructs are developed, however, the need
for alternate methods of modeling has become apparent. Large
physical models become distorted, and even unstable under
their own weight, and they are not easily reduced below a size
scale dictated by the jacks used to join the straws together. The
distortions are particularly pronounced for the newer non-
planar motifs that are being developed. Further, the construc-
tion of physical models becomes quite tedious, particularly if
multiple variations on a large motif are needed for comparison.
To solve these problems, we have developed GIDEON, a
graphical integrated development environment for oligonu-
cleotides. GIDEON provides a user-friendly graphical user
interface (GUI) that allows straightforward construction and
viewing of complex SDN models with ideal precision, free
from gravitational distortion. GIDEON also has provision for
precise numerical inputs that allow it to take advantage of any
geometrical structural calculations or data, obtained prior to
drawing the molecules. GIDEON’s outputs include simple
picture ﬁles, stereoscopic images, movies, nucleotide coordi-
nates, strand lists and base complementarity ﬁles. These latter
make it an ideal front end for sequence generators, X-ray
scattering calculations and other post-processing. We have used
GIDEON to construct detailed models of a number of SDN
motifs. We present here detailed analysis of DX and triple
crossover (TX) molecules, illustrating the effects of base tilts.
We also present a complete analysis of the geometry of 3D
tensegrity triangles, developed by Mao and co-workers [23],
along with experimental evidence demonstrating the accuracy
of the resulting structural predictions.
2. Approach
Analogous to the nature of SDN molecules being networks
of nucleic acid strands, GIDEON uses linked arrays of data
units to encapsulate speciﬁcations of a structure’s connectivity.
The data units include nucleosides – sugar-base valence groups
– and phosphates. Nucleoside sugars are rendered simply as a
sphere with a protruding cylindrical segment, portraying the
base (similar to the 1985 program [12]), and are interconnected
by phosphates represented as segments. Each sphere is an icon
of its nucleoside’s coordinates and assigned base, and segments
– representing phosphodiester linkages – are created and
deleted between spheres to deﬁne the connectivity of the
nucleosides.
In addition to their visual comprehensibility, the virtual
models produced with GIDEON have the advantage of a
comprehensive internal data structure, deﬁned as a hierarchy of
logical data units. The hierarchy starts with nucleotides at the
lowest rank. In addition to its positional coordinates, a
nucleotide encapsulates other internal data, such as a reference
to its Watson–Crick mate nucleotide, the assignment of its
associated base (A, C, G, T) if desired, and the connectivity
within its resident strand. A nucleotide, rendered as a sphere to
represent its sugar, holds the logical assignment of the base.
Strands and duplexes, deﬁned while the user constructs the
model, hold the next rank in the data hierarchy. A strand (data
unit) maintains an array of linked nucleotides, and may be
addressed as a single object to change its visibility and to
organize the connectivity. Each phosphodiester linkage –
rendered as a cylindrical segment – speciﬁes the connectivity of
the strands. Additional segments and spheres are distributed in
a periodic fashion through the interior of a duplex to represent
its stacked bases and helix axis. A duplex data unit encapsulates
the stack of bases associated with the axial vertices and base
segments, and may also be addressed as a single object for
reconﬁguration and analysis of a portion of a structure.
Fig. 1 illustrates an SDN cube [24]. The top row shows the
abstract geometrical structure [12]. The second row shows a
stereoscopic GIDEON drawing of the cube with each duplex
domain ﬁlled in with a cylinder to emphasize the overall
geometric structure. The third row shows a stereoscopic
drawing including the internal struts of the duplexes. The
fourth row shows an enlarged view of one of the duplexes that
makes up the cube, and the bottom row shows an alternate
depiction of that same duplex without its central axis marked,
with different bases having different colors, and the base pair
represented as a straight line. The versatility of the graphical
output modes eases both the design and the presentation of the
structures.
When building SDN computer models without preliminary
coordinate calculations, it is often difﬁcult to align all the
components perfectly. GIDEON has been equipped with a
rudimentary relaxation algorithm that can help ﬁt the elements
of a construct together in a smooth and low-strain conﬁgura-
tion. This relaxation process also can be used to get qualitative
estimates of the strain expected for a given design.
Once the relaxation has begun, the structure will gradually
rearrange itself to minimize mechanical strain according to user
speciﬁcations. Each segment has a target length, set implicitly
during construction, which deﬁnes its relaxed state. A tensile
(or compressive) strain arises due to a difference – also termed
J.J. Birac et al. / Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling 25 (2006) 470–480
471
J.J. Birac et al. / Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling 25 (2006) 470–480
472
Fig. 1. A sample SDN structure: the cube. The top three rows show stereoscopic images of a cube [24]. The top row is the abstract geometric shape. The second row
shows the reinterpretation of the structure as a network of stiff rod-like edges of DNA duplexes [12]. The third row shows the helical axes and base stacks. Row 4
shows an enlarged view of the near bottom duplex of the cube. Row 5 shows the same duplex without the helical axis, with the bases assigned different colors and
shown as a single line spanning the helix.
an ‘‘error’’ – in a segment’s current length relative to its target
length. During an iteration of the relaxation algorithm, two
vectors calculated as a function of each segment’s orientation
and length translate the segment endpoints. The vectors shorten
or lengthen each segment to reduce its error.
Asimilarapproachistakentominimizingplanarandtorsional
angular strains. A planar angle is deﬁned by two segments with a
common endpoint, and a torsion angle is deﬁned by a linear chain
of three segments joined end-to-end. Each segment and angle
follows
its
own
proportional–integral–differential
(PID)
response function used to calculate its relaxation vectors;
oscillations of the structure are damped during relaxation [25].
Three coefﬁcients set the response sensitivity of an angle or
segment to proportional, integral or differential error terms, but
no optimal set of coefﬁcients has been derived. The default
coefﬁcients were established empirically, based on the relaxation
of many different structures, but the user is given the option to
adjust the coefﬁcients as necessary during relaxation.
A relaxed structure may assume an unexpected conforma-
tion or reveal major internal strains that need to be resolved.
GIDEON enables a simple and reliable approach to revising the
structure to inﬂuence its relaxed conformation. Repositioning
duplexes, adjusting the number of nucleotides between
junctions, or changing the connectivity of the strands, along
with subsequent relaxations, may be repeated until the desired
conformation is obtained.
Fig. 2 shows assorted uses of the relaxation capability. Panel
(a) shows a duplex distorted by being bent twice, and (b) shows
that duplex after relaxing overnight. Panels (c–f) show how a
smooth hairpin loop can be constructed from a duplex by ﬁrst
removing one of the strands and the base stack, then linking the
two strands together (f), and ﬁnally relaxing the loop for a few
seconds to a smooth conformation. Panel (g) shows an
unrelaxed four-arm junction. The user indicates which arm
is supposed to stack on which other arm by connecting the
central axes (black). Even with this input, the system will not
relax to the twisted anti-parallel conformation [10] that such
junctions are known to prefer, without additional user input. In
this case, two pairs of bases have been connected via tethers,
shown as thin, red lines that have an assigned target length.
Panels (h) and (i) show the result of an overnight relaxation.
The pink strand runs downward along one duplex domain, with
its 30 end indicated by the bright red cone at the bottom.
Similarly, the bright blue cone at the top of the blue strand
shows that it is running upward. Thus the structure is anti-
parallel, in this case with an inter-helix angle of about 218,
substantially less than the typical value around 608 [10];
however, the relaxation result can be adjusted by changing the
target lengths and spring constants of the tethers. Panels (j–m)
show the side and front views of two DX molecules that have
undergone the relaxation process. The upper molecule, with 21
nucleotide pairs between junctions, is unstrained and the two
duplex domains can be seen to remain virtually undistorted in
their B-DNA structure. The lower DX molecule (panels l and
m), has only 19 bases between crossovers, and the relaxer
reveals that the system is substantially strained; this is visible
J.J. Birac et al. / Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling 25 (2006) 470–480
473
Fig. 2. Automatic relaxer examples. Kink relaxation (a and b). The relaxation processor of GIDEON promotes the local rigidity of DNA. A 39 bp duplex was
distorted sharply (bent 908 at two different points along the helix axis) was relaxed and resulted with a bend of less than 18 in the helix axis between neighboring base
pairs. Hairpin relaxation (c–f). The loop capping a hairpin motif may be constructed from a duplex with one strand trimmed (d) and connected to its complementary
strand (connection shown as green segment in (e)), followed by relaxation of the contorted structure into a uniform loop (f). The loop itself appears simple, but it is
quite cumbersome to construct manually. Immobile Holliday junction with tethers (g–i) [2]. (g) An immobile Holliday junction drawn with the four arms unstacked.
In a buffer containing divalent cations – such as Mg+2 – two pairs are of arms are known to stack in an anti-parallel fashion with an angle of about 638 between
domains. The user speciﬁes which pairs of arms stack by connecting the base stack axes (black cylinders) manually. The user can create tethers – non-material entities
rendered as thin red cylinders – to restrict the distance between two objects. The model includes tethers speciﬁed by the user to force the unassociated vertices –
opposite one another across the junction – close together, which will bring the phosphates spanning the junction into close proximity. (h and i) The restrictions
imposed by the tethers brings the structure into an anti-parallel conﬁguration as can be seen by the downward orientation of the red cone at the 30 end of the salmon-
colored strand and the upward orientation of the dark blue cone at the 30 end of the light blue strand. The angle between domains is about 218—lower than the target
value, but still in qualitative agreement with the observed structure [10].
from the distortions in the duplexes generated in this
conformation. This result does not guarantee that the 19 base
DX would not form, but the 21 base structure is much more
promising and in this case, it is known to form well [9].
Fig. 3 shows the steps involved in modeling a DX molecule
with parallel domains, an odd number of half-turns between
crossovers, where the extra odd half turn is a major (wide)
groove separation (DPOW) [9]. First, two duplexes are drawn
next to each other, separated by an arbitrary distance (a).
Second, nicks are placed in the two duplexes where crossovers
between domains are designed to be (b). Third, the connections
between the strands are inserted (c). Each of the compound
strands that were multi-colored have been set to a single color,
so each strand can be distinguished easily. Finally (d), the
duplex domains are rotated and shifted apart so that all the
phosphate linkages between the two domains (crossover links)
are at their normal lengths, taken in this model to be 6.8 A˚ , the
characteristic distance of phosphate linkages in the double
helix. The ﬁnal step is where geometrical information goes into
the model. In this example, all the crossover links could reach
their target lengths easily. In more difﬁcult cases, there needs to
be some strain in the system, and the duplexes need to be
adjusted to a state that balances the torques on the various base
stacks.
Fig. 4 shows drawings of two tensegrity triangles [23]. On
the left (a–d), is a left-handed triangle, one where the domains
move away from the viewer as one proceeds counter-clockwise
around the triangle. A right-handed triangle is shown on the
right (e–h). In panel (c), the left-handed triangle is viewed down
one edge, and one can see the two yellow struts forming an
angle between the junctions with the two other domains. The
triangle can only form if the correct angle is made by the twist
of the nucleotides along the edge of the triangle. In panel (d), it
is evident that approximately 1.3 turns are made by the 14
nucleotides along the edge. In contrast, in panels (g) and (h),
about 1.7 turns are made by 17 nucleotides. Since each
nucleotide of solution B-DNA has an average 34.38 twist
[26,27], a substantial deviation from the target angle can be
generated by making each edge slightly longer or shorter. In
addition, as the length of the edge changes, the target angle
shifts. Calculating the desired angles between junctions and
predicting what structures will form is helpful for building this
structure.
An analysis is illustrated in Fig. 5 for three-fold symmetric
tensegrity triangles [23]. The structure has been abstracted to
three blue helix axes of length L and three yellow struts that
represent the junction spacings; the struts are each of length D,
approximately equal to the diameter of a double helix. Each of
these six segments is perpendicular to its two neighbors in
three-space. L and D are assumed to be known, which yields the
magnitude of the angle, f, and the length, t, of the red triangle
edge. Let the x-axis run parallel to edge t, and the z-axis parallel
to the three-fold axis of the structure. Let point C, the centroid
of the structure in three dimensions, serve as the origin of the
coordinate system. Due to the three-fold symmetry of the
structure about C, if we can solve for the coordinates of points P
and Q, we will have determined the geometry of the entire
hexalateral and thereby solved the problem. Deﬁne the vectors
R running from C to P, V running from C to Q, and D = V  R.
The x-components of D, R, and V and the y-components of R,
and V are trivial to calculate as functions of jDj, Dy, t, and f all
of which are known except Dy. The green arrow indicates one of
J.J. Birac et al. / Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling 25 (2006) 470–480
474
Fig. 3. Construction and manual relaxation of a DPOW double crossover molecule. (a) Two double helices are drawn next to each other. (b) Nicks are placed on the
strands where the two domains are to be joined. (c) Crossover links are inserted, and the backbones are re-colored to reﬂect the new strand identities. At the bottom, the
end view of the structure is shown. (d) The duplex domains are moved and rotated so that the backbone segments joining the two domains are the same length as they
would be if they joined two nucleosides in the same base stack 6.8 A˚ .This approach can be used to identify low-strain SDN structures. The resulting structures have
perfectly undisturbed B-DNA duplex domains, and nominally unstrained connections. This is necessary but not sufﬁcient to guarantee clean formation of the target
structure; indeed, the DPOW has been found not to form cleanly, probably as a result of electrostatic repulsion [9]. See Figs. 4, 7 and 8 for examples of such structures.
the dyad axes that run from the midpoint of QP through C.
Because of this symmetry, the magnitudes of the projections of
R and V onto the XY plane are equal, which allows one to solve
for Dy, which in turn yields all the z-coordinates. See Fig. 5 for
details. We have produced a Microsoft ExcelTM spreadsheet
that takes the number of bases desired on each edge of a triangle
as user input and outputs the percentage of over/under turning
necessary to form the triangle, as well as the coordinates to
input into GIDEON to draw the structure with optimal
symmetry. For a copy of this spreadsheet contact the authors.
If we suppose that the closest approach between the axes of
joined duplex domains in a tensegrity triangle is 23 A˚ , we can
ﬁnd the edge lengths that generate triangles of minimal strain.
The strain is measured in terms of percentage of extra twist
J.J. Birac et al. / Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling 25 (2006) 470–480
475
Fig. 4. Left and right-handed tensegrity triangles. The left column shows a left-handed tensegrity triangle with 14 nucleotides between junctions on each side. The
right column shows a right-handed tensegrity triangle with 17 nucleotides between junctions. In the top row it is clear that the helical domains in the left- (right-)
handed triangles come toward the viewer has one progresses clockwise (counter-clockwise) about the triangle. In the lower three rows, the helical axes are marked in
blue, and the junctions are indicated by yellow struts that run from one axis to the other directly through the linking crossover. The 14 nucleotides of the left-handed
triangle subtend about 1.3 turns, where the 17 nucleotides of the right-handed triangle subtend about 1.6 turns, as can be seen in the bottom row. The immobile
Holliday junctions at each corner are more relaxed with the 608 anti-parallel conﬁguration of the right-handed triangles than the 608 anti-parallel conﬁguration
of the left-handed triangles, though both types have been shown to form.
needed in each nucleotide to have the junctions be sited
optimally along each domain. This treatment leads to the
following predictions for a left-handed triangle: for an edge of
13 nucleotides, the strain is minimized with 5.7% strain; for
14 nucleotides, 1.3% strain; for 15 nucleotides, 7.4% strain. For
a right-handed triangle we ﬁnd: for 16 nucleotides, minimal
strain is 9.6%; for 17 nucleotides, 2.8% strain; for 18
nucleotides, 3.3% strain.
To challenge these predictions, we have built tensegrity
triangles from DNA with every edge length from 13 to 18
nucleotides (Table 1). The strands were synthesized by
conventional phosphoramidite procedures [28] and were
puriﬁed by denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Stoichiometric mixtures of the strands (estimated by OD260) for
each triangle were prepared separately in a solution containing
40 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 20 mM acetic acid, 2 mM EDTA,
and 12.5 mM magnesium acetate. This is the standard buffer
used in structural DNA nanotechnology [29]. The EDTA is
included to chelate possible trace metallic contaminants of the
magnesium that could damage the DNA. Each mixture was
cooled from 90 8C to room temperature in a 1-L water bath over
the course of 48 h.
3. Results
Fig. 6 shows non-denaturing polyacrylamide gels run on a
variety of tensegrity triangles. The left lane of each gel is a
pBR322 HaeIII digest, with a gray dash marking the 184 base
pair (bp) band, and a black dash marking the 124 bp band. The
gels shown in lanes 15–17 contain 8% polyacrylamide, while
all other gels contain 10% polyacrylamide. A range of strand
concentrations is shown. A well-behaved DNA motif is
characterized by a single band migrating in the vicinity of
its molecular weight [29]. For each triangle, the lower bands
indicate small stoichiometry errors, but the upper bands suggest
more serious problems. They indicate the formation of
multimers, which occur primarily when the monomer is too
strained to fold in a closed complex [9]. We can see that the
J.J. Birac et al. / Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling 25 (2006) 470–480
476
Table 1
Strands for PAGE evaluation of tensegrity triangle stability
Strands 2, 5, and 7 are common to the triangles with edges length 13, 14, 15, 17, and 18 nucleotides:
Strand 2: 50-CCGCCAAGTGGCTGTCTG-30 18
Strand 5: 50-TGGCTTCGTGGTACAGTC-30 18
Strand 7: 50-TCGTAGCGTGGCACTGCC-30 18
Edge length 13:
Strand 1: 50-CAGACAGCCTGCTCTCGATTGGACGAAGCCA-30 31
Strand 3: 50-CGAGAGCACCGTCTATTATCACCTGAACTCACCACCAAT-30 39
Strand 4: 50-GACTGTACCTGGTGAGTTCAGGACGCTACGA-30 31
Strand 6: 50-GGCAGTGCCTGATAATAGACGGACTTGGCGG-30 31
Edge length 14:
Strand 1: 50-CAGACAGCCTGCTCTCGCATTGGACGAAGCCA-30 32
Strand 3: 50-CGAGAGCACCGTCATAGCATCACCTGTCACTCACCACCAATG-30 40
Strand 4: 50-GACTGTACCTGGTGAGTGACAGGACGCTACGA-30 32
Strand 6: 50-GGCAGTGCCTGATGCTATGACGGACTTGGCGG-30 32
Edge length 15:
Strand 1: 50-CAGACAGCCTGCTCTCGCATCTGGACGAAGCCA-30 33
Strand 3: 50-CGAGAGCACCGTCAAGCTTATCACCTGAACACTCACCACCAGATG-30 45
Strand 4: 50-GACTGTACCTGGTGAGTGTTCAGGACGCTACGA-30 33
Strand 6: 50-GGCAGTGCCTGATAAGCTTGACGGACTTGGCGG-30 33
Edge length 16:
Strand 1: 50-CAGACAGCCTGCTCTCGCATCGTGGACGAAGC-30 32
Strand 2: 50-GACTGTACCTGGTGAGTGGTTCAGGACGCTAC-30 32
Strand 3: 50-GGCAGTGCCTGATAATAGTTGACGGACTTGGC-30 32
Strand 4: 50-CCGCCAAGTGGCTGTC-30 16
Strand 5: 50-TGGCTTCGTGGTACAG-30 16
Strand 6: 50-TCGTAGCGTGGCACTG-30 16
Strand 7: 50-CGAGAGCACCGTCAACTATTATCACCTGAACCACTCACCACCACGATG-30 48
Edge length 17:
Strand 1: 50-CAGACAGCCTGCTCTCGGATCGACGGACGAAGCCA-30 35
Strand 3: 50-CGAGAGCACCGTCAACCTATTATCACCTGAACGTACTCACCACCGTCGATC-30 51
Strand 4: 50-GACTGTACCTGGTGAGTACGTTCAGGACGCTACGA-30 35
Strand 6: 50-GGCAGTGCCTGATAATAGGTTGACGGACTTGGCGG-30 35
Edge length 18:
Strand 1: 50-CAGACAGCCTGCTCTCGGTATCGACGGACGAAGCCA-30 36
Strand 3: 50-CGAGAGCACCGTCAACCAGATTATCACCTGAACTCTACTCACCACCGTCGATAC-30 54
Strand 4: 50-GACTGTACCTGGTGAGTAGAGTTCAGGACGCTACGA-30 36
Strand 6: 50-GGCAGTGCCTGATAATCTGGTTGACGGACTTGGCGG-30 36
Lengths in nucleotides follow the 30 ends.
triangle with 13 nucleotides/edge has a signiﬁcant upper band at
a 12 mM strand concentration (lane 2), while the 14 nucleotide/
edge
triangle
has
only
a
faint
upward
streak
at
this
concentration (lane 6). The 15 nucleotide/edge triangle has
clear upper bands at 3 mM (lane 13), and slight upper bands
even at 1.5 mM (lane 14). The 16 nucleotide/edge triangle has
heavy upper bands at 4 mM (lane 17), which remain even after
the monomer lane was cut out and the triangle reannealed to
ensure perfect stoichiometry (lane 16). The 17 and 18
nucleotide/edge triangles have no visible upper bands even
at 12 mM. Thus the tendency to form multimers tracks well
with the strains of the systems calculated above, and similar
calculations have successfully guided the construction of other
tensegrity triangles in this laboratory (PEC, Tong Wang, JK,
Lisa B. Israel, Xiaoping Zhang, Baoquan Ding, WBS, Xing
Wang, Jianping Zheng, Ruojie Sha and NCS, in preparation).
Note that the model used here assumed an inter-helix spacing of
23 A˚ . The data are not consistent with any inter-helix spacing
greater than 31 A˚ .
GIDEON allows similar modeling strategies to be applied
easily to other SDN motifs. For instance, various DX and TX
molecules are, perhaps, the most commonly used SDN motifs
[9,16]. They are generally taken to be ﬂat, but precise modeling
with GIDEON reveals, in many cases, deviations from
planarity. Figs. 7 and 8 show precision SDN models including
the 68 tilt of bases known to occur in B-DNA [30]. Fig. 7a and b
are two DX molecules with anti-parallel domains and an even
number of half-turns between crossovers (DAE). Panel a shows
a DAE molecule with exactly two helical turns (21 nucleotide
pairs in each helix) between crossovers. It is relaxed with the
two domains perfectly aligned. Panel (b) shows a DAE
molecule with 10 nucleotide pairs between crossovers. This is
slightly shy of one complete 10.5 nucleotide turn. This 0.5
nucleotide undertwist causes the two duplex axes to rotate
about 108 relative to each other. Fig. 7c shows a model of a DX
molecule with anti-parallel domains, and an odd number of
J.J. Birac et al. / Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling 25 (2006) 470–480
477
Fig. 5. Derivation of tensegrity triangle geometry. The blue struts are the axes
of the double helical domains forming a tensegrity triangle. The yellow struts
represent the lines through the junctions as in Fig. 4 above. Each pair of blue and
yellow struts forms a right triangle with hypotenuse shown in red with length t.
For a given duplex length, L, and a given duplex diameter, jDj, the geometrical
constraints on the system require a particular angle between pairs of yellow
struts (see Fig. 4, panels d and h). To calculate that angle, we use point C, the
centroid of the hexalateral, as the origin, and calculate the coordinates of points
P and Q as speciﬁed by the equations at right. The entire system is then speciﬁed
by the three-fold symmetry about point C. Here, R runs from C to P, V runs from
C to Q, and D = V  R. Note that this derivation depends critically upon the
structure’s two-fold rotational symmetry, whose axis is indicated by the green
arrow, and the three-fold rotational symmetry normal to the view plane. The
two-fold axis passes through C and the midpoint of D. Both of the symmetry
axes run through point C.
Fig. 6. Tensegrity triangle gels. Tensegrity triangles were constructed with edge
lengths 13 through 18 nucleotides. Room temperature non-denaturing poly-
acrylamide gels show the triangles annealed at different concentrations. For
each gel, the ﬁrst lane contains markers consisting of a pBR322 HaeIII digest,
with a gray dash marking the 184 bp band, and a black dash marking the 124 bp
band. The three larger gels contain 10% polyacrylamide, and the tensegrity
triangle concentrations are 12, 6, 3, and 1.5 mM in order left to right. The small
gel contains 8% polyacrylamide. Lane 17 was run at a strand concentration of
4 mM. Lane 16 shows material that was taken from an earlier gel run where the
monomer target band was cut out, eluted, and reannealed to a concentration of
4 mM. The tendency of the systems to form multimers is proportional to the
strain calculated in the text. The least multimer-prone structures are tensegrity
triangles with 14 nucleotide pairs on an edge (left-handed), and 17 or 18
nucleotide pairs on an edge (right-handed).
half-turns between crossovers (DAO). In this case, there are 16
nucleotide pairs between crossovers, which is a quarter of a
nucleotide more than 1.5 turns. This overtwisting, combined
with the asymmetry of the major and minor grooves results in
the two domains being about 38 away from parallel. Further, the
base tilts cause an unexpected skewing of the crossover strands:
the green and purple crossovers to tilt up to the right, and the
blue and red crossovers to tilt up to the left. Fig. 7d shows a DX
molecule with parallel helices, and an even number of half turns
between domains (DPE). For this case, the helical domains are
parallel. Note also that for this structure, the crossover links
cross each other in the front view but are parallel in the right end
view. This is typical of parallel crossovers, but is the reverse of
what occurs for anti-parallel crossovers. Fig. 8a shows a TX
molecule with an even number of half turns between junctions
[31]. In this case, all the helix axes are parallel, but the upper
and lower domains form an angle of 1638 about the middle
domain. Fig. 8b shows a TX with odd numbers of half turns
between domains [15]. In this case, both the upper and lower
domains are seen to rotate in the same direction relative to the
middle domain—about 38, with the upper domain turning a bit
more than the lower one. Note that the non-planarity shown in
Fig. 8a naturally lends itself to the formation of tubes when
multiple tiles are assembled into arrays.
Sometimes, an SDN structure may have entirely undistorted
double-helices, and all its crossovers links relaxed and yet it
may still be geometrically forbidden because of steric clashes
between parts of the molecule that appear far apart from the
standpoint of primary or secondary structure. Consider the
tensegrity triangles shown in Fig. 9. The single domain
triangles, shown with yellow base stacks, have been reinforced
by adding one double helix along each edge, a DAE structure in
each case. It would seem from panels (a) and (b) that the two
structures are more or less equally promising, even though the
triangle crossover points differ in location between the two
structures by one base. The structures are too large for
conventional physical models to distinguish clearly between
them. Precise modeling with GIDEON, however, reveals that
J.J. Birac et al. / Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling 25 (2006) 470–480
478
Fig. 7. Base tilt models of DX molecules. Careful models were made, following the method shown in Fig. 3. In this case, the 68 tilt of the bases in B-DNA was
included in the model [31]. Front, top, and right views of each structure are shown. In (a–c), an additional view from the right is shown with the distance between
domains increased by 5 A˚ to show the crossover strands. (a) A DAE molecule [9] with 21 nucleotides between junctions showing ideal alignment of the domains [9].
Note that the yellow and right blue crossovers perfectly occlude the left blue and red crossovers in the view on the far right. (b) A DAE molecule with 10 nucleotides
between junctions and 108 misalignment of the domains [9]. (c) A DAO [9] structure with 16 nucleotides between crossovers, showing 38 misalignment of the
domains [9]. The green-purple crossover is displaced from the red-blue crossover in the far right view. This arrangement is characteristic of anti-parallel DX
molecules with odd numbers of half turns between junctions, and is a result of the different sizes of the major and minor grooves. (d) A DPE molecule [9] showing
parallel domains with 21 nucleotides between crossovers. The DPE is the only one of these structures known not to form cleanly [9].
Fig. 8. Base tilt models of TX molecules. TX molecules were modeled using the
same strategies as in Fig. 7. (a) ATX molecule with an even number of half turns
between junctions [32]. The domains are parallel, but the upper domain is 178
out of the plane deﬁned by bottom two. (b) ATX molecule with an odd number of
half turns between junctions [17]. The top domain is turned about 3.48 relative to
the middle domain, and the bottom domain is turned about 2.08 relative to the
middle domain, with top and bottom domains turned in the same direction.
while the structure in (a) and (c) is promising, the structure in
(b) and (d) has a steric clash. When viewed along a duplex axis
in (d), the model shows an overlap between the outer, gray
domain and the inner domain on the next edge of the triangle.
4. Discussion
4.1. The utility of the program
We have described a system to build and display virtual
molecular models whose components are single strands, double
helices, and single nucleotides. This system allows the user to
develop simple yet precise models of SDN units, and evaluate
the strains in various designs. These geometry-based techniques
have been shown sufﬁcient to explain broad trends in SDN
formation without resorting to complex energetic calculations.
In particular, we have shown that tensegrity triangles tend to
form well when the geometrical strain is less than 4%, and tend
to form multimers when the geometrical strain is higher.
Further, as larger and more complex structures are made,
GIDEON will be of increasing utility as the only effective
means of checking for steric clashes in extended systems.
Not to be ignored is the importance of being able to display
modeled systems that have been used in experiments. The
representations that have been used to date (see, e.g., Ref. [9])
are useful for many purposes, but they elide many features that
a reader may wish to consider when reading a paper. Examples
include exact helicity and placement of grooves. The program
reported here provides this information implicitly, and also
allows further simpliﬁcations when they would make the
presentation clearer.
4.2. Validity of the approach
There are limitations to the purely geometrical modeling
methods used by GIDEON: the atoms in the crossover links
have complex interactions with each other and with the
solution. The strain in the system is likely to be accommodated
by writhing of the duplex domains to some extent [32]. Indeed,
DPOW molecules have been found not to form cleanly,
presumably due to some combination of charge repulsion of the
duplex backbones and possible kinetic traps that lead to
multimer formation [9]. While a low-strain GIDEON model is
not sufﬁcient to guarantee formation of a structure, it appears to
be generally necessary: failure to produce a relatively
undistorted molecule or one without steric clashes, bodes
poorly for the experimental success of a motif. Furthermore, the
energetic and dynamic modeling approaches necessary to
analyze a more detailed model are often computationally
inaccessible, or else may require many months to get a solution
for just a few structures.
Nevertheless, GIDEON models are fairly straightforward to
build, with the most complicated ones rarely taking more than a
few hours for the experienced user. This time can be reduced as
libraries of SDN structures are assembled, to be used as future
building blocks. As we showed for the case of tensegrity
J.J. Birac et al. / Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling 25 (2006) 470–480
479
Fig. 9. Steric clashes in tensegrity triangles with DX reinforcements. A tensegrity triangle, shown with yellow domains in all panels is reinforced by adding a second,
gray duplex domain to each leg of the triangle. The distance between domains has been increased to show the crossover links. The gray-yellow domain pairs form
DAE structures with 42 bases between junctions. The only difference between the structure in the left panels and those in the right panels is that the crossover points
deﬁning the triangles have been moved over by one nucleotide pair. The difference is hardly visible in the top row, and cannot be resolved in common physical models,
but the structure on the right has a steric clash between the gray outer domains and the neighboring yellow domains that can be seen in (d) where the gray domain
running toward the viewer overlaps the yellow domain running downward to the left.
triangles, geometric arguments are sufﬁcient to explain
qualitatively which structures form multimers more easily
than others.
4.3. Computational features and potential expansions
GIDEON’s GUI is implemented using the Metrowerks
PowerPlant framework [33]. Although it is currently speciﬁc to
the Apple Macintosh running the Mac OS X operating system,
the program’s conceptual architecture is fully adaptable to other
operating systems and environments. Targeting other popular
platforms (e.g., Windows, Linux, and others) should be
feasible, so that ﬁles would be fully exchangeable between
all platforms. Likewise, a scriptable version of GIDEON would
allow sophisticated models and animations to be created
without the need for movie ﬁles.
GIDEON is currently presented as a modeling and structure
design tool, yet through its highly ﬂexible internal architecture,
it has the potential to become a comprehensive development
system. Many other aspects of nucleic acid nanotechnology,
such as structure relaxation based on attraction and repulsion
interactions of virtual structure components, sequence selection
and energy estimation, could be modeled by more advanced
features in future versions.
Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by grants GM-29554 from
NIGMS, N00014-98-1-0093 from ONR, grants DMI-0210844,
EIA-0086015,
CCF-0432009,
CCF-0523290,
and
CTS-
0103002 from the NSF, 48681-EL from ARO and NTI-001
from Nanoscience Technologies, Inc. to N.C.S.
References
[1] N.C. Seeman, Nanotechnology and the double helix, Sci. Am. 290 (2004)
64–75.
[2] P.J. Hagerman, Flexibility of DNA, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem.
17 (1988) 265–286.
[3] H. Qiu, J.C. Dewan, N.C. Seeman, A DNA decamer with a sticky end: the
crystal structure of d-CGACGATCGT, J. Mol. Biol. 267 (1997) 881–
898.
[4] N.R. Kallenbach, R.-I. Ma, N.C. Seeman, An immobile nucleic acid
junction constructed from oligonucleotides, Nature 305 (1983) 829–831.
[5] R.-I. Ma, N.R. Kallenbach, R.D. Sheardy, M.L. Petrillo, N.C. Seeman,
Three-arm nucleic acid junctions are ﬂexible, Nucleic Acids Res. 14
(1986) 9745–9753.
[6] B. Liu, N.B. Leontis, N.C. Seeman, Bulged 3-arm DNA branched junc-
tions as components for nanoconstruction, Nanobiology 3 (1994) 177–
188.
[7] M.L. Petrillo, C.J. Newton, R.P. Cunningham, R.-I. Ma, N.R. Kallenbach,
N.C. Seeman, The ligation and ﬂexibility of four-arm DNA junctions,
Biopolymers 27 (1988) 1337–1352.
[8] J.Qi, X. Li, X.Yang,N.C.Seeman, Ligationoftriangles built from bulged3-
arm DNA branched junctions, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 118 (1996) 6121–6130.
[9] T.-J. Fu, N.C. Seeman, DNA double-crossover molecules, Biochemistry
32 (1993) 3211–3220.
[10] C. Mao, W. Sun, N.C. Seeman, Designed two-dimensional DNA Holliday
junction arrays visualized by atomic force microscopy, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
121 (1999) 5437–5443.
[11] P. Sa-Ardyen, A.V. Vologodskii, N.C. Seeman, The ﬂexibility of DNA
double crossover molecules, Biophys. J. 84 (2003) 3829–3837.
[12] N.C. Seeman, Interactive design and manipulation of macro-molecular
architecture utilizing nucleic acid junctions, J. Mol. Graphics 3 (1985) 34–
39.
[13] C.-S. Tung, E.S. Carter II, Nucleic acid modeling tool (NAMOT)—an
interactive graphic tool for modeling nucleic-acid structures, Comput.
Apps. Biosci. 10 (1994) 427–433.
[14] E.S. Carter II, C.-S. Tung, NAMOT2—a redesigned nucleic acid modeling
tool: construction of non-canonical DNA structures, Comput. Apps.
Biosci. 12 (1996) 25–30.
[15] N.C. Seeman, Physical models for exploring DNA topology, J. Biomol.
Struct. Dyns. 5 (1988) 997–1004.
[16] T.H. LaBean, H. Yan, J. Kopatsch, F. Liu, E. Winfree, J.H. Reif, N.C.
Seeman, The construction, analysis, ligation and self-assembly of
DNA triple crossover complexes, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122 (2000) 1848–
1860.
[17] Z. Shen, H. Yan, T. Wang, N.C. Seeman, Paranemic crossover DNA: a
generalized Holliday structure with applications in nanotechnology, J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 126 (2004) 1666–1674.
[18] F. Mathieu, S. Liao, C. Mao, J. Kopatsch, T. Wang, N.C. Seeman, Six-helix
bundles designed from DNA, Nano Lett. 5 (2005) 661–665.
[19] C. Mao, W. Sun, Z. Shen, N.C. Seeman, A DNA nanomechanical device
based on the B–Z transition, Nature 397 (1999) 144–146.
[20] H. Yan, X. Zhang, Z. Shen, N.C. Seeman, A robust DNA mechanical
device controlled by hybridization topology, Nature 415 (2002) 62–
65.
[21] W.B. Sherman, N.C. Seeman, A precisely controlled DNA biped walking
device, Nano Lett. 4 (2004) 1203–1207.
[22] S. Liao, N.C. Seeman, Translation of DNA signals into polymer assembly
instructions, Science 306 (2004) 2072–2074.
[23] D. Liu, M. Wang, Z. Deng, R. Walulu, C. Mao, Tensegrity: construction of
rigid DNA triangles with ﬂexible four-arm DNA junctions, J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 126 (2004) 2324–2325.
[24] J. Chen, N.C. Seeman, Synthesis from DNA of a molecule with the
connectivity of a cube, Nature 350 (1991) 631–633.
[25] E.D. Sontag, Mathematical Control Theory: Deterministic Finite Dimen-
sion Systems, second ed., Springer-Verlag, 1998, pp. 19–20.
[26] J. Wang, Helical repeat of DNA in solution, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
76 (1979) 200–203.
[27] D. Rhodes, A. Klug, Helical periodicity of DNA determined by enzyme
digestion, Nature 286 (1980) 573–578.
[28] M.H. Caruthers, Gene synthesis machines—DNA chemistry and its uses,
Science 240 (1985) 281–285.
[29] N.C. Seeman, Key experimental approaches in DNA nanotechnology, in:
Current Protocols in Nucleic Acid Chemistry, Unit 12.1, John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 2002.
[30] S. Arnott, D.W.L. Hukins, Reﬁnement of the structure of B-DNA and
implications for the analysis of X-ray diffraction data from ﬁbers of
biopolymers, J. Mol. Biol. 81 (1973) 93–105.
[31] T.H. LaBean, E. Winfree, J.H. Reif, Experimental progress in computation
by self-assembly of DNA tilings, in: E. Winfree, D.K. Gifford (Eds.),
DIMACS Series in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer
Science, vol. 54, American Mathematical Society, Rhode Island, 2000,
pp. 123–140.
[32] P.K. Maiti, T.A. Pascal, N. Vaidehi, W.A. Goddard, The stability of
Seeman JX DNA topoisomers of paranemic crossover (PX) molecules
as a function of crossover number, Nucleic Acids Res. 32 (2004) 6047–
6056.
[33] Metrowerks Corp., 7700 West Parmer Lane, Austin, Texas 78729 USA,
http://www.metrowerks.com.
J.J. Birac et al. / Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling 25 (2006) 470–480
480
