Direct manipulation systems offer the satisfying experience
of operating on visible objects. The computer becomes transparent,
and users can concentrate on their tasks.
Direct Manipulation:
A Step Beyond Programming
Languages
Ben Shneiderman, University of Maryland
Leibniz sought to make the form of a symbol reflect its
content. "In signs," he wrote, "one sees an adsantage for
discovery that
is greatest
wshen they express the exact
nature of a thinlg briefly and, as it were, picture it; then, in-
deed, the labor of thought is sonderfully diminished."
Frederick Kreiling, "Leibniz,"
Scientific A merican, M ay
1 968
Certain
interactive
systems
generate glowing
en-
thusiasm among users-in marked contrast with the
more common reaction of grudging acceptance or out-
right hostility. The enthusiastic users' reports are filled
with positive feelings regarding
* mastery of the system,
* competence in the performance of their task,
* ease in learning the system originally and in assimi-
lating advanced features,
* confidence in their capacity to retain mastery over
time,
* enjoyment in using the system,
* eagerness to show it off to novices, and
* desire to explore more powerful aspects of the
system.
These feelings are not, of course, universal, but the
amalgam does convey an image of the truly pleased user.
As I talked with these enthusiasts and examined the sys-
tems they used, I began to develop a model of the fea-
tures that produced
such delight. The central ideas
seemed to be visibility of the object of interest; rapid,
reversible, incremental actions; and replacement of com-
plex command language syntax by direct manipulation
of the object of interest-hence the term "direct manip-
ulation."
Examples of direct manipulation systems
No single system has all the attributes or design fea-
tures that I admire-that may be impossible-but those
described below have enough to win the enthusiastic sup-
port of many users.
Display editors. "Once you've used a display editor,
you'll never want to go back to a line editor. You'll be
spoiled." This reaction is typical of those who use full-
page display editors, who are great advocates of their
systems over line-oriented text editors.
I heard similar
comments from users of stand-alone word processors
such as the Wang system and from users of display
editors such as EMACS on the MIT/Honeywell Multics
system or "vi" (for visual editor) on the Unix system. A
beaming advocate called EMACS "the one true editor."
Robertsl found that the overall performance time of
display editors is only half that of line-oriented editors,
and since display editors also reduce training time, the
evidence supports the enthusiasm of display editor devo-
tees. Furthermore, office automation evaluations consis-
tently favor full-page display editors for secretarial and
executive use.
The advantages of display editors include
Display of afull 24 to 66 lines of text. This full display
enables viewing each sentence in context and simplifies
reading and scanning the document. By contrast, the
A portion of this article was derived from the author's keynote address at
the NYU Symposium on User Interfaces, "The Future of Interactive
Systems and the Emergence of Direct Manipulation," published
in
Human Factors in Interactiue Computer Systems,
Y. Vassiliou, ed.,
Ablex Publishing Co., Norwood, N.J., 1983.
s 9162 83
08(
)-00'-15(I -00
1i983
LEEF
57
August 1983
one-line-at-a-time view offered by line editors is like see-
ing the world through a narrow cardboard tube.
Display of the document in its final form. Eliminat-
ing the clutter of formatting commands also simplifies
reading and scanning the document. Tables, lists, page
breaks, skipped lines, section headings, centered text,
and figures can be viewed in the form that will be printed.
The annoyance and delay of debugging the format com-
mands is eliminated because the errors are immediately
apparent.
Cursor action that is visible to the user. Seeing an ar-
row, underscore, or blinking box on the screen gives the
operator a clear sense of where to focus attention and ap-
ply action.
Cursor motion through physically obvious and intui-
tively natural means. Arrow keys or devices such as a
mouse, joystick, or graphics tablet provide natural
physical mechanisms for moving the cursor. This is in
marked contrast with commands such as UP 6, which re-
quire an operator to convert the physical action into cor-
rect syntactic form and which may be difficult to learn,
hard to recall, and a source of frustrating errors.
Labeled buttons for action. Many display editors
have buttons etched with commands such as INSERT,
DELETE, CENTER, UNDERLINE, SUPERSCRIPT,
BOLD, or LOCATE. They act as a permanent mehu se-
lection display, reminding the operator of the features
and obviating memorization of a complex command-lan-
EDIT
--- SPFDEMO.MYLIB.PLI(COINS)
- 01.04 ------------------- COLUMNS 001 072
COMMAND INPUT =>
SCROLL ===> HALF
*X****
*********************~******
TOP OF DATA *
000100
COINS:
000Z00
PROCEDURE OPTIONS (MAIN);
000*300
DECLARE
000400
CCUNT
FIXED BINARY (31) AUTOMATIC INIT (1),
000500
HALVES
FIXED BINARY (31),
000600
QUARTERS FIXED BINARY (31),
000700
DIMES
FIXED BINARY (31),
I3
NICKELS
FIXED BINARY (31),
000900
SYSPRINT FILE STREAM OUTPUT PRINT;
001000
DO HALVES
=
100 TO 0 BY -50;
001100
DO QUARTERS
= (100
- HALVES) TO 0 BY -25;
001200
DO DIMES
= ((100
- HALVES - QUARTERS)/10)*10 TO 0 BY -10;
001300
NICKELS
= 100
- HALVES
- QUARTERS
- DIMES;
D
PUT FILE(SYSPRINT) DATA(COUNT,HALVES,QUARTERS,DIMES,NICKELS);
001500
COUNT = COUNT +
1;
001600
END;
001700
END;
001800
END;
001900
END COINS;
******
BOTTOM OF DATA ******
********
*
EDIT --- SPFDEMO.MYLIB.PLI(COINS)
- 01.04 ------------------- COLUMNS 001 072
COMMAND INPUT =
SCROLL =
HALF
*****
***************** ********** TOP OF DATA *****
**************
000100
COItS:
000200
PROCEDURE OPTIONS (MAIN);
000300
DECLARE
000400
COUNT
FIXED BINARY (31) AUTOMATIC INIT (1),
000500
HALVES
FIXED BINARY (31),
000600
QUARTERS FIXED BINARY (31),
000700
DIMES
FIXED BINARY (31),
000800
NICKELS
FIXED BINARY (31),
000900
SYSPRINT FILE STREAM OUTPUT PRINT;
001000
DO HALVES
100 TO 0 BY -50;
001100
DO QUARTERS
= (100 - HALVES) TO 0 BY -25;
001^00
DO DIMES
((100
- HALVES - QUARTERS)/10)*10 TO 0 BY -10;
001300
NICKELS
=
100
- HALVES
- QUARTERS
- DIMES;
001500
COUNT
= COUNT
4
1;
001600
END;
001700
END;
001800
END;
001C00
END COINS;
****** *************************** BOTTOM OF DATA ***
*******
*****
58
COMPUTER
guage syntax. Some editors provide basic functionality
with only 10 or 15 labeled buttons, and a specially
marked button may be the gateway to advanced or infre-
quently used features offered on the screen in menu
form.
Immediate display of the results ofan action. When a
button is pressed to move the cursor or center the text,
the results appear on the screen immediately. Deletions
are apparent at once, since the character, word, or line is
erased and the remaining text rearranged. Similarly, in-
sertions or text movements are shown after each key-
stroke or function button press. Line editors, on the
other hand, require a print or display command before
the results of a change can be seen.
Rapid action and display. Most display editors are
designed to operate at high speeds: 120 characters per
second (1200 baud), a full page in a second (9600 baud),
or even faster. This high display rate coupled with short
response time produces a thrilling sense of power and
speed. Cursors can be moved quickly, large amounts of
text can be scanned rapidly, and the results of commands
can be shown almost instantaneously. Rapid action also
reduces the need for additional commands, thereby sim-
plifying product design and decreasing learning time.
Line editors operating at 30 characters per second with
three- to eight-second response times seem sluggish in
comparison. Speeding up line editors adds to their attrac-
tiveness, but they still lack features such as direct over-
typing, deletion, and insertion.
Easily reversible commands. Mistakes in entering text
can be easily corrected by backspacing and overstriking.
Simple changes can be made by moving the cursor to the
problem area and overstriking, inserting, or deleting
characters, words, or lines. A useful design strategy is to
include natural inverse operations for each operation.
Carroll2 has shown that congruent pairs of operations
are easy to learn. As an alternative, many display editors
offer a simple UNDO command that cancels the previous
command or command sequence and returns the text to
its previous state. This easy reversibility reduces user anx-
iety about making mistakes or destroying a file.
The large market for display editors generates active
competition, which accelerates evolutionary design re-
finements. Figure I illustrates the current capabilities of
an IBM display editor.
Visicaic. Visicorp's innovative financial forecasting
program, called Visicalc, was the product of a Harvard
MBA student, who was frustrated by the time needed to
carry out multiple calculations in a graduate business
course. Described as an "instantly calculating electronic
worksheet" in the user's manual, it permits computation
and display of results across 254 rows and 63 columns
and is programmed without a traditional procedural con-
trol structure. For example, positional declarations can
prescribe that column 4 displays the sum of columns I
through 3; then every time a value in the first three col-
umns changes, the fourth column changes as well. Com-
plex dependencies among manufacturing costs, distribu-
tion costs, sales revenue, commissions, and profits can
be stored for several sales districts and months so that the
impact of changes on profits is immediately apparent.
Since Visicalc simulates an accountant's worksheet, it
is easy for novices to comprehend. The display of 20 rows
and up to nine columns, with the provision for multiple
windows, gives the user sufficient visibility to easily scan
information and explore relationships among entries (see
Figure 2). The command language for setting up the
worksheet can be tricky for novices to learn and for infre-
quent users to remember, but most users need learn only
the basic commands. According to Visicalc's distributor,
"It jumps," and the user's delight in watching this prop-
agation of changes cross the screen helps explain its
appeal.
Figure 2. This simple Visicalc program display (top) shows four col-
umns and 20 rows of home budget information. The cursor, an inverse
video light bar controlled by key presses, is in position C2. The top
command line shows that C2 is a value (as opposed to a text string)
that has been set up to have the same value as position B2.
The second display (above) shows two windows over the home budget
data with row sums to the right. The last row shows leisure dollar
amounts, which are established by the top command line formula as
the income minus the sum of expenses. A change to the income or ex-
pense values would immediately propagate to all affected values.
(Displays reproduced by permission of Visicorp.)
59
August 1983
Spatial data management. The developers of the pro-
totype spatial data management system3 attribute the
basic idea to Nicholas Negroponte of MIT.
In one scenario, a user seated before a color graphics
display of the world zooms in on the Pacific to see
markers for military ship convoys. Moving a joystick fills
the screen with silhouettes of individual ships, which can
be zoomed in on to display structural details or, ultimate-
ly, a full-color picture of the captain. (See Figure 3.)
In another scenario, icons representing different
aspects of a corporation, such as personnel, organiza-
tion, travel, production, or schedules, are shown on a
screen. Moving the joystick and zooming in on objects
takes users through complex "information spaces" or
"I-spaces" to locate the item of interest. For example,
when they select a department from a building floor
Figure 3. A spatial data management system has been in-
stalled on the aircraft carrier USS Carl Vinson. In the
photo at top left, the operator has a world map on the left
screen and a videodisc map of selected areas on the
center screen. After some command selections with the
data tablet and puck, the operator can zoom in on specif-
ic data such as the set of ships shown in the second
photo. With further selections the operator can get de-
tailed information about each ship, such as the length,
speed, and fuel. (Photos courtesy of Computer Corporation of
America.)
In 1971, about the only people playing video games were students in computer science laboratories. By 1973, however,
millions of people were familiar with at least one video game-Pong (above left). A few years later came Breakout (above
right), which, according to many designers was the first true video game and the best one ever invented. Pong and other
early games imitated real life, but Breakout could not have existed in any medium other than video. In the game, a single
paddle directed a ball toward a wall of color bricks; contact made a brick vanish and changed the ball's speed.
When the first arcade video game, Computer Space, went on location in a Sears store, its joystick was torn off before
the end of the first day. As a result, game designers have sought controls that were both easy to use and hard to
destroy. Centipede (above left) uses simple controls-a trackball and one button. On the other hand, Defender (above
right) has fIve buttons and a joystick; novice players are confused by these relatively complex controls and usually
give up after a few seconds.
COMPUTER
60
plan, individual offices become visible. Moving the cur-
sor into a room brings the room's details onto the screen.
If they choose the wrong room, they merely back out and
try another. The lost effort is minimal, and no stigma is
attached to the error.
The success of a spatial data management system de-
pends on the designer's skill in choosing icons, graphical
representations, and data layouts that are natural and
easily understood. Even anxious users enjoy zooming in
and out or gliding over data with a joystick, and they
quickly demand additional power and data.
Video games. Perhaps the most exciting, well-engi-
neered-certainly, the most successful-application of
direct manipulation is in the world of video games. An
early, but simple and popular, game called Pong re-
quired the user to rotate a knob, which moved a white
rectangle on the screen. A white spot acted as a Ping-
Pong ball, which ricocheted off the wall and had to be hit
back by the movable white rectangle. The user developed
skill involving speed and accuracy in placement of the
"paddle" to keep the increasingly speedy ball from get-
ting by, while the speaker emitted a ponging sound when
the ball bounced. Watching someone else play for 30
seconds was all the training needed to become a compe-
tent novice, but many hours of practice were required to
become a skilled expert.
Contemporary games such as Missile Command, Don-
key Kong, Pac Man, Tempest, Tron, Centipede, or
Space Invaders are far more sophisticated in their rules,
color graphics, and sound effects (see sidebar below and
on facing page). The designers of these games have pro-
vided stimulating entertainment, a challenge for novices
and experts, and many intriguing lessons in the human
factors of interface design-somehow they have found a
way to get people to put coins into the sides of com-
puters. The strong attraction of these games contrasts
markedly with the anxiety and resistance many users ex-
perience toward office automation equipment.
Because their fields of action are abstractions of reali-
ty, these games are easily understood-learning is by
analogy. A general idea of the game can be gained by
watching the on-line automatic demonstration that runs
continuously on the screen, and the basic principles can
be learned in a few minutes by watching a knowledgeable
player. But there are ample complexities to entice many
hours and quarters from experts. The range of skill ac-
commodated is admirable.
The commands are physical actions, such as button
presses, joystick motions, or knob rotations, whose
results appear immediately on the screen. Since there is
no syntax, there are no syntax error messages. If users
move their spaceships too far left, then they merely use
the natural inverse operation ofmoving back to the right.
Error messages are unnecessary because the results of ac-
tions are so obvious and easily reversed. These principles
can be applied to office automation, personal comput-
ing, and other interactive environments.
Every game that
I have seen keeps a continuous score
so that users can measure their progress and compete
with their previous performance, with friends, or with
the highest scorers. Typicallv, the 10 highest scorers get
to storc their initials in the game for regular display, a
form of positive reinforcement that encourages mastery.
Malone's4 and our own studies with elementary school
children have shown that continuous display of scores is
extremely valuable. Machine-generated value judgments
"Very good" or "You're doing great!"
are not as
effective, since the same score means different things to
different people. Users prefer to make their own subjec-
tive judgments and may perceive machine-generated
messages as an annoyance and a deception.
Carroll and Thomas' draw productive analogies be-
tween game-playing environments and application sys-
tems. However, game players seek entertainment and the
challenge of mastery,
while application-system
users
focus on the task and may resent forced learning of
system constraints. The random events that occur in
most games are meant to challenge the user, but predict-
able system behavior is preferable in nongame designs.
Game players compete with the system, but application-
system users apparently prefer a strong internal locus of
control, which gives them the sense of being in charge.
The pleasure in using these systems stems
from the capacity to manipulate the object
of interest directly and to generate multiple
alternatives rapidly.
Computer-aided design/manufacturing. Many com-
puter-aided design systems for automobiles, electronic
circuitry, architecture, aircraft, or newspaper layout use
direct manipulation principles. The operator may see a
schematic on the screen and with the touch of a lightpen
can move resistors or capacitors into or out of the pro-
posed circuit. When the design is complete, the computer
can provide information about current, voltage drops,
fabrication costs, and warnings about inconsistencies or
manufacturing problems. Similarly, newspaper layout
artists or automobile body designers can try multiple
designs
in minutes and record promising approaches
until a better one is found.
The pleasure in using these systems stems from the
capacity to manipulate the object of interest directly and
to generate multiple alternatives rapidly. Some systems
have complex command languages,
but others have
moved to cursor action and graphics-oriented commands.
Another,
related
application
is
in computer-aided
manufacturing and process control. Honeywell's process
control system provides an oil refinery, paper mill, or
power utility plant manager with a colored schematic
view
of the
plant.
The schematic may be on
eight
displays, with red lines indicatine a sensor value that is
out of normal range. By pressing a single numbered but-
ton (there are no commands to learn or remember), the
operator can get a more detailed view of the troublesome
component and, with a second press, move the tree struc-
ture down to examine individual sensors or to reset valves
and circuits.
The design's basic strategy precludes the necessity of
recalling complex commands in once-a-year emergency
conditions. The plant schematic facilitates problem solv-
ing by analogy, since the link between real-world high
temperatures or low pressures and screen representations
is so close.
Further
examples.
Driving
an
automobile
is my
favorite example of direct manipulation. The scene is
directly visible through the windshield, and actions such
as braking or steering have become common skills in our
culture. To turn to the left, simply rotate the steering
wheel to the left. The response is immediate, and the
changing scene provides feedback to refine the turn. Im-
agine trying to turn by issuing a LEFT 30 DEGREES
command and then issuing another command to check
your position, but this is the operational level of many
office automation tools today.
The term direct manipulation accurately describes the
programming of some industrial robots. Here, the opera-
tor holds the robot's "hand" and guides it through a
spray painting or welding task while the controlling com-
puter records every action. The control computer then
repeats the action to operate the robot automatically.
A large part of the success and appeal of the Query-
by-Example6 approach to data manipulation is due to its
direct representation of relations on the screen. The user
moves a cursor through the columns of the relational
table and enters examples of what the result should look
like. Just a few single-letter keywords supplement this
direct manipulation style. Of course, complex Booleans
or mathematical operations require knowledge of syntac-
tic forms. Still, the basic ideas and language facilities can
be learned within a half hour by many nonprogrammers.
Query-by-Example succeeds because novices can begin
work with just a little training, yet there is ample power
for the expert. Directly manipulating the cursor across
the relation skeleton is a simple task, and how to provide
an example that shows the linking variable is intuitively
clear to someone who understands tabular data. Zloof7
recently expanded
his ideas into Office-by-Example,
which elegantly integrates database search with word
processing, electronic mail, business graphics, and menu
creation.
Designers of advanced office automation systems have
used direct manipulation principles. The Xerox Star8 of-
fers sophisticated text formatting options, graphics,
multiple fonts, and a rapid, high-resolution, cursor-
based user interface. Users can drag a document icon and
drop it into a printer icon to generate a hardcopy print-
out. Apple's recently announced Lisa system elegantly
applies many of the principles of direct manipulation.
Researchers at IBM's Yorktown Heights facility have
proposed a future office system, called Pictureworld, in
which graphic icons represent file cabinets, mailboxes,
notebooks, phone messages, etc. The user could com-
COMPUTER
62
pose a memo on a display editor and then indicate distri-
bution and filing operations by selecting from the menu
of icons. In another project, Yedwab et al.9 have de-
scribed a generalized office system, which they call the
"automated desk."
Direct manipulation can be applied to replace tradi-
tional question-and-answer computer-assisted instruc-
tion with more attractive alternatives. Several CDC Plato
lessons employ direct manipulation concepts, enabling
students to trace inherited characteristics by breeding
drosophilla,
perform medical procedures
to save an
emergency room patient, draw and move shapes by
finger touches, do chemistry lab projects (see Figure 4),
or play games.
Explanations of direct manipulation
Several people have attempted to describe the com-
ponent principles of direct manipulation. "What you see
is what you get," is a phrase used by Don Hatfield of
IBM and others to describe the general approach. Hat-
field is applying many direct manipulation principles in
his work on an advanced office automation system. Ex-
panding Hatfield's premise, Harold Thimbleby of the
University of York, England, suggests, "What you see is
what you have got." The display should indicate a com-
plete image of what the current status is, what errors have
occurred, and what actions are appropriate, according to
Thimbleby.
Another imaginative observer of interactive system
designs, Ted Nelson,10 has noticed user excitement over
interfaces constructed by what he calls the principle of
"virtuality"-a representation of reality that can be ma-
nipulated. RutkowskitI
conveys a similar concept in his
principle of transparency: "The user is able to apply in-
tellect directly to the task; the tool itself seems to disap-
pear." MacDonald12 proposes "visual programming" as
a solution to the shortage of application progammers.
He feels that visual programming speeds system con-
struction and allows end users to generate or modify
applications systems to suit their needs.
Each of these writers has helped increase awareness
of the new form that is emerging for interactive sys-
tems. Much credit also goes to individual designers who
have created systems exemplifying aspects of direct
manipulation.
Problem-solving and learning research. Another
perspective on direct manipulation comes from psychol-
ogy literature on problem solving. It shows that suitable
representations of problems are crucial to solution find-
ing and to learning.
PolyaI3 suggests drawing a picture to represent math-
ematical problems. This approach is in harmony with
Maria Montessori's teaching methods for children. 14 She
proposed use of physical objects such as beads or wood-
en sticks to convey mathematical principles such as addi-
tion, multiplication, or size comparison. BrunerI5 ex-
tends the physical representation idea to cover polynom-
ial factoring and other mathematical principles. In a re-
cent experiment,
Carroll, Thomas, and MalhotraI6
found that subjects given a spatial representation solved
problems more rapidly and successfully than subjects
given an isomorphic problem with temporal representa-
Figure 4. Computer-assisted instruction can become more appealing with direct manipulation, rather than simple question and
answer scenarios. This CDC Plato lesson written by Stanley Smith of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Illinois
allows students to construct a distillation apparatus by proper finger actions on a touch-sensitive screen (figure at left). Once the
student has assembled the apparatus and begun the experiment, the real-time display gives a realistic view of the process with the
graph of distillation temperature vs. volume. The student controls the experiment by touching light buttons. The figure at right
shows that the student experimenter has gotten into trouble.
A
hA
hA
hA
Is
-
-
C )r_DL
-r
J)9Fr
+ -
T
-
1
-
e
fre-t
-r!
-
t:-
'
A
.
iA
kA
hkA
hA
hA
."IN
-. -I
-: .l
63
August 1983
tion. (Deeper understanding of visual perception can be
obtained from Arnheimt7 and McKim 18)
Physical,
spatial, or visual representations are also
easier to retain and manipulate. WertheimerI9 found that
subjects who memorized the formula for the area of a
parallelogram, A = h x b, mastered such calculations
rapidly. On the other hand, subjects who were given a
structural explanation (cut a triangle from one end and
place it on the other) retained the knowledge and applied
it
in similar circumstances more effectively.
In plane
geometry theorem proving, a spatial representation facil-
itates discovery of proof procedures more than an ax-
iomatic representation. The diagram provides heuristics
that are difficult to extract from the axioms. Similarly,
studenits of algebra are often encouraged to draw a pic-
ture to represent a word problem.
Papert's Logo language20 creates
a mathematical
microworld in which the principles of geometry are visi-
ble. Influenced by the Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget's
theory of child development, Logo offers students the
opportunitv to create line drawings with an electronic
turtle displayed on a screen. In this environment, users
can receive rapid feedback about their programs, can
easily determine wFhat has happened, can quickly spot and
repair errors, and can experience creative satisfaction.
Problems with direct manipulation. Some profession-
al programming tasks can be aided by the u.se of graphic
representations
such
as high-level
flowcharts, record
structures, or database schema diagrams, but additionai
effort may be required to absorb the rules of the repre-
sentationi.
Graphic
representations
can
be especially
helpful when there are multiple relationships among ob-
jects andi when the representation is more compact than
the detailed object. In these cases, selectively screening
out
detail and piesenrting
a suitable abstraction can
facilitate performaince.
However, using spatial or graphic representations of
the problem does not necessarily improve performance.
In a series of studies, subjects given a detailed flowchart
did no better in conmprehension, debugging, or modifica-
tion thani those given the code only.2t In a program com-
prehensioni task, subjects given a graphic representation
of control flow or data structure did no better than those
giv%en a textual description.-2 On the other hand, subjects
given the data structure documenitationi consistently did
better than subjects given the control flow documenta-
tioIl. This study sllgeests that the content of graphic
represenitations is a critical determinant of their utility.
The wrong information, or a cluttered presentation, can
lead to greater confusioni.
A second problem is that users must learn the meaning
of the components of the graphic representation. A
graphic iconi, although meaningful to the designer, may
require as much
or more
learning time as a word.
Some airports serving multilingual communities use
graphic icons extensively, but their meaning may not be
obvious. Similarly, some computer terminals designed
for international use have icons in place of names, but
the meaning is not always clear.
A third problem is that the graphic represenltation may
be misleadine. The Lisci mav rapidly grasp the analogical
representation,
but
then make
incorrect
conclusions
about permissible operations. Designers must be cau-
tious in selecting the displayed representation and the op-
erations. Ample testing must be carried out to refine the
representation and minimize negative side effects.
A fourth problem is that graphic representations may
take excessive screen display space. For experienced
users, a tabular textual display of 50 document names is
far more appealing than only 10 document graphic icons
with the names abbreviated to fit the icon size. Icons
Choosing the right representations and
operations is not easy. Simple metaphors,
analogies, or models with a minimal set of
concepts seem most appropriate.
should be evaluated first for their power in displaying
static information about objects and their relationship,
and second for their utility in the dynamic processes of
selection, movement, and deletion.
Choosing the right representations and operations is
not easy. Simple metaphors, analogies, or models with a
minimal set of concepts seem most appropriate. Mixing
metaphors from two sources adds complexity, which
contributes to confusion. The emotional tone of the
metaphor should be inviting rather than distasteful or in-
appropriate16
sewage disposal systems
are an inap-
propriate metaphor for electronic message systems.
Since users may not share the designer's metaphor, anal-
ogy, or conceptual model, ample testing is required.
The syntactic/semantic model. The attraction of sys-
tems that use principles of direct manipulation is con-
firmed by the enthusiasm of their users. The designers of
the examples given had an innovative inspiration and an
intuitive grasp of what users wanted. Each example has
features that could be criticized, but it seems more pro-
ductive
to construct an integrated
portrait
of direct
manipulation:
* Continuous representation of the object of interest.
* Physical actions (movement and selection by mouse,
joystick,
touch
screen,
etc.)
or
labeled
button
presses instead of complex syntax.
* Rapid, incremental, reversible operations whose im-
pact on the object of interest is immediately visible.
* Layered or spiral approach to learning that permits
usage with minimal knowledge. Novices can learn a
modest and useful set of commands, which they can
exercise till they become an "expert" at level I of the
system. After obtaining reinforcing feedback from
successful operation, users can gracefully expand
their knowledge of features and gain fluency.23
By using these four principles, it is possible to design
systems that have these beneficial attributes:
* Novices can learn basic functionality quickly, usual-
ly through a demonstration by a more experienced
user.
COMPUTER
* Experts can work extremely rapidly to carry out a
wide range of tasks, even defining new functions
and features.
* Knowledgeable intermittent users can retain opera-
tional concepts.
* Error messages are rarely needed.
* Users can immediately see if their actions are fur-
thering their goals, and
if not, they can simply
change the direction of their activity.
* Users experience less anxiety because the system is
comprehensible and because actions are so easily
reversible.
* Users gain confidence and mastery because they in-
iti-ate an action, feel in control, and can predict
system responses.
My own understanding of direct manipulation was
facilitated by considering the syntactic/semantic model
of user behavior. The cognitive model was first devel-
oped in the context of programming language experi-
mentation24'25 and has been applied to database query
language questions.26
The basic idea is that there are two kinds of knowledge
in long-term memory:
syntactic and semantic
(see
Figure 5).
Syntactic knowledge. In a text editor, syntactic
knowledge-the details of command syntax-include
permissible item delimiters (space, comma, slash, or col-
on), insertion of a new line after the third line (13, 1 3, or
31), or the keystroke necessary for erasing a character
(delete key, CONTROL-H, or ESCAPE). This knowl-
edge is arbitrary and therefore acquired by rote memori-
zation. Syntactic knowledge is volatile in memory and
easily forgotten unless frequently used.27 This
knowledge is system dependent with some possible over-
lap among systems.
Semantic knowledge. The concepts or functionality-
semantic knowledge-are hierarchically structured from
low-level functions to higher level concepts.
In
text
editors, lower level functions might be cursor movement,
insertion, deletion, changes, text copying, centering, and
indentation. These lower level concepts are close to the
syntax of the command language. A middle-level seman-
tic concept for text editing might be the process for cor-
recting a misspelling: produce a display of the misspelled
word, move the cursor to the appropriate spot, and issue
the change command or key in the correct characters. A
higher level concept might be the process for moving a
sentence from one paragraph to another: move the cur-
sor to the beginning of the sentence, mark this position,
move the cursor to the end of the sentence, mark this se-
cond position, copy the sentence to a buffer area, clean
up the source paragraph, move the cursor to the target
location, copy from the buffer, check that the target
paragraph is satisfactory, and clear the buffer area.
The higher
level concepts
in the problem domain
(moving a sentence) are decomposed, by the expert user,
top-down
into multiple,
lower
level concepts (move
cursor, copy from buffer, etc.) closer to the program or
syntax domain. Semantic knowledge is largely system
independent;
text editing functions (inserting/deleting
August 1983
lines, moving sentences, centering, indenting, etc.) are
generally available in text editors, although the syntax
varies. Semantic knowledge, which is acquired through
general explanation, analogy, and example, is easily an-
chored to familiar concepts and is therefore stable in
memory.
The command formulation process in the syntactic/
semantic model proceeds from the user's perception of
the task in the high-level problem domain to the decom-
position into multiple, lower level semantic operations
and the conversion into a set of commands. The syntax
of text editors may vary, but the decomposition from
problem domain into low-level semantics is largely the
same. At the syntax level the user must recall whether
spaces are permitted, whether program function keys are
available, or whether command abbreviations are per-
mitted.
As a user of a half-dozen text editors during a week, I
am very aware of the commonality of my thought pro-
cesses in problem solving and the diversity of syntactic
forms with which I must cope. Especially annoying are
syntactic clashes such as the different placement of
special characters on keyboards, the multiple approaches
to backspacing (backspace key, cursor control key, or a
mouse), and the fact that one text editor uses "K" for
keeping a file while another uses "K" for killing a file.
Implications of the syntactic/semantic model. Novices
begin with a close link between syntax and semantics;
their attention focuses on the command syntax as they
seek to remember the command functions and syntax. In
fact, for novice users, the syntax of a precise, concise
High-Level
Problem Domain
Low-Level
Program Domain
Semantic Knowledge
Unix
Micro
Editor
Editor
Syntactic Knowledge
Long-Term Knowledge
Figure 5. The semantic knowledge in long-term memory goes from
high-level problem domain concepts down to numerous low-level pro-
gram domain details. Semantic knowledge is well-structured, relative-
ly stable, and meaningfully acquired. Syntactic knowledge is arbitrary,
relatively volatile unless frequently rehearsed, and acquired by rote
memorization. There is usually little overlap between the syntax of dif-
ferent text editors, but they often share semantic concepts about in-
serting, deleting, and changing lines of text.
65
commllanid language prosides the cues for- recallirnL
thc
semllanitics. Novices revies the command names, in their
memorv5 or in a mainual, which act as the stimuli for
recalling the related semaintics. Each comnmaind is thein
exaluated tor its applicability to the problem. Novices
may hase a haid time figuring out
hbos
to move a
sentence of text, even if they understand each of the com-
mands. Novices using editors that have a "CHANGE
lold string/nexv string/" command must still be taught
hows to use this command to delete a word or insert a
xx1ord inlto a linie.
Manuals that have alphabetically arranged
sections make it difficult for the novice to
anchor material to familiar concepts.
As users gain experience, thev increasingly think
in
higher lexel semantic terwns,xhich are freer from the syn-
tactic detail and more svstem independent. In addition to
facilitating
learninig,
direct
mallipulationi
of a Visual
representation may aid retentioni.
The syntactic/semantic model suggests that trainine
rmaniuals should be w ritten f'rom the more familiar , high-
level, problem domain viesspoint. The titles of section.s
should describe problem domaini operations that the user-
deals sith regularly. Then the details of' the comnmanids
used to accomplish the task can be presented, and finally,
the actual svntax can be shoxn.
M\anuals that have
alphabetically arranged sectionis devoted to each coIml-
rnand are sers
difficult for the noxvice to lea-rn
fromii,
because it is difficult to anchor the materiall to famililar
conlcepts.
The sucCess of direct mlanlipulation is unlderstanidable
in the context of the svintactic/semantic mocdel. The ob-
ject of interest is displayed so that actions are directls in
the high-level problemll domain. There is little need for-
decompositioni into multiple commiiiiands with a complex
svintactic t'orm. On the contrary, each comminiaind pro-
duces a comprehenlsible action in the problem domain
that is immediately X isible. The closeness of' the problem
domain
to
the
comminiand
action
reduces
operator
problem-solving load and stress.
Dealing with representations of objects may be more
"natural'
and
closer
to
ininate human
capabilities:
action anid visual skills emerged xsell before language
in humani
e olution.
Psvchologists hase long knos n
that spatial relationshipps and actions are nmore quicklx
Frasped
sith
visual rather thani linguistic representa-
tions.
[Iurthermorc,
intuition an-d discovery are often
promoted by suitable sisual representations of formal
mathemiiatical svstems.
Piaget described t'our stages ot' crosth: senisorimotor
(from birth to approximately 2 sears), preoperational (2
to 7 years), concrete operational (7 to 11 vears), and f'or-
mal operations (beginninv at approximately 11 syears).>
Phssical actions on anl object are conmprehenisible duringP
the concrete operational stage, and childreni acquire the
concept of conservation or invariance. At arounid age 1 1,
children
ente-
the
f'orral operations stage of symbol
manipulation
to
repr esent
actions on objects.
Since
mathematics and programming require abstract thilnik-
ing, thex are difficult for childreni, and a greater effort
must be made to linek the symbolic representation to the
actual object. Direct mnanipulationi is an attempt to bring
activity to the concrete operational stage or exen1 to the
preoperational stage, thus making some tasks easier flor
children and adults.
It is eass to ens ision direct manipulation in cases s here
the physical action is conifined to a small number of ob-
jects and simple comminiands, but the approach rmav be
unsuitable f'or some complex applications. On the other
hand, display editors proside impressixe functionality in
a natural xas. The limits of direct manipulation
xill be
determined by the imagination and skill ot' the designer.
With more examples and experience, researchers should
be able to test competing theories about the most effec-
tive metaphors or analogies. Familiar sisual analogies
may be more appealing in the early stages of learning the
ssstem, xshile more specific abstract models may be more
useful during regular use.
The syntactic/semantic model prosides a simple model
of human cognitive activitv.
It must be refined and cx-
tended to enlhance its explanatory and predictive posver.
Empirical tests and car-eful measurements of' human per-
formance x ith a X aricty of syxstems are needed to X alidate
the improved model. Cognitive models of user behavior
and mental models or system images of computer-sup-
plied funlctions are rapidly expanding areas of research in
computer science anid psychology.
Potential applications of direct
manipulation
The trick in creating a direct manipulation syvstcm is to
comi-e up with an appropriate representation or model ot'
reality.
I t'ound
it dif ficult to thilnk about int'ormiiation
problems in a visual f'orm, but xith practice it becamne
more natural. With many applications, the jump to a
visual language sas initialls a struggle, but later
I couldi
hardly imagine xxhy anyone xould xant to use a com-
plex syntactic notation to descr-ibe an essentially x isual
process.
One application that se explored was a personal ad-
dress list program that displays a Rolodex-like dcx ice (see
Figure 6). The most recently retrieved address card ap-
pears on the screen, and the top line of the next two ap-
pear behind, follosed by the image of a pack of remain-
ing cards. As the joystick is pushed forward, the Rolodex
appears to rotate and successive cards appear in f'ront. As
the joystick
is pushed ftirther-, the cards pass by more
quickly; as the joystick is reversed, the direction of moxe-
ment rex erses. To change an entry, users merely mox e the
cursor over the field to be updated and and type the cor-
rection. To delete an etry, ulsers merely blank out the
fields. Blank cards night be let't at the top of' the file, but
xhen the ftields are f'illed in, proper alphabetic placement
is prosided. To find all enltries xith a specific zip code,
users merely type the zip code in the proper t'ield and
enter a question mark.
Checkbook maintenlance andl searchine mieht be donc
in a simila- fashion, by displaying a checkbook reuister-
COMPUTER
66
with labeled columns for check number, date, payee, and
amount. The joystick might be used to scan earlier en-
tries. Changes could be made in place, new entries could
be made at the first blank line, and a check mark could be
made to indicate verification against a monthly report.
Searches for a particular payee could be made by filling
in a blank payee field and then typing a question mark.
Bibliographic
searching
has more
elaborate
re-
quirements, but a basic system could be built by first
D
J
PHC-
showing the user a wall of labeled catalog index drawers.
A cursor in the shape of a human hand might be moved
over to the section labeled "Author Index" and to the
}
S54 2847
drawer labeled "F-L." Depressing the button on the
joystick or mouse would cause the drawer to open up and
reveal an array of index cards with tabs offering a finer
index. Moving the cursor-finger and depressing the selec-
tion button would cause the actual index cards to appear.
Depressing the button while holding a card would cause
copying of the card into the user's notebook,
also
Figure 6. This electronic Rolodex or phone-number card file gives
represented on the screen. Entries in the notebook might
users rapid control over the card motion by a forward or backward
bepredintedto crathe asprienEntriedbib
phynork
combin
joystick press. Different commands can be displayed by moving the
be edited to create a printed bibliography or combine
joystick left or right. The lively motion of the cards and the natural
with other entries to perform set intersections or unions.
commands appeal to many users. Implemented by Gary Patterson in
Copies of entries could be stored on user files or trans-
Basic on an Apple 11, this system was part of a course project at the
mitted to colleagues by electronic mail.
It
is easy to
University of Maryland.
visualize many alternate approaches, so careful design
and experimental testing will be necessary to sort out the
P<t
5 s:
successful, comprehensible approaches from the idiosyn-
/t mnS>
cratic ones.
-Os)
It
is possible to apply direct manipulation to en-
ed tor
Cc>
vironments
for which
there
is no obvious physical
>
parallel. Imagine a job control language that shows the
|
c>
file directory continuously, along with representations of
Sp>
s>
'posh>
computer components. A new file is created by typing its
name into the first free spot in the directory listing. A file
name is deleted by blanking it out. Copies are made by
icro>
locking a cursor onto a file name and dragging it to a pic-
/,t//\
ture of a tape drive or a printer. For a hierarchical direc-
/
sstem>
/
tory, the roots are displayed until a zoom command
causes the next level of the tree to appear. With several
>
presses of the button labeled ZOOM a user should be
c
P>
>
able to find the right item in the directory, but if he goes
|
i
\
Os>
down the wrong path, the UNZOOM button will return
|h
old
os)
the previous level. (See Figure 7 for a different approach
et>
to hierarchical directories.)
d,tor>
Why not make airline reservations by showing the user
P
aU?>>
\ \
>
a map and prompting for cursor motion to the departing
|
\\
and arriving cities? Then use a calendar to select the date,
a clock to indicate the time, and the plane's seating plan
\cro)
\\nx>
o e>
(with diagonal lines across already reserved seats) to
>
select a seat.
e
0 t
\ nternal>
Why not take inventory by showing the aisles of the
t\\ tes
>her>
warehouse with the appropriate number of boxes on each
ta
tes)
shelf? McDonald29 has combined videodisc and com-
Ystem\s
puter graphics technology in a medical supply inventory
with a visual warehouse display.
Why not teach students about polynomial equations
Figure 7. The Dirtree (for directory tree) program on the Perq computer
by letting them bend the curves and watch how the coef-
of Three Rivers Computer Corporation is built from left to right by
ficients change, where the x-axis intersects, and how the
puck selections. The details of lower level directories appear, and the
derivative equation reacts?30
items can then be selected by moving a cursor onto the item. In this
figure, the current item is AU, shown in inverse video, but the user has
These ideas are sketches for real systems. Competent
moved the cursor to Boot, which is shown with a box around it. If the
designers and implementers must complete the sketches
button on the puck is pressed, Boot would become the current item.
and fill in the details. Direct manipulation has the power
(Figure courtesy of Three Rivers Computer Corporation)
A-ri-,5.*cot 1 CQ'2
67
I
I
AugustI1jbj
to attract users because
it
is comprehensible, natural,
rapid, and even enjoyable. If actions are simple, rever-
sibility ensured, and retention easy, then anxiety recedes
and satisfaction flows in.
The tremendous growth of interest
in interactive
system design issues in the research community is en-
couraging. Similarly, the increased concern for improved
human engineering in commercial products is a promis-
ing sign. Academic and industrial researchers are apply-
ing controlled, psychologically oriented experimenta-
tion25 to develop a finer understanding of human perfor-
mance and to generate a set of practical guidelines. Com-
mercial designers and implementers are eagerly awaiting
improved guidelines and increasingly using pilot studies
and acceptance tests to refine their designs.
Interactive systems that display a representation of the
object of interest and permit rapid, incremental, revers-
ible operations through physical actions rather than com-
mand syntax are attracting enthusiastic users. Immediate
visibility of the results of operations and a layered or
spiral approach to learning contribute to the attraction.
Each of these
features needs research
to refine our
understanding of its contributions and limitations. But
even while such research is in progress, astute designers
can explore this approach.
The future of direct manipulation is promising. Tasks
that
could
have
been performed
only
with
tedious
THE NAVAL COASTAL SYSTEMS CENTER
Panama City, Florida Offers
SOFTWARE and SONAR ENGINEERING POSITIONS
520,256
- $53,661 Depending on Qualifications
**CHALLENGING ASSIGNMENTS**
**CAREER GROWTH**
**LOW COST OF LIVING**
**BEAUTIFUL ENVIRONMENT**
Join
a
rapidly
expanding
team
of scientists and engineers
engaged
in
Research,
Development, Test and Evaluation
of major
Navy
Systems, Supporting
Mine
Countermeasures, Swimmer
Oper-
ations,
Diving and Salvage,
Coastal and Inshore Defense, and Am-
phibious Warfare.
Qualifications
Bachelors Degree, Engineering, Computer Science, or Physics.
U. S. Citizenship
Significant Experience in:
Development
or
Life
Cycle
Support
of Embedded
Computer
Softwvare
---- or----
Sonar Desigii and System Development
APPLY IMMEDIATELY
NAVAL COASTAL SYSTEMS CENTER
Dr. D. P. Skinner
*OR DS MAOSTA
Code 03 (83-18)
Panama City, Florida 32407
An Equdal OQcort(ninty Employer
command or programming languages may soon be acces-
sible through lively, enjoyable interactive systems that
reduce learning time, speed performance, and increase
satisfaction. C
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to the Control Data Corporation for par-
tial support (grant 80M 15) of my work and to the Univer-
sity of Maryland Computer Science Center for computer
resources
to
prepare
this
report.
I
thank
Gordon
Braudaway, Jim Foley, John Gannon, Roger Knights,
John Lovgren, Harlan Mills,
Phyllis Reisner, Sherry
Weinberg, and Mark Weiser for their constructive and
supportive
comments
on
draft
versions.
Gio
Wie-
derhold, Stephen Yau, and the reviewers provided useful
guidance in shaping the final article.
References
I.
Teresa
L.
Roberts,
"Evaluation
of Computer
Text
Editors," PhD dissertation, Stanford University,
1980.
Available
from
University
Microfilms,
Ann
Arbor,
Michigan, order number AAD 80-11699.
2.
John M. Carroll, "Learning, Using and Designing Com-
mand Paradigms," Human Learning, Vol. 1, No. 1, 1982,
pp. 31 -62.
3.
Christopher F. Herot, "Spatial Management of Data,"
ACM Trans. Dutabase Systems, Vol. 5, No. 4, Dec. 1980,
pp. 493-513.
4.
Thomas W. Malone, "What Makes Computer Games
Fun?" Byte, Vol. 6, No. 12, Dec. 1981, pp. 258-277.
5.
John M. Carroll and John C. Thomas, "Metaphor and the
Cognitive Representation of Computing Systems, IEEE
Trans. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Vol. SMC-12, No.
2, Mar./Apr. 1982, pp. 107-116.
6.
Moshe M. Zloof, "Query-by-Example," AFIPS Conj..
Proc., Vol. 44, 1975 NCC, AFIPS Press, Montvale, N.J.
1975.
7.
Moshe
M.
Zloof,
"Office-by-Example:
A
Business
Language that Unifies Data and Word Processing and
Electronic Mail, IBM Sys. J., Vol. 21, No. 3, 1982, pp.
272-304.
8.
Cranfield
Smith
et
al.,
"Designing
the
Star
User
Interface," Byte, Vol. 7, No. 4, Apr. 1982, pp. 242-282.
9.
Laura Yedwab,
Christopher
F.
Herot, and Ronni
L.
Rosenberg, "The Automated Desk," Sigsmall Newsletter,
Vol. 7, No. 2, Oct. 1981, pp. 102-108.
10.
Ted Nelson, "Interactive Systems and the Design of Vir-
tuality," Creative Computing, Vol. 6, No. 11, Nov. 1980,
pp. 56 ff., and Vol. 6, No. 12, Dec. 1980, pp. 94 ff.
11.
Chris Rutkowski, "An Introduction to the Human Ap-
plications Standard Computer Interface, Part
1: Theory
and Principles," Byte, Vol. 7, No.
11, Oct. 1982, pp.
291 -310.
12.
Alan MacDonald, "Visual Programming," Datamnation,
Vol. 28, No. 11, Oct. 1982, pp. 132-140.
13.
George Polya, How to Solve It, Doubleday, New York,
1957.
14.
Maria Montessori, The Montessori Method, Schocken,
New York, 1964.
COMPUTER
15.
James Bruner, Toward a Theory of Instruction, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1966.
16.
John M.
Carroll,
J. C. Thomas, and A. Malhotra,
"Presentation and Representation in Design Problem-
Solving," British J. Psych., Vol. 71, 1980, pp. 143-153.
17.
Rudolf Arnheim, Visual Thinking, University of Califor-
nia Press, Berkeley, Calif., 1972.
18.
Robert H. McKim, Experiences
in
Visual Thinking,
Brooks/Cole Publishing Co., Monterey, Calif., 1972.
19. Max Wertheimer, Productive Thinking, Harper and Row,
New York, 1959.
20.
Seymour Papert, Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and
Powerful Ideas, Basic Books, Inc., New York, 1980.
21.
Ben Shneiderman, R. Mayer, D. McKay, and P. Heller,
"Experimental Investigations of the Utility of Detailed
Flowcharts in Programming," Comm. ACM, Vol. 20,
No. 6, June 1977, pp. 373-381.
22.
Ben Shneiderman, "Control Flow and Data Structure
Documentation: Two Experiments," Comm. ACM, Vol.
25, No. 1, Jan. 1982, pp. 55-63.
23.
Michael L. Schneider, "Models for the Design of Static
Software User Assistance," Directions in Human-
Computer Interaction, Albert Badre and Ben Shneider-
man, eds., Ablex Publishing Co., Norwood, N.J., 1982.
24.
Ben Shneiderman and Richard Mayer, "Syntactic/Seman-
tic Interactions in Programmer Behavior: A Model and
Experimental Results," Int'l J. Computer and Informa-
tion Sciences, Vol. 8, No. 3, 1979, pp. 219-239.
25.
Ben Shneiderman, Software Psychology: Human Factors
in Computer and Information Systems, Little, Brown and
Co., Boston, Mass., 1980.
26.
Ben Shneiderman, "A Note on Human Factors Issues of
Natural Language Interaction with Database Systems,"
Information Systems,
Vol. 6, No. 2, Feb.
1981, pp.
125-129.
27.
D. P. Ausubel, Educational Psychology: A CognitiveAp-
proach, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, 1968.
28.
Richard W. Copeland, How Children Learn Mathematics,
third ed., MacMillan, New York, 1979.
29.
Nancy McDonald, "Multi-media Approach to User Inter-
face," Human Factors in Interactive Computer Systems,
Yannis Vassiliou, ed., Ablex Publishing Co., Norwood,
N.J., to appear in 1983.
30.
Ben Shneiderman, "A Computer Graphics System for
Polynomials," The Mathematics Teacher, Vol. 67, No. 2,
Feb. 1974, pp. 111-113.
Ben Shneiderman is an associate professor
of computer science at the University of
Maryland, where he is pursuing research
in the design of interactive computer sys-
tems. He is the head of the recently formed
Laboratory for Human-Computer Inter-
action within the Center for Automation
Research.
Shneiderman is the author of Software
Psychology: Human Factors in Computer
and Information Systems, the coauthor of several textbooks,
and the editor of three collections of papers. He has published
more than 80 research journal and conference articles.
i!!..mmmmmm!.L
.mmmmmmmmmmmmm.
.'mmmmmmmmmmmmmm.
mm mm mm mm mm mm qmm
'FORBES SAYS000
"Before even tallcing to the
salesman spend some time with
The Software Catalog.*uly4,1983)
Indexed 8 different ways, by:
* Application * Subject * Computer System .
* Programming Language * Microprocessor
* Package Name * Software Vendor
Published every 6 months with supplemental updates three months later.
Single Copy
MICROCOMPUTERS
$69.00
Supplemental Update (Micro)
$15.00
MINICOMPUTERS
Supplemental Update (Mini)
$95.00
$15.00
Standing Order
$58.50
$12.75
$80.75
$12.75
*
"... it gives concise descriptions ofpackages that will interest professionals in
the accounting, legal, architectural, medical, and dental fields."
Call 1-800-223-2115 (in New York State) 1-212-867-9040 Ext. 307
EISEVIER/INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE DATABASE.m
Elsevier Science Publishing, Inc., Box CR, 52 Vanderbilt Ave., New York, New York 10017
Reader Service Number 6
I.,
Operating System
r
