0039-3fm(94)ooo36-0 
Reworking 
the Mechanical 
Value of 
Heat: Instruments 
of Precision and 
Gestures 
of Accuracy 
in Early 
Victorian 
England 
Heinz Otto Sibum* 
In this paper I address the questions 
of whether, and how, reworking 
historical 
experiments 
can contribute 
to the understanding 
of experimental 
practice in history. 
I concentrate 
on a particular 
experiment 
on the determination 
of the mechanical 
equivalent 
of heat performed by James Prescott Joule from Manchester. 
In his paper 
On the Mechanical Equivalent of Heat printed in the Philosophical 
Transactions’ in 
1850, Joule describes in detail the mechanical 
friction of fluids as the direct method 
for determining 
the mechanical 
equivalent 
of heat. After several earlier trials in 
evolving 
heat electrically 
he regarded the friction of water as the most simple and 
therefore convincing 
experiment 
to support his argument for the existence 
of such 
a constant relation between heat and work.’ In that document Joule gives by far the 
most detailed description 
of the mechanical 
construction 
of the experimental 
set-ups 
and the design of the paddle-wheel 
for churning the water as well as minute accounts 
of how to perform the experiment 
properly. Tables of numbers 
are given to report 
the outcomes of his trials as accurate laboratory 
measurements, 
which should give 
evidence for the existence and the value of this constant of nature. But controversies 
about the existence of such a number and the reliability of the measurement 
techniques 
used to establish it lasted until the end of the nineteenth century. Joule’s determination 
of the ‘mechanical value of heat’, his experiments on the friction of water in particular, 
still remained debatable until then. Historians 
of science have stressed in detail the 
meaning 
of this experimental 
trial for the development 
of thermodynamics 
and the 
*Department 
of History 
and Philosophy 
of Science, University 
of Cambridge, 
Free School Lane, 
Cambridxe 
CB2 3RH. U.K. 
Rt?ce&d 
19 April 1994; in revised fun 8 August 1994. 
‘James Prescott Joule, ‘On the Mechanical Ecluivalent of Heat’, Philosophical 
Transactions (1850, Part 
I), read 21 June 1849. Reprinted 
The Scient$zc~Papers, vol. 1 (London: Taylor and Francis, 
1884). pp. 
298-328. 
*Methods for obtaining 
the mechanical 
equivalent 
of heat can be divided into direct and indirect 
methods. Joule’s ‘experiments 
on the friction of fluids’ involve a direct method, i.e. mechanical 
energy 
is transformed 
into heat. Heat produced 
in water by an electric current is an indirect method. 
Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci.. Vol. 26, NO. 1. DD. 73-106, 
1995 
Copyright 
0 i995 El&ier 
Science Ltd 
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved 
0039-3681/95 
$9.50 + 0.00 
Pergamon 
73 
74 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
dynamical 
theory of heat in particular. 
This paper focuses on Joule’s practice of 
measurement 
in its cultural 
context. 
The historical 
analysis 
includes 
work with 
replicas of Joule’s experiment 
on the friction of water as a complementary 
resource 
to Joule’s own renditions of his experimental 
practice as documented in his published 
papers, notebooks and correspondence. 
It is an attempt to study Joule’s private place 
of knowledge 
production 
which led to his 1850 publication. 
In the first part of this paper I will give a detailed report of my own experiences 
when reworking the paddle-wheel 
experiment with different replicas. The subsequent 
historical 
narrative 
opens dimensions 
of past practice which have not yet been 
considered. 
For example, I will show that Joule’s exceptional 
experimental 
practice 
was based on the transformation 
of different, 
apparently 
unrelated 
traditions. 
It 
emerges that thermometrical 
skills which were rare in the early Victorian physics 
community 
were required in order to perform these trials. However, such skills were 
widely distributed 
in the brewing community 
to which Joule also belonged. 
The 
second section will introduce 
the reader to Manchester 
brewing culture and their 
changing practices. In a third section I will focus on contemporary 
sites of production 
in order to show that the new brewing practice represents 
a general change in the 
cultural habits of the time. Absolute standards were imposed in order to make local 
knowledge 
work elsewhere. 
Instruments 
of precision 
controlled 
skill and became 
representatives 
of accuracy. The fourth section describes Joule’s laboratory 
life in 
which all his brewing craft skill came to bear. Characteristic 
forms of division 
of 
labour and knowledge 
will become visible. Over and above, Joule created his own 
standards of accuracy which made him a performer without audience. The final part 
deals with Joule’s attempts to create his public space as a natural philosopher. 
Difficulties 
in communicating 
his local knowledge 
to the public will be described. 
His methods and choices of arguments 
given in his publication 
On the Mechanical 
Equivalent of Heat indicate a hybrid of craft consciousness 
and that of a gentleman 
specialist.3 These attempts to communicate 
his knowledge 
highlight the importance 
of the reliability of measurements. 
The use of instruments 
of precision has to go along 
with the formation 
of accepted gestures of accuracy-an 
expert culture which had 
not yet been established.4 
‘For the meaning of craft and craft consciousness 
in that period see John Rule, ‘The Property of Skill 
in the Period of Manufacture’, 
in Patrick Joyce (ed.), The Historical Meanings of Work (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1987), pp. 99-l 18. On ‘gentlemen specialists’, 
see Jack Morrell and Arnold 
Thackray, 
Gentlemen of Science: Early Years of the British Association for the Advancement 
of Science 
(Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1981). Joule’s move from private to public spaces will be discussed in more 
detail in a forthcoming 
paper which focuses on the reception of his friction experiments and its importance 
for metrology 
and the development 
of energy physics in the second half of the nineteenth century. 
?he 
expressions 
‘instruments of precision’ and ‘gestures of accuracy’ 
reflect on a common use of the 
terms ‘precision’ and ‘accuracy’ 
in the period under analysis. For Joule and others, ‘precision’ refers to 
tools and their quality, whereas ‘accuracy’ 
refers to the quality of workmanship. 
Reworking 
the Mechanical 
Value of Heat 
75 
Fig 1. Preparations for performing Joule’s paddle-wheel experiment in the Oldenburg powder tower. 
Picture: by permission of Norbert Gerdes. Oldenburg. 
‘New Experiments on the Friction of Fluids’ and its Troubles 
Erstens kommt es anders, zweitens als man denkt5 
It is well known that doing an experiment is not only determined by material culture 
but also by the actors’ abilities to interact properly with the objects and each other. 
A range of terms such as ‘skill’, ‘tacit knowledge’ 
or ‘Geschick’ are used to draw 
our attention 
to this crucial aspect of human practices. Historians 
of science use a 
variety 
of methodologies 
in order to study past practices. 
Playing 
the stranger, 
using actors’ categories, and studying controversies 
are preferred methods to make 
their taken-for-granted 
practices 
explicit.6 The example 
given here of reworking 
historical experiments 
is a complementary 
approach to the existing methods. This 
%erman 
adage. 
60n historical studies of experimental practice, see Steven Shapin and Simon Schaffer, L.eviurhan and the 
Air-Pump: Hobbes, Boyle, and rhe Experimental Life (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985); David 
Gooding, Trevor Pinch and Simon Schaffer (eds), The Ctses of Experiment: Studies in rhe Nurural Sciences 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989); Peter Galison, How Experbnents End (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1987); David Goading, ’ “In Nature’s School”: Faraday as an Experimentalist’, 
in David 
Gooding and Frank A. 3. L. James (eds), Furaday Rediscovered: Essays on the Life and Work of Michael 
Faraday, 1791-1867 (Houndsmill: 
Macmillan 
Press, 1985). On anthropological 
and sociological 
ap- 
proaches, 
see Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar, 
Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Fucrs 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986); Bruno Latour, Science in Action: How to Follow Scienrisrs 
and Engineers Through Society (Milton Keynes: Open University Press, 1987); Harry Collins, Changing 
Order: Replication and Induction in Scientific Practice (London: Sage, 1985). 
76 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
anthropological 
method involves the design and building of replicas, the performance 
of experimental 
work with these replicas, and the historical, archival exploration 
of 
the world in which these historical experiments 
were developed. Each of these three 
strategies is designed to inform and improve the others. These actions may help us 
to reconstitute 
tacit dimensions 
of past practices that were either taken for granted, 
kept secret and therefore not written down, or became victims of substitution 
by 
formal or mechanical 
representation. 
This argument only stands if I can show that 
my own experiences 
in doing 
the experiment 
are relevant 
to the historical 
experimental 
practice. In order to be able to refer to my ‘local knowledge” 
I use the 
term gesturul knowledge* for the complex of skills and forms of mastery developed 
in these real-time performances. 
In the summer of 1990 we9 began to replicate Joule’s paddle-wheel 
experiment 
to 
determine the mechanical 
equivalent 
of heat. The design of the experimental 
set-up 
was based on the 1850 publication 
in the Philosophical 
Transactions. Here Joule gave 
a minute 
description 
of the apparatus, 
the experimental 
method 
and tables of 
experimental 
data in order to present his result as being obtained with ‘exactness’. 
In rebuilding 
the first version of the experimental 
set-up we tried to follow carefully 
the instructions 
given by the texts. The thermometers 
used by Joule could not be 
rebuilt because of a lack of sufficient information 
and possibly the skill to do so.” 
Therefore the measurements 
were taken with two Beckmann thermometers 
which are 
highly sensitive and allow a reading of l/lOOth of a degree Celsius. Such instruments 
of precision correspond 
with Joule’s accounts of graduating 
his thermometers. 
We 
thought we could guarantee the ‘uniformity of temperature’ Joule mentioned by using 
an air-conditioned 
modem laboratory. 
Joule’s method of experimenting 
is as follows. 
‘On ‘local knowledge’, 
see Clifford 
Geertz, 
Local Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretive 
Anthropology (New York: Basic Books, 1983). 
‘Historical 
studies ordinarily deal with literary sources and material relics. Rudolf zur Lippe stresses 
the importance 
of the productive 
power 
of gesture 
in history 
and suggested 
the term 
‘gestisch 
geschichtliches 
Wissen’ as an analogy to the working knowledge of oral cultures. In my historical studies 
1 pursued this concept further in order to be symmetrical with the non-literary traditions of past experimental 
practice. 
Therefore 
gesturaf 
knowledge 
is to be understood 
as knowledge 
united with the actor’s 
performance 
of work, and it changes according 
to the specific kinds of performance, 
for example the 
manipulation 
of an instrument or the use of mathematical 
tools, and in ever new historical circumstances, 
For a further discussion of this historiographic 
approach, 
see the author’s article ‘Working Experiment: 
Bodies, Machines 
and Heat Values’, in R. Staley (ed.), The Physics of Empire (Cambridge: 
Whipple 
Museum of the History of Science, 1994), pp. 29-56. 
9During the first part of my studies I was assisted by Peter Heering, a Ph.D. student in the Research 
Group of Higher Education and History of Science at the Physics Department 
of the Carl van Ossietzky 
University, 
Oldenburg, 
Germany. 
All replicas were made there and I am very grateful to the Physics 
Department 
and the members of the project group in particular. 
Joule’s thermometer 
doesn’t exist anymore but I was able to reconstmct 
his design based on Joule’s 
own records and Arthur Schuster, ‘On the Thermometric 
Scale-value of the late Dr. Joule’s Thermometers’, 
Philosophical Magazine 5th series 39 (1895), pp. 477-501. 
Reworking the Mechanical Value of Heat 
77 
The temperature of the frictional apparatus having been ascertained and the weights wound 
up with the assistance of the stand h. the roller [fJ was refixed to the axis. The precise height 
of the weights above the ground having then been determined by means of the graduated 
slips of wood k,k, the roller was set at liberty and allowed to revolve until the weights 
reached the flagged floor of the laboratory, after accomplishing 
a fall of 63 inches. The roller 
was removed to the stand, the weights wound up again, and the friction renewed. After this 
has been repeated twenty times, the experiment 
was concluded with another observation 
of the temperature of the apparatus. The mean temperature of the laboratory was determined 
by observations 
made at the commencement, 
middle, and termination of each experiment. 
Previously to, or immediately 
after. each of the experiments, 
I made trials of the effect of 
radiation and conduction 
of heat to or from the atmosphere 
in depressing 
or raising the 
temperature 
of the frictional apparatus. In these trials the position of the apparatus, the 
quantity 
of water contained 
by it, the time occupied, 
the method 
of observing 
the 
thermometers, 
the position of the experimenter, 
in short everything, with the exception of 
the apparatus being at rest, was the same as in the experiments in which the effect of friction 
was observed.” 
Our first attempts to repeat the trial in this version already gave us interesting 
insights into the process of making a scientific fact. Initially it seemed evident to us 
that the experiment 
should be performed by two persons, one to wind up the weights 
and the other to read the temperature. 
When we entered the room in order to read 
the temperature 
the thermometers 
responded immediately 
to our body radiation and 
we found that a constant temperature was recorded after one hour. In order to maintain 
this uniform temperature 
we had to prevent witnesses from entering the laboratory 
during the trials. Moreover, the high sensitivity 
of the thermometers 
demanded that 
we learn to use them properly. The act of reading the thermometer 
requires a certain 
technique 
which includes the right timing for taking measurements. 
The radiation 
effect between 
the actor and the instrument 
was very difficult 
to master. Long 
experience in using the particular thermometer 
was needed. We helped ourselves first 
by creating rules such as: wait two minutes then read off, and continue reading every 
minute; then take the mean temperature. 
Joule’s paper informs us that winding up the mass of 26 kg twenty times over a 
distance of 1.40 m should be done in 35 min. We failed completely, simply on physical 
grounds. We had to share the job because of a lack of strength. Even then, it took 
us one hour and twenty minutes to perform successfully. 
This activity made the stirrer 
move and increased the temperature 
in the water by 0.5 degrees Fahrenheit. 
It also 
caused an increase of one degree Fahrenheit in the room due to our sweating. In order 
to avoid these troublesome 
body radiations we decided to reduce the weights and to 
perform the experiments 
individually. 
These first runs also showed that the paddle-wheel 
we had built moved totally 
differently 
from Joule’s 
description. 
The velocity 
of the falling 
masses varied 
markedly from his account. Obviously 
our design of the paddle-wheel 
differed in a 
crucial way from the original one, despite our efforts to build a good copy. For our 
“Op. cit., note 1, pp. 305-306. 
78 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
individual 
trials, we used 7 kg on each side because 
this corresponds 
with the 
published 
velocity of 2.42 in/s for the masses. Our results lay between 
500 and 
1500 ftlb/BTU. 
A further interesting 
question 
was raised here: does a different 
design of the paddle-wheel 
have any fundamental 
influence on the result? We could 
not give a satisfactory 
answer at this stage, because of the temperature 
fluctuations 
and the inaccuracy 
of our temperature 
readings. 
The use of a magnifying 
glass 
fastened on the thermometer 
allowed a precision of 0.001 degrees Celsius. So, at the 
end of the first attempt at historical 
replication 
the ‘mean equivalent 
of twenty 
experiments 
(where the falling masses had a weight of about 5 kg each)’ gave a value 
for the mechanical 
equivalent 
of heat of 705 ftlb/BTU with a standard deviation of 
9.2%.i2 
This approach had to be complemented 
with historical information. 
The Museum 
of Science and Industry in Manchester is in possession of some relics of Joule’s early 
paddle-wheel 
experiment from the year 1845. The different set-up and the measuring 
devices were of interest to us. A ‘travelling microscope’ at the Museum was designed 
by John Benjamin Dancer in order to graduate Joule’s sensitive thermometers. Joule’s 
notebooks 
are kept at the University 
of Manchester 
Institute 
of Science 
and 
Technology. 
The entries are very meagre with respect to the relevant experiment. The 
records of the relevant experimental 
runs are real-time recordings of numbers. There 
is no literary trace of Joule’s thermometrical 
skills, nor does he give information 
about 
the machinery, 
possible problems in performance, 
or his likely assistants. 
But his 
notebook does contain many detailed calculations 
on the specific heats of the metals 
used. Also, he intensively 
recorded the calibration 
of his own thermometer 
scale 
against thermometers 
of contemporary 
researchers. Unfortunately, 
his thermometers 
were destroyed during a fire at the Philosophical 
Society at the beginning 
of the 
twentieth 
century. 
But through 
further archival 
research 
I gained quite a good 
understanding 
of the instrument 
and its calibration 
device (see Fig. 4, below). 
The London 
Science 
Museum 
gave permission 
to take measurements 
of the 
existing paddle-wheel 
which it owns and which is reported to be the original. This 
gave me a basis for a new replica.13 I used all possible information 
about the objects 
and modes of producing them, to come as close as possible to the design and material 
culture as primary resources and existing crafts skills allowed. Besides the usual 
primary sources like correspondence, 
instruments, 
notebooks, 
this second replica 
became a complementary 
resource. On 1 March 1992, I started a new series of 
experiments 
with this replica in a different 
space. Joule’s working space was ‘a 
spacious cellar, which had the advantage of possessing 
a uniformity 
of temperature 
“I am very grateful to Peter Heering whose independent 
experimentation 
with this first version led to 
these results and allowed 
useful comparisons. 
For his report see Peter Heering, 
‘On J. P. Joule’s 
Determination 
of the Mechanical 
Equivalent of Heat’, The Hismy and Philosophy ofScience in Science 
Educarion, Kingston Conference 
Proceedings, 
vol. 1 (1992), pp. 502-504. 
‘aI am very grateful to the Curator Neil Brown from the London Science Museum, who allowed me 
to take the measures from the original paddle-wheel. 
For the replica, see Fig. 5 below. 
Reworking the Mechanical 
Value of Heat 
79 
far superior to that of any other laboratory’. 
My previous experiences 
in doing the 
experiment 
alerted me to the significance 
of the spacious cellar: the immense 
heat 
radiation during the trials could be partly compensated 
through a spacious room at 
a lower temperature 
level. Therefore, I performed the experiment 
in an old powder 
tower in Oldenburg 
which was used as a store room for meat during the eighteenth 
century. It was spacious and the material construction 
allowed me to expect that 
its temperature 
conditions 
would give further information 
about Joule’s workplace 
(Fig. 1). My research showed that the phrase ‘uniformity 
of temperature’ 
in the 
powder tower could be taken to mean fluctuations 
of about 0.5 degrees Celsius. I 
measured these effects during a time of changing 
weather from sunshine to stormy 
rain. But even during apparently 
constant weather conditions, 
the fluctuation 
over 
70 min (the duration 
of one complete experimental 
run) amounted 
to 0.5 degrees 
Celsius. 
Acclimatization 
after entering 
the room was necessary 
as well. Joule did not 
mention this as a problem at all. Even when he was asked by G. G. Stokes in 1853 
he answered 
‘I have thought a great deal on the subject of your queries, and in the 
first place I do not think that for experiments 
on heat it is absolutely essential to have 
a uniform 
temperature 
although 
it would 
be desirable 
to obviate 
sudden 
or 
uncontrolled 
changes’.14 This reply indicates 
that his understanding 
of uniformity 
obviously allowed such fluctuations. 
This was not because he was not aware of them 
but because he was convinced that he was able to control them by a certain technique 
of measuring 
temperatures. 
Difficulties 
also arose through placing the thermometers 
in the room: temperature 
differences 
occurred through movements 
of the measuring 
devices. Practising 
with 
the thermometers 
in the room over weeks had already improved 
my abilities as I 
accustomed myself to the room and its conditions. 
From written material I could not 
get any further information 
about Joule’s 
particular 
method 
for measuring 
the 
temperatures. 
His technique 
remained 
unknown 
to us. In order to replicate Joule’s 
experimental 
practice it was crucial to know more. The sketch of Joule’s thermometer 
reconstructed 
on the basis of primary sources and his notebook entries allowed me 
to state that in practice he actually read off a tenth part of a millimetre 
division on 
the scale.15 His construction 
of the thermometer made it unnecessary 
to read off 1/20th 
of a division. It is reasonable to state that his famous remark ‘constant practice enabled 
me to read off with the naked eye 1/2Oth of a division’ was intended to demonstrate 
in public the reliability 
of his measurement. 
Knowledge 
about the temperature 
difference between water and air turned out to 
be crucial. Joule did not state anything specific about it. His tables indicate a difference 
of OS-2 degrees Fahrenheit 
on one side or the other. If the water is slightly warmer 
“Joule to Stokes, 12 November 
1853 (Add MSS 7656 J 19, Cambridge 
University 
Library). 
15All his relevant notebook entries show two kinds of numbers: the measured results are given to one 
decimal place; numbers calculated by means of ‘interpolation’ 
and conversion have two or three decimals. 
Joule ‘Notebook’ 
(1 June 1847). 2 (1843-1858). 
p. 162, UMIST. Manchester. 
80 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
than the air, one would expect a loss of temperature over time, but this did not always 
happen. If the temperature 
of the water is much warmer or much colder than the air 
it is impossible 
to perform the experiment. 
Performing 
under the right temperature 
conditions 
needed a lot of experience. 
Ending the experiment 
also needs a lot of experience. 
The correct timing and the 
appropriate 
habit of taking the temperature 
measurements 
is absolutely 
crucial. 
Presumably, 
a run should cease when the final, stable, temperature has been reached. 
The Beckmann thermometer 
indicated a stable temperature within 6 min after putting 
them into the water. We can assume a similar behaviour 
for Joule’s thermometer. 
Joule had a reasonable 
expectation 
of the equilibrium 
value for the terminal 
temperature 
and managed 
his thermometry 
through 
keeping 
the thermometer 
indication 
near to the expected value. This reduced the time of taking the measure. 
But nevertheless 
the termination 
of experiment 
was problematic. 
Do these 4-6 min 
already count as radiation time? How can you calculate this uncertainty? 
This draws 
our attention 
to the reliability 
of his accounts on the radiation 
effect in general. 
Consider 
Joule’s 
6 1 copper vessel filled with water. Using 
his data, could a 
temperature 
difference of 2.09 degrees Fahrenheit 
between air and water cause the 
total increase of temperature 
of 0.106 degrees within 35 min? 
The spacious room obviously reduced the heat radiation effect of the human body. 
A total increase in the room after the experiment could not be measured. His notebook 
entries however gave increases between 0.1 and 0.16 degrees Fahrenheit. 
The final 
‘uniformity 
of temperature’ 
was achieved through the method of means. In order to 
minimize 
the heat radiation from the experimenter’s 
body that reached the vessel 
during the trials, the wooden shield was absolutely 
necessary. 
It would reflect the 
radiation into the room. 
The design of the paddle-wheel, 
which we adopted, differed greatly from the one 
Joule sketched in the 1850 paper. Ours gives a velocity of 2.59 in/s, which is very 
close to Joule’s written account of 2.42 in/s. Experiments 
with our first replica showed 
that we could not repeat the mechanical 
sequence as given in the text. The version 
of the paddle-wheel 
displayed in the Science Museum allowed us to do so. Therefore 
it seems evident that Joule had used this type of construction. 
We have to explain 
why Joule did not give the appropriate design in publication. 
It is especially interesting 
because our experiences 
with different forms of paddle-wheels 
gave different values 
for the mechanical 
equivalent 
of heat. I6 
The most troublesome 
mechanical 
problem was the weakness of the strings. The 
string that still connects the wooden roller of the paddle-wheel 
axle and the pulleys 
was made of a very thin baste fibre. We do not know what string Joule might have 
used for lifting the weights-probably 
a very thin one, because this would have 
reduced friction. In my experiments 
even strong fishing line (60 kg) didn’t stand the 
“For the different designs of the paddle-wheel 
compare the sketch in Joule’s publication 
and Fig. 5. 
I will focus on this problem in the forthcoming 
second part of this study. 
Reworking the Mechanical Value of Heat 
81 
test. A lot of repair work had to be done. Mechanical 
problems, such as the changing 
friction of the roller axles, the changing centre of gravity of the wooden pulleys caused 
by the working mode of wood, the rigidity of the strings, the friction of the steel axle 
on the brass wheel, the determination 
of the actual distance of equable motion, and 
weighing the masses, are all sources of possible errors. In all these particular aspects 
Joule’s notebook 
showed minute 
determinations. 
In order to calculate 
the effect 
of friction 
due to the pulleys 
and the rigidity 
of the strings he took measures 
over several days. He connected 
the two pulleys with twine passing round a roller 
of equal diameter to that employed 
in the experiments. 
Under these circumstances, 
the weight required to be added to one of the leaden weights in order to maintain 
them in equable motion could be found.t7 Out of the varying results due to changing 
working conditions 
of the apparatus he took the mean weight, which became the 
representative 
number Joule used for publication. 
The ‘method of means’ he used as 
the appropriate 
method to balance 
out the remaining 
irregularities. 
He continued 
taking this measure over years in order to achieve ‘greater accuracy’. His knowledge 
about the material culture of his experiment 
is probably best described through his 
notes on the thermometer 
in which he followed and reported the rise of the zero point 
over 40 years. 
The thin construction 
of the vessel compared with the weights was at the limits 
of its stability. 
Slight irregularities 
of the pulleys could produce a swinging 
of the 
unstable 
axle which could completely 
destroy the apparatus. 
I had to maintain 
absolutely 
smooth revolving 
pulleys 
in order to guarantee 
a secure drive for the 
delicate paddle-wheel. 
The handle on top of the axle was much too short to wind up 
the weights. The handle of the model at the Science Museum could not be the one 
which he or anyone else used during the experiment. 
In that shape it could have been 
used only as a demonstration 
device. 
The crucial gestures involved 
in this experiment 
were reading 
temperatures 
and 
doing the work. Both techniques 
require the highest degree of attention. The worker 
had to take care of the symmetrical 
winding of the left and right strings. He had to 
disconnect 
the winder from the axle and control the behaviour 
of the axle and the 
pulleys. No disturbance 
in the machinery 
should occur otherwise the paddle-wheel 
as well as the thermometers 
could be destroyed. Perfect mastery of this part of the 
performance 
was reached when no swinging 
of the system occurred. The fragile 
design of the vessel and axle avoided a major source of error: heat produced through 
the constant 
rubbing 
against the bushings 
of the axle brace mount. But it made 
necessary an artistic mechanical 
performance. 
The reader had to take measures very 
quickly before, during and after the run. Keeping the temperature near to the expected 
point of increase during the runs, the specific working condition due to bad light, the 
“James P. Joule, ‘New Experiments 
on the Friction of Fluids’, in ‘Notebook’ 2, Spring 1848, p. 175, 
UMIST, Manchester. 
82 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
very fine graduation 
of the temperature 
scale, and the temperature 
fluctuations 
demanded 
the complete attention of this experimenter. 
In ten experiments, 
I achieved 
a value for the equivalent 
of heat of 746.89 
ftlbs/BTU. Joule got a value of 772.692 ftlbs. The modem value is 776.1 ftlbs/BTU. 
In the manner of a modem physicist I judged my own runs in terms of the variation 
of my measurements 
from the mean. This calculated standard deviation amounted to 
2.1%, which is an excellent result by the standards of today. 
My accomplishment 
of accuracy 
draws 
our attention 
towards 
our modem 
understanding 
of precision 
measurement. 
From a physicist’s 
point of view it is 
reasonable to ask why repeating a historical experiment gave a result which is precise 
but not in conformity 
with the published value. A physicist would tend to argue that 
it was my fault or that Joule was inaccurate. From an anthropological 
point of view 
the result could also indicate that instruments 
of precision and their proper use are 
fundamentally 
connected 
with each other. My results show the lack of sufficient 
enculturation 
in order to accustom myself to the techniques involved in Joule’s trial. 
But they gave 
me a sense 
for Joule’s 
meanings 
for ‘exactness’, 
‘accurate 
thermometrical 
researches’, 
‘to obtain that relation 
with still greater accuracy’. 
Moreover the result shows that precise measurements 
do not necessarily 
have to be 
in conformity with the culturally accepted value. The nearness of many results to each 
other-which 
to physicists indicates a high degree of precision-does 
not necessarily 
imply that the accepted value has been reached. In modem physics this nonconformity 
with the accepted value indicates a low degree of accuracy. I was precise without 
being accurate. This draws our attention to the reliability 
of precision measurement 
in general. It raises the question of the way cultures come to agree about accurate 
practices of measurement. 
Can we identify different forms of accurate measurements 
in Joule’s time? Has our understanding 
of accuracy changed during time? How do 
cultures achieve a ‘true’ value? On what technologies 
do we tacitly rely when we use 
or produce numbers? 
What is it necessary 
to be able to do in order to measure 
temperatures, 
for example, 
as Joule did? How could anyone 
else acquire 
such 
obviously 
rare skills? 
My answers to these questions will be historical. The proposed method will show 
the intimate link between the production of instruments 
of precision and the formation 
of a collective of accurate experimenters 
in the nineteenth 
century. In the remainder 
of this paper I will concentrate on Joule’s practice of measurement 
in its context until 
the year 1850. It is a study of Joule’s private place of knowledge 
production 
which 
led to his publication 
On the Mechanical Equivalent of Heat and the value of 772.692 
ftlbs based on my own experiences 
in reworking the historical experiment. 
First of 
all, characteristic 
gestures of my own experimentation 
led me to look for historical 
spaces where 
such techniques 
could have been imitated 
and developed. 
The 
thermometrical 
skills and the modes of arranging the experimental 
sequences show 
close links to the historical actors’ mundane practices of which there is no obvious 
literary trace. Fundamental 
techniques 
to achieve Joule’s form of accuracy, which 
Reworking the Mechanical Value of Heat 
83 
Lord Kelvin later praised as magical, had their origins in the brewers’ form of life.18 
In the next section 
I will describe 
Manchester 
brewing 
culture 
as a gesturd 
coflective’9 focusing on the relevant techniques 
and their major changes. 
Manchester’s 
Changing Brewing Standards 
Formerly the lower classes who were, and still are, the principal consumers 
of beer, 
thought it a mark of effeminate 
refinement to require a glass to drink their beer from; 
and however thick the fluid, it flowed from the pewter pot, with inexpressible 
zest down 
their callous throats, and all was well: but not so in the present day! Nothing less than 
a clean glass filled with ale of sparkling brilliancy will suffice for the lowest of the low.. . 
Formerly the brewer was required to furnish beer to the public at the age of one, two, 
and three years.. . But such beer will not now be commonly dnmk, and the brewer is 
required to brew all the year through, and to furnish it to the public at the end of few 
days after brewing, perfectly mild, full, and transparent. Now to do this in hot weather, 
is certainly no easy task to the uninitiated.” 
Historical 
studies 
on the science 
of heat have usually 
stressed 
engineers’ 
achievements 
in developing 
steam engines. *’ But in the 184Os, the main repository 
of a rare and unevenly 
distributed 
‘practical knowledge’ 
of heat measurement 
was 
the brewery. 
‘Either partially or totally, the malt will be set, / If with water too hot 
or too cold it is wet’. Fortunately, 
some literary traces, like this adage, touch on this 
‘imitative 
knowledge’: 
a form of knowledge 
‘personally 
communicated 
by some 
instructor, 
or is the fruits of the imitation 
of others, resulting 
from the close and 
attentive 
observation 
of their practical operations’.‘* 
George Adolphus 
Wigney, 
a 
middle-class 
brewer from Brighton 
and author of a first dictionary 
of brewing, 
presented a detailed account of the difficulties of transcribing 
this traditional ‘practical 
or imitative knowledge’ of brewing into textual representations. 
He translated his own 
experiences 
as a brewer as well as the historical collection 
of oral communications, 
such adages (proverbs), 
into his language of chemistry. 
But he himself wants us to 
regard this knowledge 
as hypothetical, 
because of the specific and subtle nature of 
“Neither 
Joule’s own writings nor the historians’ 
accounts 
are explicit about this dimension 
of his 
experimental 
practice. Philip Mirowski does refer to the link between Joule’s work and brewing. However, 
as a historian of the interaction 
of economics 
with physical models, he draws our attention away from 
‘meticulous descriptions 
of experiments’ 
towards accounting. 
Indeed, Mirowski uses brewing to explain 
how Joule was allegedly able to produce a value of the mechanical 
equivalent 
despite his experiments. 
I am concerned to show how brewing practices allowed him to perform the experiment. Philip Mirowski, 
More Heat than Light: Economics as Social Physics: Physics as Nature’s Economics (Cambridge: 
Cambridge 
University 
Press, 1990), pp. 128-129. 
‘9 am using the term gestural collective in order to locate historical spaces of gestural knowledge. 
See 
also the term ‘community 
of skills’ which my colleagues 
Rob Iliffe and Michael Berlin use in order to 
point at places of skill. Michael Berlin and Rob Iliffe, ‘The Places of Skill in Early Modem London’, 
unpublished 
paper presented at the Achievement 
meeting, Oxford, June 1992. 
‘G. A. Wigney, An Elementary Dictionary, or Cyclopaediafor 
the Use of Malsters, Brewers, Destillers, 
Rectifiers, Vinegar Manufacturers and Others (Brighton, 
1838). p. 97. 
“See T. S. Kuhn, The Essential Tension (Chicago: 
University 
of Chicago Press, 1977). p. 77. 
**Op. cit., note 20, p. 137. 
84 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
THE 
ART 
OF 
BREWING 
AND “FERMENTING, 
IN 
THE 
SUM&i&R, 
AND ALL OTHER SEASONS, TO TEE GREATEST ADVANTAGE, 
*h‘Dm* 
ESSAYS, 
AND 
DECT’MAL TAB 
A .DBSCRlPTlON OF TllE AUTIIOR'S 
NBWLY-SNVENTSD 
TIC1 
ERMOMETER, 
Fig. 2. The Art of Brewing and Fermenting.. ., by John Levesque. Picture: by permission ofthe Syndics 
of University Cambridge Library. 
Reworking the Mechanical Value of Heat 
85 
the subject: ‘If then the animal faculties of man are not competent to penetrate into 
the arcanum of nature, and view the formation of atoms . . . why therefore should the 
mind, untutored 
by the senses, strive to furnish fiction as a substitute 
for truth?‘23 
In this oral culture, most practices, 
such as malting, 
were traditional 
processes. 
It is an imitative system of labour, in which three of the five animal senses are engaged, 
seeing, feeling and smelling; and in which the mental faculties have usually but little 
participation. An experienced practical malster can tell when his corn is in good order, when 
it needs turning or raking, more warmth, more air, or more water; an acceleration 
or 
retardation of the process, and when it is fit to go to the kiln and the various operations 
thereon, by the intuitive indication of one or all of these senses; but if you ask him to state 
the mode by which he judges, he is quite unable to express the means by any clear and 
definite language, because the mind has no participation 
in the determination, 
and as his 
experience is incommunicable 
in words, so it is in practice, for he cannot impart to another 
by any mental instruction, the discernment 
of the animal faculties, which he has himself 
acquired by long continued observation.24 
In order to be symmetrical 
with the predominantly 
oral culture 
of brewing 
and their 
practices, 
I will call their forms 
of ‘imitative 
knowledge’ 
gestural knowledge. 
The proverb 
quoted above clearly indicates 
that, for the determination 
of the 
appropriate mashing heats, personal experience was necessary in order to produce an 
invariable 
product. The correct temperature 
did not only depend upon the varying 
quantity 
and quality of the malt, and the changing 
temperature 
of the atmosphere 
according to a particular season, but also on the situation of and amount of radiation 
from the mash-tun. Therefore only long experience 
and a certain ‘habit of taking his 
mashing heats’ allowed a successful 
control of the brewing process. Brewers and 
malsters were bearers of this gestural knowledge. 
Mashing heats were often secrets 
of local brewers and depended on their particular 
scales and modes of production. 
The malster’s skill made him one of the most important and respected ‘agents’.25 The 
production 
and the selling 
of ale or porter with a standard 
colour and flavour 
completely 
depended on the mastery of specific heats in the process of mashing and 
fermentation. 
Therefore ‘heat was the principal agent’ in the whole brewing process 
and the malster and the brewer its masters. For large breweries, Wigney proposed the 
employment 
of their own malsters with an extremely high salary in order to get control 
over this most critical 
component 
of the whole production 
process.26 Even in 
*‘Ibid., pp. 193-194. 
241bid., p. 224. For an excellent 
study on incommunicable 
knowledge, 
see Christopher 
Lawrence, 
‘Incommunicable 
Knowledge: 
Science, Technology 
and the Clinical Art in Britain 1850-1914’, 
Journal 
of Contemporary History 20 (1985), 503-520. 
?he 
term ‘agency’ was used in brewing terminology 
as ‘performance 
by a substitute, an acting medium 
between cause and effect’ (op. cit., note 20, p. 43). Malsters were agents as well as heat or air. 
26For brewers at that time the process of malting was regarded as the economical 
window in brewing, 
i.e. due to the yearly changes in quality and quantity of malt brewers took their opportunity 
of buying the 
malt from different 
producers 
in order to keep their brewing costs at a constant 
level. But in order to 
guarantee a standard tasfe all the year round Wigney’s proposal represents the main issue the new scientific 
brewer had to deal with. I am very grateful to Peter Mathias, who discussed this issue with me. 
86 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
periodically 
occurring 
situations 
when ‘first houses were out of order’, i.e. leading 
breweries made foul or bad beer, which could go on for weeks, it was never regarded 
as the fault of the malting or brewing agent. It might have been a change in the 
atmosphere, a change of yeast or the quality of water. Brewers relied completely 
on 
such representatives 
of oral cultures and their gestural knowledge. 
They were the 
unquestionable 
standards in the production 
process. 
The process of brewing and the economy of the market were the conflicting poles 
of brewing. Furthermore, 
the vast scale of the government 
excise system established 
in the eighteenth century, in which accurate values of liquid were measured by widely 
distributed 
hydrometers, 
put brewers into a nationwide 
state-controlled 
system of 
metrology.27 In the 1820s William Cobbett reported that the ‘lowering of the wages 
of labour, compared with the prices of provision, 
by means of the paper money, the 
enormous tax upon the barley when made into malt, and the increased tax upon hops’ 
had ‘quite changed the customs of the English people as to their drink’. Drinking beer 
had become a public, as opposed to a domestic, culture. Labourers and tradesmen 
‘now spent their evenings 
at the public-house 
amidst tobacco smoke and empty 
noise’.28 This decline of the home brewing and the changing taste of the public led 
to the wealth of breweries in the first decades of the century and it effected changes 
in their modes of production. 
New changes in supply and demand in the 1830s had 
direct influences 
on the practice of brewing too (see Fig. 2). Brewers became more 
interested in a chemical understanding 
of the principles and agencies in ‘nature’s vast 
laboratory’. 
More details about the nature of heat and the fermentation 
process in 
order to get ‘exact control’ would bring an economic advantage.29 Through a scientific 
practice of brewing it was hoped to achieve communicable 
knowledge 
about exact 
temperatures, 
quantities and timings of brewing sequences and habits of buying and 
selling. 
‘Scientifically’ 
minded, careful quantitative 
studies of the subtle process of heat 
conversion 
in germination, 
fermentation 
and mashing were envisaged 
as one major 
strategy of ‘the new system’ in brewing. G. A. Wigney coined this term in order to 
outline the ‘science of brewing’ as opposed to brewing as craftsmanship. 
Practical 
advice show clearly how these economic 
interests, 
caused by a ‘never excusing 
public’, moulded the practice of brewing. Wigney’s cyclopaedia 
written in 1838 was 
a voluminous 
attempt to accustom the uneducated 
brewer to the virtues of science. 
For him, ‘a brewery may appropriately 
be termed a brewing chemical laboratory; 
“Even the names of beers like ‘sixty shillings’ and ‘eighty shillings’ remind us of this control system. 
**William Cobbett, Cottage Economy (London, 
1822) p. 12, p. 21. 
*‘Joule’s brewery was producing 
ale and porter. It was probably the most secure way to make profit. 
The two most important problems in order to improve brewing in the 1830s were described by William 
Black: ‘In no treatise on brewing which I have seen have I been able to find any distinct or specific rules 
for taking the proper temperatures 
of mashing liquors; nor have I ever found, what may be called the most 
important 
though least understood 
operation 
in the process of brewing, 
vs. fermentation, 
treated or 
explained in such a manner, as to be any guide to a brewer’. William Black, A Practical Treafise on Brewing 
and on Storing Beer: Deducedfrom 
Forty Years Experience (London: Smith, Elder and Co., 1835), A2. 
Reworking the Mechanical 
Value of Heat 
87 
requiring to be fitted upon the best chemical and mechanical principles, so as to enable 
the brewer to furnish the best product at the least possible cost’.30 
Large breweries like William Joule & Son provided spaces where different forms 
of life such as the old brewing culture with their particular 
local practices and the 
engineers’ 
world of steam-engine 
technology 
interacted. The nature and economy of 
heat was their common 
concern, 
the gestural 
knowledge 
of the former hardly 
understood 
by the latter. Benjamin 
Joule’s brewery provided the necessary 
capital 
which allowed their sons to participate in a form of life which G. A. Wigney portrayed 
as follows: 
The next period they [the brewers’ sons] are found at school, as the sons of fortune, to whom 
education is not necessary, as the means of procuring bread, but merely to adorn and fit 
them to pass with eclat, through the ranks of polished society.. . . To take the mashing heats 
and weigh the warts, is quite sufficient for him! All the rest can be performed by the well 
organised menials. His father did well by it, and what can he need more?3’ 
Wigney 
also concluded 
that this portrait was not appropriate 
for all brewing 
families; 
but we know that everyday 
life in the Joule family was organized by six 
live-in servants. The Joule brothers’ private tutelage by the chemist Dalton perfectly 
represented 
brewers’ interests at that time. But James’s brother devoted his life to 
music, and James was also in the position to decide either to improve the business 
or to become a gentleman 
of science. He decided to do both. In the autumn of 1843 
Benjamin 
Joule built his son James his own laboratory at their new residence in Oak 
Field, Whalley Range. Beforehand 
he had experimented 
in one of the spare rooms 
at Broom Hill. During the years 1834-1854 
James attended his father’s brewing 
business ‘pretty constantly 
from nine to six’.32 His experiments 
he performed before 
breakfast 
or in the evening. 
For twenty 
years his engagement 
with these two 
apparently 
unrelated 
spaces formed his life and work.33 
As Peter Mathias has shown, the use of thermometers 
in the brewing community 
was in the late eighteenth century already regarded by ‘men of reflection’ as one of 
the major achievements 
in the exploitation 
of raw materials.34 But only in connection 
with the hydrometer 
did it lead to the idea of standard heats which allowed the 
“Op. cit., note 20, p. 89. 
“‘Zbid., pp. 68 ff. 
32J. P. Joule, ‘Autobiographical Note’, in J. R. Ashworth, ‘A List of Apparatus now in Manchester which 
belonged to Dr. J. P. Joule, F.R.S.. with Remarks on his MSS., Letters, and Autobiography’, 
Munchesrer 
Memoirs 75 (193&31), 105-117, on p. 113. 
33HistoricaJ studies of Joule differ on this aspect. The question whether Joule was involved in the brewing 
business is treated differently. 
Cardwell’s 
comment brilliantly 
summarizes 
the involved issue. ‘Young 
Joule was a businessman. 
He was later to record that once his tutelage was over he used to attend at the 
brewery every day, from nine in the morning to six in the evening. This, by Manchester 
standards, 
was 
a far from excessive burden and Osborne Reynolds was later to assert that Joule had little connection with 
the business. But, while he carried out some of his researches at the brewery (he acknowledged 
as much 
in various papers), his correspondence 
indicates clearly that he was actively engaged in running the business 
until it was finally sold’ (D. S. L. Cardwell, James Joule: A Biography (Manchester: Manchester University 
Press, 1989), p. 3). 
34Peter Mathias, The Brewing Industry in England I7Wl830 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1959). pp. 63 ff. 
88 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
brewers, the distillers and the Government 
excise system in particular a more precise 
measurement 
of the specific gravity of liquids. ‘The one showing the heat, and the 
other ascertaining 
the strength, or gravity, of the extract obtained at that heat. Here, 
and here only, we lay hold of the clue that leads with certainty to the establishing 
of standard heats’.35 
In many other operations absolute measures were regarded as a disadvantage. 
For 
example, during the process of malting, excise officers had to control various stages 
of operation in order to prevent defrauding. 
But from the brewers’ point of view it 
was ‘much to be regretted’ that the legislative 
period too often interfered with the 
malster’s judgment. 36 From the excise officers perspective, 
using absolute measures 
was the only way to levy duties. In 1842 they set up their own laboratory 
in order 
to protect the revenue through establishing 
standards against which brewers’ and 
distillers’ work was calibrated.37 Although these commercial interests existed on both 
sides, heat processes still remained difficult to calculate. A perfect mashing heat was 
variable to an extent of thirty degrees during the period of a year’s practice. Hence 
Wigney concluded: 
If there was an invariable right standard heat, either for water or return wort, as well as a 
perfect heat, at which the best solution of malt extract, and the obtainment of the largest 
quantity could be effected; the discovery of it would be of the highest importance to brewers; 
and once made, and communicated 
to the public, its invariable adoption, would ensure to 
the fortunate possessor, the most profitable results, as relates to the process of extraction. 
But that which does not exist, cannot be discovered. 
Yet there is a perfect mashing heat, 
but it is a variable one, and may be said to be fugitive, the same heat scarcely ever being 
advantageously 
applicable to two successive brewings from the same malt.‘8 
But as a result of the new economic 
situation 
of producing 
beer all the year round, 
thermometers 
and decimal 
tables 
became 
the brewers’ 
indispensable 
practical 
and 
35R. Shannon, A Practical Treatise on Brewing, Destilling and Rectifying (London, 
1805), p. 57. On 
the role of the hydrometer 
at that time see William Speer, ‘On the Hydrometer’, 
Philosophical Magazine 
14 (1802). 151-162 and 229-237. 
36The malster’s object is to obtain as much saccharine 
matter as possible, with the smallest loss of 
substance, by converting 
the starch of the barley into sugar. Malting consists of four processes: steeping, 
couching, flooring, and kiln-drying. 
In order to make correct charges the excise officers gauged the utensils 
and gave certain standard times (‘legislative periods’) for some operations. For a detailed description, 
see 
Encyclopaedia Brittanica, ninth edn, vol. 4 (Edinburgh: 
Adam and Charles Black, 1876) pp. 264-275; 
op. cit., note 20, p. 4. 
77’The need for such a laboratory arose from a desire to protect the revenue, and not from any perception 
that an official body was needed to protect in any way the population 
or the environment 
in which we 
live. This role came later’. P. W. Hammond 
and Harold Egan, Weighed in the Balance: A History of the 
Laboratory of the Government Chemist (London: HMSO, 1992), p. 1; see also p. 51. 
380p. cit., note 20, p. 32. 
Reworking the Mechanical Value of Heat 
89 
theoretical technologies.39 The London brewer John Levesque clearly spelled out the 
advantage: 
No brewer can reasonably expect favourable results from his practice, without intimate 
knowledge of the heats requisite for the different stages of the process; and as ultimate 
success depends on the utmost accuracy in that important department, the author has 
invented a Thermometer (referred to in this work) on such unerring principles 
in the 
application, 
as to insure precision 
and prevent 
the possibility 
of error,-that 
great 
desideratum 
in the Art of Brewing. The Author concludes, that the more his Tables and 
newly-invented 
Thermometer 
is studied, the more they will be referred to and adopted, as 
the standard of calculation, 
&c. of the materials of brewing.40 
Wigney, 
like Levesque, 
was one of the protagonists 
of this ‘new system’ of 
brewing. In his Theoretical and Practical Treatise he taught the reader to distinguish 
between the old and the new system: 
The Old System. The first mashing heat taken by guess; and by many to the same degree 
all the year through, regardless of seasons and circumstances, 
and by none with accuracy. 
The New System. The first mashing heat taken by rule, subject to arithmetical calculation, 
upon the data of the weight and heat of the malt, and the quantity of the malt, and the quantity 
of liquor mashed with, with tables to refer to, to save the practitioner 
the trouble of 
calculating for every brewing.4’ 
In order to demonstrate the advantages Wigney presented typical brewing problems 
and discussed their ways of solving them in the old and new style: 
Example-A 
Brewer is required to mash 20 quarters of malt, weighing 40 lbs, and at a 
temperature 
of 50 degrees, with 40 barrels of water, weighing 360 lbs per barrel, and it is 
required that the heat of such malt, and water when mixed, should be at 144 degrees. Query! 
What should be the heat of the 40 barrels of water?’ 
The old rule of solving it was objected to because of its imperfection 
in representing 
the brewing process sufficiently. 
‘The loss of heat during the mashing’ was not taken 
into account, nor was ‘the increase in active heat arising from the conversion 
of latent 
into active heat’. But despite his efforts in highlighting 
the improvements 
of the new 
system he finally admitted: 
But it should be observed that all these objections, and others in addition, may, with as much 
and more propriety, be made to any fixed and arbitrary standard of heat, which is adopted 
upon any other principle, and it does not follow, that because we cannot attain perfection, 
39For the use of technologies see Shapin and Schaffer, op. cit., note 6; and Andrew Warwick, ‘Cambridge 
Mathematics and Cavendish Physics: Cunningham, Campbell and Einstein’s Theory of Relativity, 
1905-1911; Part 1: The Uses ofTheory’, Studies in History andPhilosophy 
ofScience 23 (1992), 625-656. 
40John Levesque, The Art of Brewing and Fermenting 
in the Summer, and all Other Seasons, to the 
Greatest Advantage, 
and the Making of Malt, Exhibited 
in Essays, and Decimal Tables, Accurately 
Calculated, 
the Result of Upwards of Forty Years’ Experience; 
also a Description 
of the Author’s 
Newly-Invented 
Thermometer, 
By the Application of which Extreme Precision and Considerable Saving 
will be Eficted, 
2nd edn (London: Thomas Hurst, 1836). preface. 
4’G. A. Wigney, Theoretical and Practical Treatise of Brewing (Brighton, 1835), p. 252. 
421bid., p. 102. 
90 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
that we should not approach as near to it as we can, consistent with the convenience of 
common practice, based on careful and industrious principles. And to judge fairly of the 
merits and value of a system, we should weigh the products against the cost, the labour and 
the inconvenience of carrying into effect.43 
He explained 
the given ‘standard heats’44 in his tables as representing 
common 
brewing practice, because they were results of years of experience. But it was no more 
than the closest ‘approximation 
to a good practice’ the brewing economy of that time 
would allow. But regardless of this fundamental issue Wigney 
had already been 
industrious 
to provide instructions 
for the proper use of these decimal 
tables in 
connection 
with the thermometer: 
Explanation relative to the use of the Tables-The 
weight of a bushel of the malt about 
to be brewed being ascertained, take the Thermometer out of the malt just before mashing, 
and note its temperature. Let us suppose that the weight of the malt is 40 lbs per bushel, 
and its heat 50 degrees, and you intend to mash with 2 barrels of water per quarter, then 
refer to the first column of the third Table, and find 50” then in a line therewith, and in the 
third column, under the head of two barrels, you will find 185 3/4 degrees, which should 
be the heat of the mashing water.” 
This major change from the old to the new system in the practice of brewing 
stigmatized 
old traditions: 
If the brewer tells his pupil, that in order that he may know whether or not he has taken 
a first mashing heat correct, that he must apply a thermometer 
to the steam of wort, as it 
runs from the mash tun into the under back, when about half the expected quantity to come 
off is down; and if he finds the temperature at any point between 144 and 150 degrees, he 
may take it for granted that it was so; and if on the contrary he finds it above or below, 
that then he may conclude that it was incorrect, and to an amount proportionate to the extent 
of the difference in heat, between which it should and does come down; will not the pupil, 
if he is accustomed to think, naturally enquire, if such is the effect, what is the cause? And 
if to-day, one particular heat is right, why should not the same be tomorrow? And if the 
instructor cannot tell the instructed, what do we think of his knowledge of his business? 
And if the instructed should say, is it not possible to find out beforehand, what is the right 
mashing heat upon every occasion, and avoid the consequences 
of error; as well as to know 
by the result, whether or not the right heat has been taken, which is no consolation to know 
if it should happen to be wrong? Andif the instructor, who is not accustomed to think, reflect, 
deduce, and discover, replies, it is impossible, for the person who taught me, was a good 
brewer and he never knew the means...?46 
The introduction 
of standard heats created the idea of error and deviation 
in that 
industry, at the expense of the prestige of humans, whose skills had mastered each 
particular 
situation 
by judging 
the actual heat conditions. 
Thermometers 
made it 
%Cf., 
p. 103. 
“‘Standard 
heats’ are only one type of standard measures. Other standards were ‘The weight of yeast 
to pitch the tun with, in the ratio of its density’ or ‘Weights of hops, which had to be added in relation 
to the increase of warmth in weather’, etc. 
450p. cit., note 41, p. 105. 
460p. tit, note 20, p. 16. 
Reworking the Mechanical Value of Heat 
91 
possible to produce numbers which helped to replace these craft skills-the 
gestural 
knowledge-by 
absolute standards. The new demand for the brewers’ products made 
tables of decimals and thermometers the trustworthy companions of the scientific 
brewer. Thermometers with a sensitivity of tenths of a degree became the required 
standards. Their constant use gave evidence for the ‘advantageous points’ for each 
mashing condition, but simultaneously declared the particular as deviation. 
Wigney’s book documents this conflict between individuals as bearers of gestural 
knowledge which was regarded as incommunicable and the scientific brewer. He tried 
to unify these two sites of knowledge by inventing the terms ‘theoretical’ and 
‘practical’ chemist. 
Both malsters and brewers are practical chemists, in the proper acceptation of the term; yet 
what do they (generally) know of chemistry? 
So little indeed, that it would be no trifling 
task to convince them, that the process of either malting and brewing is chemical.. . The 
man who devotes his time and attention to the study of chemistry, 
merely as a scientific 
pursuit, may for the sake of distinction be called a theoretical chemist: and the person, who 
performs chemical operations as a matter of business, may be termed a practical chemist.. . 
Thus the theoretical chemist while sitting in his study, discovers and develops the arcanum 
of the process; while the practical chemist (the malster) fulfils all the mechanical conditions 
of the operation, without a knowledge 
of the theory.47 
Wigney cleverly turned their common practice of learning by imitation into an 
argument for the study of science, especially chemistry. Brewers and malsters were 
now represented as ‘mere automata’ and as ‘children’, both mechanical and juvenile: 
As the malster is, so is the brewer taught; or rather he learns a series of practical operations, 
the whole of which are (perhaps to him) a mass of mysteries, as relates to the causes which 
produce certain effects, and effects which produce certain causes: he is but a child, that 
assists to work the complicated 
and extensive machinery of the factory, instead of being 
as the conscious inventor, who comprehends 
and commands the movement of the whole, 
with ease, order and regularity. He is a mere automaton, without knowledge, judgment, or 
skill, as relates to his profession 
or manufacture, 
if unacquainted 
with the theoretical 
department 
of chemistry?8 
The new brewer should understand that his business was a complex mixture 
between theoretical and practical tasks, and ‘mere theorists, as well as mere 
practitioners, [would be] _. .ever grasping at a shadow and losing the substance’. Only 
science could save the traditional brewer from remaining an ‘automaton exemplar’, 
‘a blind and unconscious agent in the performance of a chemical work, a stranger to 
tbe wonderful transitions which he had assisted to affect, and without a 
comprehension of the cause’.49 
471bid., pp. 59-61. 
481bid., pp. 63-64. 
491bid., p. 64. 
92 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
Fig. 3. Model made by Henry Maudslay about 1805 in order to be able to produce copies of his new 
micrometer, which he called the ‘Lord Chancellor’. 
Used exemplars of this ‘companion of the bench’ 
hardly exist any more because they have been worked to death. Picture: by permission of The Science 
Museum/Science and Society Picture Library. 
Mass Production and Accurate ‘Companions 
of the Bench’ 
If we go on as some mechanics 
are doing, we shall soon be boiling our eggs with a 
chronometer.” 
The new system of brewing was only one indicator for a fundamental 
cultural change 
in British society in the first half of the nineteenth 
century. Especially 
in industrial 
cities like Manchester, 
rapid mechanization 
of the manufacturing 
industry produced 
the vision of a ‘self-acting’ society. Self-acting machine tools driven by steam engines 
revealed the new metropolitan 
habit of replacing self-moving 
forces in nature through 
the scientific study of self-acting 
powers in culture. Economic 
reasoning 
about the 
costs of exploiting natural forces became an important task for engineers and natural 
philosophers. 
Mass production 
and its need for exact measurement, 
standards and 
control skill, increased rapidly. This changing economic situation and the ‘Machinery 
question’5’ affected the habits of the actors in everyday life as well as in the sciences. 
5”Henry Maudslay 
in Samuel Smiles (ed.), James Nasmyth, Engineer; An Autobiography 
(London, 
1885). p. 146 n.1. 
“Maxine 
Berg, The Machinery Question and the Making of Political Economy 1815-1848 (Cambridge: 
Cambridge 
University 
Press, 1980). Iwan Morus, ‘Correlation 
and Control: William Robert Grove and 
the Construction 
of a New Philosophy of Scientific Reform’, Studies in History and Phifosophy of Science 
22 (1991), 589-621. 
Reworking the Mechanical 
Value of Heat 
93 
The transference 
of bodily techniques 
to machines went along with the devaluation 
of the body and of gestural knowledge. 
Machinery 
is rapidly supplanting 
human labour, and rendering 
mere muscular force a 
worthless drug. That natural machine, the human body, is depreciated 
in the market. But 
if the body has lost its value, the mind must get into business without delay. The intelligence 
of man must be brought to the mint and coined and set in instant circulation.52 
For engineers 
self-acting 
tools involved 
a successful replacement 
of ‘irregularity 
and carelessness 
of the workman’. Or as James Nasmyth put it: ‘The machines never 
got drunk; their hands never shook from excess; they were never absent from work; 
they did not strike for wages; they were unfailing 
in accuracy and regularity, 
while 
producing 
the most delicate or ponderous 
portions of mechanical 
structures’.53 The 
bold marketing of self-acting 
machine tools helped to create the image of unreliable 
humans and their failing senses. The want of uniformity 
was made obvious after the 
opening 
of the Liverpool-Manchester 
railway 
line in 1831. The ‘uniformity 
of 
screws’ became especially 
important 
for the needs of railway constructors. 
Before 
Henry Maudslay introduced his screw-cutting 
machine, every bolt and nut was unique 
in itself. This economic 
interest 
went along 
with a programme 
of producing 
instruments 
of precision 
and disciplined 
human beings. 
Maudslay, 
for example, 
constructed 
and propagated his ‘Companion 
of the Bench’, which every craftsman 
should use to control his own accuracy of work (Fig. 3). 
So much depended upon the manner in which the ordinary measuring instruments 
were 
handled and applied that they sometimes failed to give the required verdict as to accuracy. 
In order, therefore, to get rid of all difficulties in this respect, he designed and constructed 
a very compact and handy instrument which he always had on his bench beside his vice.. 
In consequence 
of the absolute truth of the verdicts of the instrument, he considered 
it as 
a Court of Final Appeal, and humorously 
called it ‘The Lord Chancellor’.54 
In order to guarantee the making of standard products, companions 
of the bench were 
introduced in several sites of production. 
Even composers began to calibrate musical 
performances 
against an absolute time measure by means of the metronome.55 The 
use of these companions 
changed the performance 
of work and contributed 
to the 
formation of new kinds of gestural knowledge. 
But although the use of thermometers 
was still discussed 
controversially 
within the brewing culture, experts of the new 
system of brewing neither took care to pass on the old brewers knowledge 
of how 
to use hand and elbow as a temperature 
measuring device nor translated it into a text. 
“James 
Martineau, cited in W. Hawkes Smith, ‘On the Tendency & Prospects of Mechanics 
Institutions’, The Analysr 2 (1835). 336. 
53Smiles, op. cir., note 50, p. 193. 
“1bid., p. 145. 
55A classical example of a companion of the bench is the metronome with its absolute time measure, 
developed in Germany during the. late eighteenth and early nineteenth century. As a result of the composer’s 
changing economic situation, compositions 
became commodities 
which involved standardization. 
This led 
to the invention of the conductor 
and the metronome 
which serves as the mediator between composer, 
conductor 
and the orchestra. 
For further details see the author’s article ‘Working Experiments’, 
op. cit., 
note 8; Peter Schleuning, 
Das 18. Juhrhmderr: 
Der Biirger erhebr sich, Geschichte 
der Musik in 
Deutschland, 
Band I (Reinbek bei Hamburg, 
1989), pp. 459-474. 
94 
Studies in History and Philosophy 
of Science 
With regard to the economic and social context of manufacture 
and the devaluation 
of bodily work in particular, the possession of this instrument 
already made the new 
brewer a ‘man of reflection’ and indicated his affiliation to a gentlemanly 
form of life. 
These cultural changes go along with fundamental 
shifts even in the manners of 
natural philosophy, 
another site of knowledge production. 
In the eighteenth century 
the credibility 
of experimental 
practices 
was very much based on face-to-face 
interactions. 
‘Natural philosophers 
had to pay attention 
to the means by which 
experiments 
tried in private space, backstage, could be made to transit to the public 
settings of polite culture’. Simon Schaffer has identified the emergence 
of trust in 
self-registering 
technology 
and the disembodied 
genius as a new cultural manner of 
the early nineteenth century. 56 In the period under analysis, the imposition of increases 
in the sensitivity 
of instruments 
of precision 
made necessary 
new gestures 
of 
accuracy. 
The use of new companions 
of the bench led to practices which even 
required their particular spaces and did not necessarily 
conform with the patterns of 
bodily behaviour 
customary to Joule’s contemporary 
natural philosophers. 
In order 
to understand 
what was regarded as reliable experimental 
practice we have to look 
at the natural philosophers’ 
attempts to define standards of accuracy and methods of 
calibration. 
In a report to the British Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science, the natural 
philosopher 
J. D. Forbes was quite explicit about the predominant 
issue of how to 
get reliable 
data: 
Great numerical accuracy is always of extremely difficult attainment; and it is hoped that 
the good sense of observers will dismiss from Meteorology, 
as well as from some other 
branches of physical science in which it has prevailed, that superfluity of decimal places, 
which when they exceed to a great extent the compass of the instrument to verify, create 
rather a distrust in the observer than confidence 
in his observations. 
Even within very 
moderate limits it is clear that, where accuracy so entirely depends upon the extreme 
precision of instruments and attention to their condition, and upon perfect regularity and 
consistency 
of observation, 
there are few individuals who can furnish the numerical data 
now required for the advancement 
of science.57 
For the supply of meteorologicai 
heat data he then suggested substituting 
the ‘good 
sense of the observer’ 
by ‘the hands of merely mechanical 
observers, 
under the 
occasional superintendence 
of persons of greater acquirements’.58 These disciplined 
hands he found in the army at Leith. Military 
officers executed the temperature 
readings of great extent during the years 1824 and 1825. Besides these hands of 
%ee 
Simon Schaffer, 
‘Self Evidence’, 
Critical inquiry (Winter 1992) pp. 327-362. On discipline 
formation in electrical research and the changing role of the experimenter’s 
body, see H. 0. Sibum, Physik 
aus ihrer Geschichte verstehen: Entstehung und 
Entwicklung natunvissenschaftlicher Denk- und 
Arbeirsstile in der Elektrizifiilsforschung des 18. Jahrhunderts (Wiesbaden: Deutscber Universitlt 
Verlag, 
1990), pp. 2 19-254. 
57James D. Forbes, ‘Report upon the Recent Progress and State of Meteorology’, 
BAAS Report (1832), 
pp. 196258, 
p. 199. 
jarbid. 
Reworking the Mechanical Value of Heat 
95 
mechanical observers, self-registering 
instruments 
were introduced as the appropriate 
replacements.59 
In Cambridge 
University, 
Forbes’s 
ally William 
Whewell 
worked 
on the 
development 
of another companion 
of the bench which allowed control over sites of 
knowledge production outside the natural philosopher’s 
own place. In the chapter on 
‘Special Methods of Induction 
Applicable 
to Quantity’ 
of his Philosophy 
of the 
Inductive 
Sciences, 
he introduced 
the ‘method of curves’ 
as the most efficient 
technology 
for calibrating 
individual 
practices against a geometrical 
standard. 
But the Method of Curves not only enables us to obtain laws of nature from good 
Observation, but also in a great degree, from Observations 
which are very imperfect.. . The 
regular curve which we thus obtain, thus freed from the casual errors of observation, is that 
in which we endeavour to discover the laws of change and succession. By this method, thus 
getting rid at once, in great measure, of errors of observation, 
we obtain data which are 
more true than the individual facts themselves. The philosopher’s 
business is to compare 
his hypotheses 
with facts, as we have often said. But if we make the comparison 
with 
separate special facts, we are liable to be perplexed or misled, to an unknown amount, by 
errors of observation; 
which may cause the hypothetical 
and the observed result to agree, 
or to disagree, when otherwise they would not do so. If however, we thus take the whole 
mass ofthefacts and remove the errors of actual observation, 
by making the curve which 
expresses 
the supposed 
observations 
regular and smooth, we have the separate facts 
corrected by their general tendency. We are put in possession, as we have said, of something 
more true than any fact itself is.@’ 
In accordance with the customs of these sites of production, 
different technologies 
became the trustworthy 
companions 
of skilled individuals. 
Simultaneously, 
their 
absolute measures became the guideline for the production process.61 These were the 
places where particular human experiences 
became marked as deviation, 
where the 
‘companion 
of the bench’ became the representative 
of ‘absolute truth’. In order to 
further 
the advancement 
of science 
and society, 
human 
skill partly 
became 
standardized 
or was irretrievably 
lost. Instruments 
became the reification of accuracy 
and humans turned into instruments 
of precision developing 
new forms of gestural 
knowledge. 
Joule’s Laboratory 
Life and its Values 
Art is long and life is short. [Joule] 
In the ‘new system’ of brewing 
and in other sites of production, 
an array of 
‘companions 
of the bench’ were to act as standards of competent 
performance. 
It 
involved the establishment 
of new hierarchies of mind and body. This general change 
59John Phillips, ‘Description of a New Self-Registering 
Maximum Thermometer’, 
BAAS Report (1832). 
pp. 514-575, 
p. 514. 
60William Whewell, 
The Philosophy qf the Inductive Sciences, Founded Upon Their History, 2 vols 
(London: John W. Parker, 1840). vol. 2, pp. 206-207. 
“For further examples of the practice of absolute measures and its troubles, see the Glaswegian 
Professor 
of Engineering 
Lewis Gordon on pyrometers 
and dynamometers. 
M. Norton Wise, ‘Work and Waste: 
Political Economy 
and Natural Philosophy 
in Nineteenth 
Century Britain (III)‘, History of Science 28 
(1990), 221-261. 
96 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
Fig. 4. John Benjamin Dancer’s travelling microscope builtfor the calibration and graduation ofJoule’s 
thermometer. Picture: by permission of the Museum of Science and Industry, Manchester. 
in cultural manners helps us to clarify the connections 
between Joule’s work as brewer 
and his efforts to turn himself into a natural philosopher. Joule’s autobiographical 
note 
as well as his notebook entries show that he performed more than the minimal tasks 
of a brewer: taking the mashing heats, weighing the worts and balancing 
the books. 
He also did experiments 
on the combustion 
of hay and corn, and on brewing 
procedures6* as well as studies on the duty of electro-motors. 
With respect to the 
Manchester 
engineering 
background 
it is not surprising 
that he wanted to measure 
nature’s agents such as heat and electricity, 
‘ever at work in her vast laboratory; 
commanding 
indestructible 
atoms to unite and disunite’.63 His experience 
with 
6*Joule, ‘Notebook’, 
2, pp. 18 1-185, pp. 222-223, 
9 January 
1846, 14 October and November 
to 
December 
1847, October 1849, UMIST, Manchester. 
631n his study on Joule’s work, John Forrester has shown that his various attempts to identify primary 
forces in nature-heat, 
electricity 
and mechanical 
force-were 
favourites 
used in his various atomic 
theories. Latent heat and electricity 
were exactly the most important 
issues in brewing practice. See in 
Wigney the explanations 
of ‘Electricity, Attraction without Magnetism’ 
and ‘Heat, the Sensation caused 
by Fire, Hot Weather &c’ and ‘Decomposition’. 
Op. cit., note 20, pp. 121-122 and pp. 179-185. John 
Forrester, 
‘Chemistry 
and the Conservation 
of Energy: The Work of James Prescott Joule’, Studies in 
History and Philosophy of Science 6 (1975). 273-313. 
Reworking the Mechanical Value of Heat 
97 
decomposing 
organic 
materials 
by mechanical 
and chemical 
means 
made 
it 
self-evident 
to reflect on friction 
as a source of heat rather than as an obstacle 
engineers 
had to overcome. 
In the brewers’ form of life, even Joule’s use of the 
conservation 
of living force shows a close analogy to the brewer’s understanding 
of 
conversion 
processes 
as discussed 
in Wigney’s 
dictionary.” 
Determining 
the 
‘mechanical 
value of heat’ was his attempt to calibrate nature at work.65 The duty 
of electro-motors 
as well as other moving forces were well worth knowing in order 
to estimate the costs a self-acting 
society had to match.% 
During these twenty years of participation 
in the brewing world, Joule developed 
a particular gestural knowledge 
which came to bear in his new location as a natural 
philosopher. 
His development 
of the gestures 
of perceiving 
and 
measuring 
temperatures 
became 
a self-evident 
technique 
during 
his experiments 
on the 
mechanical 
equivalent 
of heat. They were steadily extended. In the notebooks 
his 
practice of reading temperatures 
was not mentioned 
at all. But we know from our 
replication that in order to avoid errors it is necessary to have extraordinary 
experience 
in the use of the thermometer 
and the working conditions. 
Both were available 
to 
Joule. He performed 
the experiment 
of 1850 in the cellar of the brewery, 
which 
appeared 
to be a more familiar 
place to him than his new laboratory. 
But the 
temperature 
fluctuations 
identified in a similar building indicated that he must have 
had long experience 
in taking the temperatures 
in order to avoid these disturbing 
effects. How he did it will, to a certain extent, remain unknown 
to us; but from the 
practice of brewing we already know that a successful performance 
of mashing was 
based on calculating 
and measuring 
the mashing heats to a tenth of a degree related 
to air temperature 
changes of one degree. 
We can also conclude that his earlier experiments 
in determining 
the mechanical 
equivalent 
of heat were not as accurate as in the 1850 version. The constructions 
of 
the earlier technical 
set-ups prevented 
him from producing 
reliable 
results. It is 
obvious that he was absolutely convinced beforehand that such an equivalent existed. 
In the brewers’ form of life, using equivalents 
was one operation within the practice 
of ‘mensuration’. 
As a result of the different scales used for different kinds of goods, 
brewers 
and excise officers both had to be perfectly 
acquainted 
with decimal 
arithmetic. 
Tables 
of decimals 
in connection 
with the ‘sliding-rule’ 
were their 
@See there the sections on ‘Generate’ and ‘Germinate’. This issue requires further research but it seems 
that conversion 
processes and the role of human agency in them are the characteristic 
problem situations 
not only of Joule but also of researchers 
like Julius Robert Mayer and Justus von Liebig. Op. cit., note 
20ti$p. 167-170. 
Joule 
used the term 
‘mechanical 
value 
of heat’ 
in his paper 
‘On the Caloric 
Effects 
of 
Magneto-Electricity, 
and on the Mechanical 
Value of Heat’ (1843). in Joule, The Scienfijic Papers, op. 
ci?Gte 
l,, pp. 123ff. 
istonans of science usually connect the term ‘duty’ with an old engineers’ concern of measuring the 
efficiency of an engine. In fact that meaning was very recent, compared 
with the meaning of ‘payment 
to the public revenue levied upon the manufacture 
and sale of commodities’. 
98 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
Reworking the Mechanical Value of Heat 
99 
trustworthy companions6’ in order to find numerical expressions which served as 
a measure of value for the other. This conversion of units and measures was a 
mundane practice for Joule as well. But the challenge for him was to achieve an 
experimental 
practice which would allow him to claim that heat has a mechanical 
equivalent.68 
A further major advantage was his collaboration with instrument makers and 
workers. Our replication shows that an athlete would have been perfect to wind up 
the weights. An athlete’s physical condition would prevent unnecessary temperature 
increases in the room during the trial, which had to be performed as fast as possible. 
Probably, an unknown brewing mate was hired by Joule to do the job. But not only 
did his bodily conditions have to be appropriate, the winding had to be done with 
particular care. Joule’s final design of the vessel for the 1850 publication did not allow 
any mechanical irregularities during the trials. From my own experience I conclude 
that in order to measure the friction of water every other possible source of error had 
to be avoided. For example a stabilizer attached to the thin axle produced heat due 
to the friction of the axle which made it necessary to perform without it. In fact this 
made the mechanical sequence of the experiment an artistic performance. 
Joule could improve his work of measurement only because John Benjamin Dancer 
built nearly all the equipment he needed to perform the experiments on the friction 
of fluids in order to determine a mechanical value of heat. Dancer was a Manchester 
instrument maker mainly known for his micro-photography.69 His skill and the 
Manchester material culture were the crucial preconditions in order to become 
unbeatable in temperature measurements. One of the most important precision 
instruments, which Dancer himself called the ‘travelling microscope’, allowed the 
construction of an ‘extreme sensible’ thermometer. This companion of the bench 
consisted of a low power microscope, which could be moved horizontally by rotating 
a screw. The distance of travel could be determined from a graduated disc at the one 
end of the screw. But it also served as a means of rotating the screw. The pitch of 
the screw was l/20 in and the circumference of the disc was divided into 200 equal 
parts, so that the instrument read to l/4000 in. This precision instrument enabled Joule 
to build the most precise thermometers of his time.” 
67As Peter Mathias tells us: ‘In no case was a brewer’s word to be taken for the gauge, or a brewer’s 
table used to calculate it’. Op. cit., note 34, p. 349. 
68A standard for precise experimental 
work on determining 
equivalents 
was surely set by the newly 
founded Excise Laboratory 
when an ‘equivalent 
weight of sugar to a quarter of malt in brewing’ 
was 
determined by their officers and confirmed by law in 1847. Particularly 
in this field of metrology, the frame 
of reference 
for producing 
numbers was ‘skill in experimenting’, 
which was judged by professors 
of 
chemistry like Thomas Graham who made a considerable 
part of his income from being a consultant 
for 
the revenue. Cf. op. cit., note 37, pp. 49ff., p. 3 19, n. 12. 
69W. Browning, 
‘John Benjamin 
Dancer, F.R.A.S., 
1812-1887’, 
Memoirs and Proceedings of rhe 
Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society 107 (1964/65), 115-142; 
H. Milligan, 
‘New Light on J. 
B. Dancer’, ibid. 15, 80-88. In 1844 Dancer also built the paddle-wheel 
for the experiments 
which led 
to the 1850 publication. 
On micro-photography 
see Brian Bracegirdle 
and James B. McCormick, 
The 
Microscopic Photographs 0f.J. B. Dancer (Chicago: 
Science Heritage Limited, 
1993). 
%or 
an illustration 
of the travelling 
microscope 
see Fig. 4. 
100 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
The exceptional 
manner of graduation 
and calibration 
and its impact on Joule’s 
work can be explained as follows. Firstly, the ‘travelling microscope’ was extremely 
helpful for proving the quality of the glass bore. Take a glass tube of narrow bore 
and introduce a one-inch column of mercury. Measure the distance between the two 
end points of the drop. Then move the drop so that one of its ends is at one of the 
previous points. Then take a second measurement 
of the drop’s length. If the bore 
is of constant diameter, successive distances will also be constant. In each position 
the probable varying length of the column can be ascertained to the 1/4OOOth part of 
an inch. The bore of Joule’s thermometer 
was ‘conical, gradually 
diminishing 
in 
diameter. The mean cross-sections 
near the two ends of the tube differ by about 
20%.“’ This process of checking the bore over a certain length helped in selecting 
the best quality of glass tubes. 
Secondly, the instrument 
allowed a precise graduation, 
‘The surface of the glass 
having then been covered with a thin film of bees-wax, the portions of tube previously 
measured were each divided into the same number of parts by a machine constructed 
for the purpose. The divisions 
were then etched by means of the vapour of fluoric 
acid’.72 His instrument 
enabled him to determine 
these distances easily because it 
could distinguish 
1/4OOOth part of an inch. On the basis of Joule’s table of measures, 
differences 
of about 0.00635 mm were identifiable. 
These technical achievements, 
due to Manchester material culture and instrument 
makers’ skill, provided Joule with an extraordinary 
calibrating 
device. The method 
given above allowed him to ‘calibrate the thermometer 
by the graduation itself’ .73 If 
the tube had a perfectly uniform bore it only would have been necessary to make a 
millimetre 
scale of equal parts between the freezing and boiling points. But usually 
no bore had these conditions. 
Joule therefore decided, in dividing the scale, to make 
allowance 
for the variations 
in the tube’s capacity. The process described 
above, 
enabled him to identify the varying length of the mercury column. Afterwards, these 
different 
distances 
were each graduated 
into 50 divisions. 
The divisions 
of a 
thermometer 
built like thus did not represent 
degrees of the ordinary 
scales of 
temperature, 
but of an arbitrary value, differing for each instrument. 
This method provided Joule with a unique measuring 
device which improved the 
sensitivity 
of its measurements 
immensely. 
His readings became the most direct and 
sensitive 
measures of temperature 
increases 
available. 
He achieved the necessary 
consciousness 
about his accuracy in using this new companion 
of the bench from his 
constant practice. In the old brewing culture he had experienced 
impressive 
role 
models. In this respect Joule continued 
in the manner of a malster whose individual 
skill in performance 
was the evidence of, and therefore the unquestioned 
guideline 
“Arthur 
Schuster, ‘On the Scale-Value 
of the late Dr. Joule’s Thermometers’, 
Philosophical Magazine 
39 (I895), 477-501, p. 481. 
“James P. Joule, ‘On the Heat Disengaged 
in Chemical Combinations’, 
The Scientijc Papers, op. cit., 
note I, p. 214. 
‘?Joule to Thomson, 25 May 1879, Add MSS 7342 J 29 1, Cambridge 
University 
Library. 
Reworking the Mechanical Value of Heat 
101 
for, his research 
and judgment. 
This interpretation 
fits the brewers’ 
dictionary 
definition 
of ‘accuracy’ 
defined 
as ‘exactness’ 
or ‘nicety 
of attention 
and 
performance’. 
Joule worked entirely in this craftsman 
manner. 
His skill in taking 
measures 
and performing 
the experiments 
could not be doubted 
even when the 
laboratory 
‘went out of order’. But simultaneously 
Joule had made his measurements 
their own standards because he created a system of values and assigned them to a 
particular thermometer 
which no one else possessed. His arbitrary scale allowed him 
to increase the sensitivity 
but made him the only person able to judge his accuracy. 
Joule had created a space of innovation 
with its own values. He had become a 
performer without an audience: as our reconstruction 
has shown, nobody could have 
witnessed 
his experiment 
directly due to the disturbing 
effects of body radiation. 
Neither could Joule go out and demonstrate 
a successful trial. His newly developed 
instruments 
carried arbitrary values with them which nobody could control at that 
time. In order to compare his measurements 
with those of contemporary 
researchers 
he very often brought foreign thermometers 
into his laboratory either to calibrate them 
against his own or to use them for air temperature 
readings during his trials. These 
‘standards’ were very well chosen. One thermometer 
was given to him by Professor 
Thomas Graham, an eminent chemist from University 
College London. In the 1840s 
he was also one of the main consultants 
for the Revenue, both to do chemical analysis 
and also to referee the work of the excise staff.74 The second standard was given by 
Lyon Playfair, 
an industrial 
chemist 
and Professor 
of Chemistry 
at the Royal 
Institution 
in Manchester. 
In the 1840s he improved his abilities in doing more sensitive measurements. 
It 
even prompted him to move out of his laboratory 
to perform his final trials in his 
brewing cellar, probably 
in order to minimize 
the heat losses and to get a uniform 
temperature. As the replication shows, this performance 
could not be repeated. Joule’s 
skill and that of others made the brewing cellar a unique site. Metaphorically 
speaking 
the ‘frozen vegetables’75 stored inside would already have melted, even by opening 
the door of the cellar. Therefore Joule’s experiments 
on the friction of fluids were 
problematic 
not only because they told against the caloric theory of heat. For Joule 
the problem became at that time more one of demonstrating 
the reliability of his work. 
This move from private to public now confronted him with culturally shared standards 
which he had to match. 
Defending Tradition and Writing For Acceptance 
By the term science, we understand it to imply that species of knowledge, in the obtainment 
of which the mind is exclusively engaged, without the aid of the bodily organs, let the subject 
of acquirement be what it may; and that the purport of its use is to distinguish it from that 
74See op. cit., note 37, p. 53, pp. 319-320; Joule ‘Notebook’, 
2, p. 162, UMIST, Manchester. 
“Brano 
Latour used the term ‘frozen vegetable’ 
to describe the problem that skill--as 
a character 
of 
a social setting-can 
hardly travel. It always changes. 
He used the term at the Bath conference 
on 
‘Rediscovering 
Skill’. 
102 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
peculiar knowledge which results from the combined exercise of the mental and physical 
powers.76 
When Joule started to publish his experiences 
in experimenting 
on the nature of 
heat he wanted to present himself as a natural philosopher. 
The nature of his work 
on the mechanical 
value of heat, however, put him in an awkward position. He could 
only report about the actual performance 
in his laboratory 
because the sensitive 
measurements 
did not allow direct witnessing. These reports had to be written in such 
a way that the audience would understand 
and believe him. Therefore on their own 
they do not give an adequate account of Joule’s work. The reconstitution 
of his private 
experimental 
form of life throws a different light on his persona and his publication 
On the Mechanical 
Equivalent of Heat.” 
Changes in the design of the experimental 
set-up during the years 1843-l 850 show 
that he responded to public criticism in order to demonstrate 
‘numerical 
accuracy’. 
At the Cambridge 
meeting of the British Association 
in June 1845 he presented a 
version of his experiment 
in which the copper vessel was not isolated. This set-up 
was publicly criticized. Two years later, at the Oxford meeting, he said that the earlier 
experiments 
‘though abundantly 
sufficient to establish 
the equivalency 
of heat to 
mechanical 
power, were not adapted to determine 
the equivalent 
with very great 
numerical accuracy, owing to the apparatus having been situated in the open air, and 
having been in consequence 
liable to great cooling 
or heating effects from the 
atmosphere’.‘* 
So Joule presented an improved version in which the copper vessel 
had been isolated. In his 1850 version, however, he again announced 
that he had set 
up the experiment without isolating the vessel. Instead he gave numerical calculations 
about these ‘cooling and heating effects’. My own experiments, 
however, have shown 
that the ‘radiation effect’ was indeed difficult to measure. One major reason was my 
lack of experience in the correct timing of taking the measures. In 1875 the American 
physicist 
Henry Rowland 
commented 
on this problem 
in his diary in order to 
overcome this possible source of error: ‘Having set the machine in operation, using 
water colder than the air, we note the thermometer 
and then wait until the temperature 
has risen the same distance above that of air. In this way all correction for radiation 
is avoided’.79 
But Joule’s consciousness 
of and probably his ability to control these atmospheric 
influences 
were based on long experience 
in constructing 
thermometers 
and 
760p. cit., note 20, p. 307. 
“This is also indicated by the divergent characterizations 
of Joule’s experimental 
work. In the recent 
biography 
of Joule, Cardwell 
states: ‘Joule was not a metrologist 
nor was his main interest in exact 
measurement. 
But Sarton [who mentioned this fifty years ago] was doing no more than repeating a view 
that was common at the time and had persisted in some quarters to the present day. In fact Joule was a 
highly original man of science and, undeniably, 
a bridge figure.’ Op. cit., note 33, p. viii. 
‘James P. Joule, ‘On the Mechanical Equivalent of Heat, as Determined by Heat Evolved by the Friction 
of Fluids’, The Scienrifc 
Papers, op. cit. note 1. p. 278. 
“Henry 
Rowland, ‘European Trip Diary’, Johns Hopkins University Library, MS.6 series 4, pp. 37-38. 
Cf. H. Rubens, ‘Apparat zur Bestimmung des mechanischen 
Warmeaquivalents’, 
Physikalische Zeitschrifr 
7 (1906), 272-276. 
Reworking the Mechanical Value of Heat 
103 
developing a particular ‘habit of taking measures’. Here the ‘brewing chemical 
laboratory’ was the most perfect place to accustom himself to it and to do the 
performance as well. But that embodied capability, that particular gestural 
knowledge, was incommunicable. Over and above that, he could not defend his 
experimental accuracy by appealing to brewers’ craftsman skill. On the contrary it 
was more advantageous to distance himself from this particular gestural collective. 
However, in order to convince the public Joule could also use his experimental 
privacy. His actual resources could remain secret. With the demonstration of the 
isolated version in Oxford he avoided a debate about his skill in keeping control over 
these ‘radiation effects’. With respect to the participants it was more secure to argue 
with the isolated version. An inlluential and hostile listener, Sir John Herschel, was 
not given the chance to make his fundamental methodological attack. In a paper on 
the ‘actinometer’80 Herschel criticized every static measurement of heat radiation 
because it failed to take time into account. Joule’s skill, his habit of taking measures, 
the constant use of these particularly sensitive thermometers and the speed of 
performing made him feel conscious of managing that problem. Therefore in private 
he continued experimentation in the old manner. He used a very thin copper vessel 
in order to minimize any isolating effect between water and air. He got his assistant 
to perform in 35 min and used the brewing cellar in order to reduce the radiation effect 
caused by the experimenters’ bodies. He read off temperatures in the usual manner. 
As the reworking has shown, such a performance was only possible in that particular 
space. In order to make his local experimental work a transparent natural phenomenon 
and make himself the authority, Joule had to invent convincing demonstration devices 
which made his ‘individual fact’ universal. A quantitative measure of the ‘radiation 
effect’ demonstrated advanced control over such disturbing effects and gave his 
determination of the ‘mechanical equivalent of heat’ more ‘numerical accuracy’. 
But accurate measurement was not regarded by all as the major precondition for 
demonstrating a natural phenomenon. Michael Faraday, for example, worked very 
hard to make an experiment transparent so that the techniques and the equipment 
appeared to contribute nothing to the outcome. ” This gentlemanly behaviour of an 
early nineteenth-century researcher represented one experimental form of life. 
William Sturgeon, a contemporary electrician, represented an opposing form of life. 
‘His decision to make public the details of his experimental apparatus was designed 
to support his claim that the world was an electrical machine and that only those 
skilled in the workings of machinery could understand such a world’.82 
?he 
instrument 
itself is nothing more than a very large cylindrical 
thermometer 
bulb with a scale 
greatly enlarged, so as to render the smallest possible increase of temperature 
distinctly measurable.’ 
Sir 
John F. W. Herschel, 
‘Explanation 
of the Principle and Construction 
of the Actinometer’, 
BAAS Report 
(1833). pp. 379-381, 
on p. 379f. 
“Cooding, 
‘ “In Nature’s School” ‘, op. cit., note 6, pp. 105ff. 
s*Iwan Rhys Moms, ‘Different Experimental 
Lives: Michael Faraday and William Sturgeon’, 
History 
of Science 30 (1992) 
l-28, 
p. 23. 
104 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
Joule’s early writings indicate a form of life very close to Sturgeon’s 
But he also 
orientated himself to Faraday’s method of distinguishing 
between the private and the 
public 
space of knowledge 
production. 
Joule’s 
particular 
experimental 
result, 
however, made his mechanical equivalent 
of heat appear to be a constant ofnature.83 
Therefore, in his 1850 publication 
he had effaced all the immense labour which had 
gone into the performance 
of his experiment. 
In the 1850 paper he distinguishes 
himself 
from any of the gestural 
collectives 
which had become 
objects of the 
disciplining 
programme 
described 
above. The unreliable 
unskilled 
working class 
represented by the unknown brewing mate was not mentioned 
at all. The instrument 
maker Dancer, as a representative 
of the skilled working class, was given the status 
of a valuable 
servant. Only Joule himself remained, 
but now as the disembodied 
observer of nature who displayed 
herself. He distanced 
himself from any kind of 
sensuous perception other than those gestures of accuracy which demonstrated 
remote 
control 
of the object of research: 
reading 
off temperature 
scales from the best 
instruments 
by means of a ‘practised eye’. This would fit the assumed manners of 
the reader of the Philosophical 
Transactions and was precisely the kind of science 
that Wigney had in mind when he wrote his dictionary 
and the quotation 
set as an 
epigraph to this section. Moreover William Whewell, who coined the word ‘scientist’ 
at this time, did help to promote this ideal of scientific practice in which sight and 
hearing were privileged 
above the other senses. ‘The other senses have not any 
peculiar prerogatives, 
at least none which bear on the formation 
of science’.84 
Yet not only the labour, but even the machine which was needed to perform the 
experiment, 
was not explained sufficiently 
well nor given in a complete picture. The 
only parts of the machinery 
which were sketched were very cleverly chosen. The 
shape of the suspension 
of the pulleys was probably taken from a standard textbook 
illustration 
of George Atwood’s machine. Such an image would take the reader into 
the academic world of Cambridge University 
mechanics where no friction existed:85 
it would diminish 
the reader’s doubts as to whether this source of friction could 
become a major error. This particular design, connected with long tables of numbers, 
made Joule appear as a master of precision measurement 
and his number as a constant 
of nature. 
Despite his efforts in writing for acceptance, 
Joule constantly 
defended brewing 
traditions. After all his 1850 publication 
became a hybrid of the different collectives 
*‘This neologism 
was used by Charles Babbage for his encyclopaedic 
project started in the 183Os, of 
collecting facts which could be expressed by numbers. Joule’s number, the mechanical equivalent of heat, 
was a perfect example of such a constant. But its existence was not a common opinion in the natural 
philosophical 
community. 
Charles Babbage, Smifhsonian Instirurion Annual Report (1856). pp. 289-302. 
For constants 
see also Ian Hacking, 
The Taming of Chance (Cambridge: 
Cambridge 
University 
Press, 
1990). 
840p. cit. note 60, vol. 1.. p. 280. 
*?t seems Joule could have learnt of Atwood’s 
machine 
through 
the Manchester 
Literary 
and 
Philosophical 
Society. Peter Ewart, ‘On the Measure of Moving Force’, Memoirs and Proceedings of the 
Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society 2 (1813). 105-228. 
Reworking the Mechanical Value of Heat 
105 
he participated 
in. His uses of the terms ‘accuracy’ and ‘exactness’ were still signs 
of this private craftsman 
consciousness. 
He presented 
himself as a self-conscious, 
experienced 
experimentalist 
whose reliability 
was not allowed to be doubted because 
he was the only experienced 
bearer of this knowledge. 
He did not even discuss 
possible errors in his temperature 
readings. 
Only once, when he had increased the 
sensitivity 
of his thermometers, 
did he explain 
why he had given very doubtful 
numbers 
to three decimal places. ‘The scale being arbitrary, the indications 
of the 
thermometer 
had to be reduced in every instance, a circumstance 
which accounts for 
my having given the temperatures 
in the tables to three places of decimals’.86 In his 
final publication 
he presented the following 
specimen of his extraordinary 
abilities 
in order to present himself as an accurate experimentalist: 
‘And since constant practice 
enabled me to read off with the naked eye l/20 of a division, it followed that l/200 
of a degree Fahr. was an appreciable 
temperature’.87 
With this statement Joule linked together an extraordinarily 
sensitive instrument 
of precision with his individual 
gestures of accuracy. It was a self-evident 
brewing 
practice that an ‘approximation 
to a good practice’,88 would determine the result. Only 
his skill, not a foreign ‘companion 
of the bench’ could be the ultimate guideline 
of 
his practice. Therefore, using arbitrary scales in order to achieve greater sensitivity 
and variations 
in his calculated 
results did not provide him with a problem; on the 
contrary, 
it exemplified 
his excellence 
of workmanship. 
Moreover, 
his initial 
circumspection 
about graphical methods give further evidence that he was convinced 
that a constant practice of taking measures was superior in achieving a true value than 
the procedure of drawing a curve in which the ‘eye often spontaneously 
detects the 
law’.89 Joule’s self-presentation 
in public had its origins in the experimental 
form of 
life described 
above. 
His gestural 
knowledge 
in reading 
temperatures 
was 
systematically 
built up through an everyday practice. This knowledge 
came to bear 
not only as a measuring 
technique but also as self-consciousness 
about this practice. 
The use of decimal tables was the complementary 
practice which gave confidence 
in keeping 
control 
through 
calculations. 
When 
he decided 
to create his own 
experimental 
space with its own values all these experiences 
were applied. But 
just as his brewers’ economic 
interests had demanded 
control over crafts skill, he 
now experienced 
himself 
as a craftsman 
controlled 
by the scholars 
of natural 
philosophy. 
86James P. Joule, ‘On the Changes of Temperature 
produced by the Rarefraction 
and Condensation 
of 
Air’, The Scienrijc Papers, op. cd., note 1, p. 175. 
s’James Prescott Joule, ‘On the Mechanical 
Equivalent 
of Heat’, op. cit., note 1, p. 303. 
‘?his 
interpretation 
of ‘Approximation’ 
is given in the cyclopedia 
and it represented at that time quality 
in workmanship. 
The quality wasn’t measured by an absolute standard but given through the skill of the 
individual. 
Op. cit., note 20, pp. 6l3-70. 
*‘Op. cit., note 60, vol. 2, p. 551. 
106 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
Acknowledgements-This paper was presented at the workshop on ‘Replications of Historical Experiments 
in Physics’ at the Carl von Ossietzky University, 
Oldenburg, 
Germany, 
24-29 August 1992, and in the 
Cambridge 
Physics History Group, University of Cambridge, 
November 
1992. I am grateful to members 
of both audiences for stimulating discussions. 
I would like to thank in particular Peter Heering, Falk Riess, 
Simon Schaffer, Richard Staley, Andy Warwick and two anonymous 
referees. For the realization of the 
replica I thank Uwe Albers, Heinz Biittcher, Egon Kayser and Wolfgang 
Kuhn. I quote manuscripts 
from 
Cambridge 
University Library (Joule correspondence), 
University of Manchester 
Institute of Science and 
Technology 
Archive (Joule papers) and Johns Hopkins University 
Library (Rowland 
papers), and am 
grateful for permission 
to do so. 
