979
P. Michelucci (ed.), Handbook of Human Computation, 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-8806-4_76, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013
 Introduction 
 This chapter, like most if not all the other chapters in this book, was written and 
edited on a digital computer. That computer can perform incredible feats of numeri-
cal computation at blindingly fast speeds, store massive amounts of data, and be used 
as a tool for everything from writing to music production to scientiﬁ c analysis to 
communication. The abilities of a digital computer, however, are insigniﬁ cant next to 
the computational power of the network of human beings, their communication infra-
structure, and the accumulated knowledge tapped into by those individuals respon-
sible for building it. No single human being knows how to build a modern computer 
from scratch. Indeed, no one knows how to build a computer mouse, or a lead pencil, 
or many of the complex tools we rely on for modern living from scratch (Read  1958 ; 
Ridley  2010 ). For that matter, hardly any of us know how to make simple two-strand 
twisted string from local raw materials, something that practically every adult once 
knew how to do. A key factor that enables us as human beings to solve complex 
problems and achieve a level of dominance over a wide variety of environments from 
the desert to the arctic to the deep ocean is not simply our individual big brains, but 
our capacities for extreme sociality, to cooperate and learn from one another, and our 
ability to build on previous knowledge and to accumulate culture. 
 It is often said that the human brain is like a computer. It processes information, 
takes in input, produces output, stores and retrieves memory. Groups of people, 
 Human Cumulative Cultural Evolution 
as a Form of Distributed Computation 
 Paul  E.  Smaldino and  Peter  J.  Richerson 
 P. E.  Smaldino (*) 
 Center for Advanced Modeling in the Social, Behavioral, and Health Sciences , 
 Johns Hopkins University ,  Baltimore ,  MD ,  USA 
 e-mail: paul.smaldino@gmail.com 
 P. J.  Richerson 
 Department of Environmental Science and Policy ,  University of California, Davis ,  Davis ,  CA ,  USA 
 e-mail: pjricherson@ucdavis.edu 
980
then, are like supercomputers. They can process in parallel, allocate resources, and 
divide tasks to produce faster and better solutions to problems than lone individuals 
can manage, and that are more than the sum of the individuals’ abilities were they 
working separately (Smaldino  in press ). For example, Woolley and colleagues pre-
sented small groups with a number of tasks requiring different types of collabora-
tions to solve them (Woolley et al.  2010 ; see also Woolley and Hashmi this volume). 
Their results showed, ﬁ rstly, that groups’ performance between tasks were corre-
lated, pointing to an emergent “collective intelligence” for each group conﬁ gura-
tion, and secondly, that a group’s performance was uncorrelated with the intelligence 
of its individual members, but rather stemmed from their ability to communicate in 
a understanding and democratic fashion. 
 If groups of humans are like a supercomputer, then what of human  cultures , 
which store and process the cumulative innovations and collaborations of genera-
tions of individuals? Cumulative culture allows human societies to act as  super- 
duper computers. Humans are unique in the animal kingdom for our tremendous 
capacity to learn from one another. Our relatively fast and accurate imitation and 
willingness to teach others allows us to acquire complex skills without having to 
reinvent them for ourselves. Individuals sometimes improve upon the skills they 
have acquired and these improvements can be passed on to those who learn from the 
inventor. Furthermore, we are smart shoppers in the marketplace of ideas. We selec-
tively adopt innovations from others that work better or whose use is correlated with 
success. Human social learning cumulatively ratchets up technology and innovation, 
providing groups with progressively better solutions to the problems they encounter 
(Tennie et al.  2009 ; Boyd et al.  2011 ). By such means Stone Age bowyers produced 
bows that modern engineers ﬁ nd to be approximately optimal designs (Allely et al. 
 1992 ). From this perspective, the human-based genetic algorithm (Kosorukoff  2001 ; 
Grier, this volume), a computational technique in which human users are involved in 
both judging the ﬁ tness of problem solutions as well as suggesting novel solutions, 
is simply an application of evolutionary processes that have been driving human 
innovation since the ancient hominins began to make multi-part tools. 
 In this chapter, we will ﬁ rst discuss how social learning can increase the ﬁ tness 
of a population by allowing cultural innovations to accumulate. We will then dis-
cuss the importance of population size and social connectivity on maintaining those 
innovations, with a focus on the fragility of human computational systems to sudden 
isolation or population loss. We end with a consideration of the implications of our 
discussion on the design of human computation systems in the future. 
 Roger’s Paradox: Why Social Learning Is Not Enough 
 In a complex world in which decisions must often be made quickly and in which 
skills may be difﬁ cult to acquire, individual trial-and-error learning can be overly 
costly in terms of time, cognitive capacity, and the potential consequences of a poor 
decision. A hunter-gatherer learning on his own may spend months trying to con-
struct a hunting apparatus or, much worse, misread animal tracks and be eaten by a 
P.E. Smaldino and P.J. Richerson
981
predator. Social learning—which includes knowledge or behaviors acquired via 
teaching, imitation, or social inﬂ uence (e.g., you learn to play video games because 
your friends all hang out and play Xbox)—helps individuals to gain important skills 
without the time costs and risks associated with individual, trial-and-error learning. 
It may therefore seem obvious that the adoption of a strategy of social learning 
should beneﬁ t a population—increasing its ﬁ tness, in the language of evolutionary 
biology. Yet, it turns out that if the only beneﬁ t of social learning is to avoid the 
costs of trial-and-error, then social learning strategies will be indeed adopted but 
will  not increase the ﬁ tness of the population. 
 This apparent paradox was demonstrated by Rogers ( 1988 ) via a simple mathe-
matical model. Suppose a hypothetical world in which there are two possible behav-
iors, either of which individuals can adopt to help them survive and reproduce. 
Suppose also that the environment changes periodically between two states, and that 
in each of these states a different behavior yields a ﬁ tness advantage over the other 
behavior. Finally, suppose that individuals in this world fall into two categories of 
learner, and that learning strategies are passed on from parents to their children. 
 Individual learners always learn the optimal behavior for the environment, but at a 
heavy cost.  Social learners choose an individual from the previous generation at 
random and adopt that individual’s behavior. Because they simply copy the behavior 
of another individual, social learners avoid the cost of individual learning. 
 When social learners are rare, they will have higher ﬁ tness than individual learn-
ers, and their prevalence in the population will therefore increase. However, as 
social learners become more common, a social learner becomes increasingly likely 
to learn her behavior from a fellow social learner. The state of the environment is not 
stable, so social learners risk learning an out-of-date behavior, and transmitting that 
incorrect behavior to social learners in subsequent generations. Thus, as the preva-
lence of social learners increases, their ﬁ tness begins to fall, until it again reaches 
the ﬁ tness of individual learners (Fig.  1 ). In other words, we should expect social 
learning strategies to evolve in a social species, but the introduction of social 
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Fitness
Proportion of Social Learners
Individual Learners 
Social Learners 
Average
Social learning
increases 
Social learning
decreases 
 Fig. 1  Rogers’ model. Social 
learners have higher ﬁ tness 
than individual learners when 
rare, and their invasion brieﬂ y 
increases the average ﬁ tness 
of the population. However, 
as the proportion of social 
learners in the population 
increases, the population 
stabilizes at a mixed 
equilibrium ( vertical line ) in 
which the average ﬁ tness is 
identical to that of a 
population of individual 
learners (Adapted from 
Rogers ( 1988 )) 
 
Human Cumulative Cultural Evolution as a Form of Distributed Computation
982
learning behavior does not, in and of itself, increase the average ﬁ tness of popula-
tions of that species. Boyd and Richerson ( 1995 ) studied variations on Rogers’ 
model, including ones in which social learners could identify and preferentially 
learn from individual learners and ones in which there were more than two behav-
iors. They showed that Rogers’ results were robust: social learning on its own does 
not increase the mean ﬁ tness of a population.
 Cumulative Culture 
 One way of getting around Roger’s paradox is if social learning can improve the 
efﬁ ciency of individual learning. For example, suppose individuals sample multiple 
behaviors, and choose one if it is obviously better than the others. If there is an 
insufﬁ ciently clear signal, and one behavior is not obviously superior, then the indi-
vidual chooses a random behavior through imitation. This strategy of “conditional 
social learning” has been shown to increase the mean ﬁ tness of the population rela-
tive to a population of individual learners under a variety of conditions (Boyd and 
Richerson  1995 ; Enquist et al.  2007 ; Ehn and Laland  2012 ). In this and related 
scenarios, behaviors can always be hypothetically learned by individuals through 
trial and error. Social learning can be adaptive if it hastens the spread of beneﬁ cial 
behaviors. Indeed, this seems to be the primary beneﬁ t of social learning in non- 
human apes (Tennie et al.  2009 ). Nonetheless, human groups have utilized social 
learning to make extremely large adaptive gains, much larger than would be facili-
tated solely through the increased spread of beneﬁ cial behaviors.  The key to human 
success is the spread of incremental innovations based on existing behaviors—often 
quite complex behaviors—which naïve individuals would be unable to learn on 
their own . Human social learning based on teaching and imitation is so efﬁ cient that 
a Stone Age bowyer could acquire an advanced technology like a bow that already 
incorporated the hard-won innovations of dozens if not hundreds of his ancestors 
before he contemplated innovations that might improve it still further. 
 Humans are the most successful vertebrate species on the planet. We have man-
aged to conquer a vast range of environments from the desert to the tropics to the 
Arctic. We have modiﬁ ed our environments to facilitate our survival and our expan-
sion. At the dawn of the agricultural revolution 10,000 years ago, the entire human 
population across the globe was approximately ﬁ ve million (Keinan and Clark 
 2012 ). Today, over 37 million people live in the Tokyo metropolitan area alone. We 
have achieved this success through the process of  cumulative culture . By this, we 
mean that learned information and behaviors are reliably transmitted and improved 
upon, such that those improvements can in turn be transmitted through learning. 
 Cumulative culture allows individuals to build on previous adaptations. To exploit 
this, humans have evolved psychological mechanisms, heuristics, and biases that 
facilitate the acquisition of useful knowledge and behaviors (Henrich and McElreath 
 2003 ; Tomasello et al.  2005 ; Herrmann et al.  2007 ; Hill et al.  2009 ). This includes 
P.E. Smaldino and P.J. Richerson
983
learning from individuals who have demonstrated success either directly or by proxy, 
indicated by traits like status or prestige (Henrich and Gil-White  2001 ). Symbolic 
communication additionally allows for transmission of behaviors and practices with-
out direct observation. Stories, myths, and moral doctrines play an important role in 
the cultural transmission of norms of social behavior as well as useful information 
about survival (Chudek and Henrich  2011 ). Moreover, the spread of organizational 
norms through narratives, religions, and other social institutions have enabled the 
creation and transmission of emergent group-level traits that rely on social organiza-
tion and division of labor (Henrich and Boyd  2008 ; Smaldino  in press ). The capaci-
ties of human populations for the storage and transmission of collective information 
constitute a feat of evolutionary computing unmatched in the natural world. 
 Why Culture Is Common but Cultural Evolution Is Rare 
 Since cumulative culture has made our species so outstandingly successful, why 
didn’t this capacity evolve long ago and lead to many highly cultural species? After 
all, most “killer” adaptations like internal skeletons, camera-type eyes, and efﬁ cient 
ﬂ ight have been around for hundreds of millions of years and characterize many 
lineages. At least two answers are possible. First, cumulative culture would be very 
difﬁ cult to get started if the capacity for it is costly, as our large brains suggest it is 
(Aiello and Wheeler  1995 ). The problem is that it takes many large brains operating 
over many generations to evolve complex cultural adaptations. The ﬁ rst individuals 
to pay the cost for a capacity for cumulative culture would ﬁ nd no useful complex 
traits to imitate and hence would get no ﬁ tness payoff to cover the overhead of the 
capacity (Boyd and Richerson  1996 ). Second, the kind of environment that makes 
complex cumulative culture useful may be of very recent vintage. Theoretical mod-
els suggest that cumulative culture is most useful in moderately variable environ-
ments, especially environments that vary on time scales too short for genes to track. 
Cultural evolution is rapid compared to genetic evolution and can thus generate 
adaptations to more ephemeral environmental changes than can genes (Perreault 
 2012 ). We have known for decades that the earth’s climates became much more 
variable during the Plio-Pleistocene—from 5.3 million years ago to about 11.5 
thousand years ago—than they were during the preceding 60 million years (Zachos 
et al.  2001 ). Until recently, however, the best data described climate variation on 
time scales too long to favor costly culture. As better paleoclimate data has come 
available, we have begun to resolve climate variation at the millennial and submil-
lennial scale that in theory should favor a capacity for cumulative culture. This 
variation appears to have been increasing over the last few glacial cycles (Loulergue 
et al.  2008 ), in rough parallel to human brain size increase and the increasing sophis-
tication of stone tools. In other words, paleoclimate data for the last several hundred 
thousand years shows a steady increase in environmental variability that appears to 
be tracked by the emergence and spread of cumulative culture. 
Human Cumulative Cultural Evolution as a Form of Distributed Computation
984
 Innovation, Environment, and Population Size 
 The ability to socially learn and accumulate culture provides opportunities for the 
expansion of humans’ ability to problem-solve. However, the ability to learn and 
adapt does not necessarily lead to the runaway growth of cultural innovation. As a 
prime example, anatomically modern humans ﬁ rst appeared in Africa between 160 
and 200 kya (kya = thousand years ago; McBrearty and Brooks  2000 ; White et al. 
 2003 ; McDougall et al.  2005 ), and had spread to most of the habitable parts of the 
globe between 90 and 40 kya (Ambrose  1998 ; Ray et al.  2005 ). Yet the appearance 
of agriculture and the comparatively rapid growth of culture, technology, and popu-
lation size only occurred around 11 kya. Why is this the case? It seems unlikely that 
it took somewhere between 30 and 150,000 years for humans to happen upon the 
idea of domesticating crops and adopting stationary (as opposed to nomadic) life-
styles. Richerson et al. ( 2001 ) have argued that the drier, highly variable, low CO 2 
world of the last glacial period would have been unfavorable for the evolution of 
agriculture until about 11,000 years ago, which is in fact when agriculture began to 
develop. It is true that anatomically modern humans were present in Africa during 
the last interglacial period without developing agriculture, and our understanding of 
events in Africa leading up to anatomical moderns spreading out of Africa around 
50 kya is still rudimentary (Richerson et al.  2009 ). Nevertheless, the case is strong 
that it was the right mix of biological and cultural preparedness and worldwide cli-
matic factors that triggered the widespread adoption of agriculture, sowing the 
seeds of modern civilization. 
 Even in the relatively stable global climate of the last 11,000 years, cultural inno-
vations have required the right social and environmental circumstances to thrive and 
evolve. One of the best markers of cumulative cultural evolution is the presence of 
complex technology. Before most of the world was connected by webs of commu-
nication and commerce, tremendous variability could be found in the complexity of 
each culture’s toolkits. What factors determine the limits of a cultural population’s 
technological complexity? 
 Population Size and Connectedness Predict Technological 
Complexity 
 Cumulative culture allows for complex technologies to be maintained and transmit-
ted across generations. As a result, humans have developed technologies that have 
allowed them to survive and ﬂ ourish in wide ranges of environments. Spears and 
kayaks are useful for ﬁ shing in marine environments, but would be quite difﬁ cult for 
naïve individuals to make and exploit on their own. Inuit populations living in Arctic 
climates learned to make warm skin clothing, build sleds, and breed and train dogs 
for sled travel. All of these cultural adaptations were essential for their long-term 
survival in the icy climate of the frozen North. The creation of all of these 
P.E. Smaldino and P.J. Richerson
985
technologies depends on the ability to transmit and maintain complex and cumula-
tive information and behaviors. However, learning complex behaviors and technolo-
gies is not easy. For example, not everyone is a great model for learning. In a 
generation, there may be only one or two great kayak builders. Moreover, not every-
one has the ability or the proclivity to learn complex skills. From among many stu-
dents, a gifted teacher may have only a few gifted pupils who can go on to teach 
others to the same high standard. How might these factors inﬂ uence the mainte-
nance and transmission of complex cultural adaptations? 
 Using a mathematical model, Henrich ( 2004 ) showed that if (1) there is indi-
vidual variation in learning ability, and (2) students are usually less skilled than their 
teachers, then more complex skills will require larger population sizes in order to be 
maintained. Powell et al. ( 2009 ) then extended Henrich’s model and showed that it 
is not necessarily the absolute size of the population that matters, but rather the 
number of effective teachers available. Thus, contact with other groups can com-
pensate for a given group’s small population size. On the other hand, this theory 
implies that smaller and more isolated groups should have less complex technology 
than larger and more connected groups. Kline and Boyd ( 2010 ) analyzed ﬁ shing 
and marine foraging toolkits from ten small-scale societies in Oceania and found 
that, as the models predicted, population size was the best predictor of toolkit com-
plexity, and also that higher rates of contact with other groups were associated with 
greater toolkit complexity, especially in relatively small groups. 
 When Disaster Strikes 
 If larger and more connected populations are associated with increased technologi-
cal complexity, what happens if there is a catastrophic event that suddenly shrinks 
the population or isolates a group from outside contact? Several documented cases 
suggest that this can lead to a loss of previously held technologies (Boyd et al.  2011 ). 
A well-known example is the case of the Tasmanians (Diamond  1978 ; Henrich 
 2004 ; Davidson and Roberts  2009 ). Isolated from mainland Australia after the seas 
began to rise at the end of the last glacial period, humans on Tasmania were stranded 
for about 8,000 years on an island that could not sustain more than a few thousand 
people, and remained isolated from the rest of the world until their ﬁ rst contact with 
Europeans in the late eighteenth century (Pardoe et al.  1991 ). Over the next several 
thousands of years following their isolation, the Tasmanians lost a number of previ-
ously held technologies, such as bone tools and ﬁ shing hooks and the ability to make 
cold-weather clothing, which were nevertheless maintained in Aboriginal communi-
ties on the Australian mainland. Moreover, the archaeological record on Tasmania 
points to a gradual loss of technology following their isolation. For example, the 
record indicates that between 8,000 and 5,000 years ago the Tasmanian diet was 
heavily dependent on ﬁ sh. However, the presence of ﬁ sh in their diet (as seen in the 
archaeological record) was declining by 5,000 years ago and had completely disap-
peared by 3,800 years before present, even though the relative proportions of other 
Human Cumulative Cultural Evolution as a Form of Distributed Computation
986
elements in the Tasmanians’ diet did not shift much. Other technologies that 
appeared on the mainland after the Tasmanian separation may have never arisen on 
the island at all. For example, boomerang use was widespread on the mainland by 
the time of European contact, and the remains of boomerangs dating back to over 
11,000 years ago have been found in a peat bog in South Australia, but none have 
ever been found in Tasmania (Davidson and Roberts  2009 ). 
 Technological Complexity in the Modern World 
 The past two centuries have seen exponential growth in both the size of the human 
population on Earth and the complexity of our technology. Each new technological 
innovation has built upon previous or contemporary technologies, and those innova-
tions have spread with startling speed. Consider that a person alive today born 100 
years ago would have witnessed the inventions of—just to name a few—the televi-
sion, the transistor radio, modern plastics, the jet airplane, the electric guitar, the 
microwave, the credit card, the remote control, the compact disc, personal comput-
ers, cell phones, the internet, GPS, DNA ﬁ ngerprinting, Prozac, Viagra, gene 
sequencing, smart phones, and unmanned drone aircraft. Consider also that in that 
time, the world population has not only quadrupled, but has become vastly more 
connected. Three-fourths of the world’s people now have access to cell phones 
(World Bank  2012 ). Social media such as Facebook, Twitter, and Google + allow 
information, ideas, and norms to spread faster and wider than ever before. The 
research university and other formal educational and R&D organizations spread 
technical information to ever larger numbers of students and support ever larger 
numbers of research scientists, design engineers, manufacturing specialists and 
maintenance technicians. 
 Access to advanced technologies is extremely widespread. However, the knowl-
edge and ability to create innovative new technologies rests in the hands of rather 
few individuals in each separate ﬁ eld. Moreover, many technologies require compli-
cated collaborations between individuals with different skill sets and access to 
resources—a prerequisite fulﬁ lled by large numbers of people with access to com-
munication networks and substantial wealth. As our population grew and became 
more interconnected, our capacities to invent and sustain complex technologies 
increased. However, the maintenance of those technologies is not guaranteed. For 
example, it may be that the number of highly trained engineers necessary to sustain 
(much less advance) modern highly complex technology is quite large. If the global 
human computer were to suffer some kind of setback (due to a political, economic, 
or environmental shock), the loss of individual experts or the reduced communica-
tion between them might further exacerbate the original setback, much as a shrink-
age of population size and/or contact caused the loss of complex technology on 
Tasmania and on remote Paciﬁ c islands. As an example from a complex society, 
consider also the setbacks to technology and knowledge in the former Western 
Roman Empire after its political collapse. Depopulation and the fragmentation of 
P.E. Smaldino and P.J. Richerson
987
the formerly uniﬁ ed polity and economy resulted in declines in literacy and the hol-
lowing out of civil engineering skills so advanced by the Romans. Old buildings and 
roads fell into ruin and new construction did not recover to Roman standards until 
the Late Medieval period. 
 How Fragile Is the Global Human Computer? 
 Could a disaster characterized by a sudden loss of either population or connected-
ness really lead to a global loss of technology? Maybe not. The world is extremely 
well connected. This may create redundancies and plasticity that could prevent loss 
of technology, provided the damage was not too extensive. Consider an analogy to 
the human brain. Damage to the left hemisphere of the cerebral cortex, such as 
caused by a stroke or traumatic brain injury, can cause difﬁ culties in the production 
or comprehension of language (aphasia). However, if a patient speaks more than 
one language, she may show differential patterns of damage and recovery between 
languages, making the patient more likely to regain or retain language use in at least 
one language (Goral et al.  2002 ). Increased social connections whereby similar 
technologies are produced via slightly different pathways may increase the robust-
ness of complex technologies. We also have large information reserves in the forms 
of books and internet databases. Although the Romans had books, the printing press 
had not yet been invented, and as such dissemination of information was limited. 
Merlin Donald ( 1991 ) has argued that literacy and numeracy, leading to the external 
storage of information, is one of the great advances (of three) in the origin of the 
modern mind. The unaided human brain has a limited memory and a limited ability 
to handle quantitative calculations. Literacy and numeracy not only relieve these 
limitations but also increase connectedness via books and other forms of written 
communication. Mass literacy and inexpensive mass media following the invention 
of the printing press greatly multiplied the number of people who could participate 
in advancing and spreading technology and other innovative ideas. 
 Nevertheless, it is possible that technology may be lost should disaster strike. 
Much of our specialized knowledge is collected by institutions, and that knowledge 
could rapidly vanish. Skilled people can die, books can be burned, and computers 
can wear out. Cumulative culture creates infrastructures that facilitate the persis-
tence and growth of technologies and innovations. The maintenance of modern 
medicine, for example, leans on the infrastructure of the medical school system as 
much as it does on the availability of information. If young would-be doctors didn’t 
have anywhere to train, it would be difﬁ cult for them to become as skilled as today’s 
highly trained doctors regardless of the persistence of medical textbooks. If the 
population necessary to maintain a particular technology were to suffer a loss, it is 
not clear that recovery would be swift. 
 Even if a technology  is lost, knowledge of the technology’s existence and its 
associated beneﬁ ts may help to recover it. The archaeological evidence shows that 
for thousands of years following their separation from the mainland, the Tasmanians’ 
Human Cumulative Cultural Evolution as a Form of Distributed Computation
988
diet involved large quantities of ﬁ sh. When European’s visited the island, however, 
the islanders were astonished at their success in pulling ﬁ sh out of the ocean, but 
refused offers of ﬁ sh to eat (Davidson and Roberts  2009 ). This taboo on eating ﬁ sh 
almost certainly arose after the islanders stopped ﬁ shing, along with their loss of the 
technology to make bone ﬁ shing hooks. Importantly, the taboo would have also dis-
suaded potential innovators from re-inventing ﬁ shing equipment, or prevented such 
technology from spreading should it have arisen. While this taboo may have helped 
to concentrate efforts on the acquisition of land-based sources of food, it also poten-
tially halted technological innovation. In contrast, some of the more recent techno-
logical innovations in the modern world were driven by science ﬁ ction writers’ 
visions of what could be. It is possible that, in the aftermath of a technology loss, 
recovery could be aided by visions of what once was. 
 The Future of Innovation 
 Is it possible for human computation to improve the operation of cumulative culture, 
so that we may avoid catastrophic technology loss altogether? We can draw insight 
from how it has been improved in the past, focusing on the last ten millennia and 
particularly on the most recent centuries and even decades. Table  1 details some of 
these mechanisms. Contemporary web-based efforts to speed the rate of innovation 
(e.g. Spigit.com, Innocentive.com, Google Scholar) are based on further improve-
ments along the lines outlined in Table  1 . Electronic storage is so cheap that we can 
aspire to have the sum total of human knowledge stored in electronic media. Even 
today a large fraction of that total is available to those of us with access to the web and 
a research library with electronic journal subscriptions. Top universities are offering 
free online courses and Wikipedia has authoritative micro-courses on a host of topics. 
Given that much innovation involves novel combinations of ideas, the ability to rap-
idly access a wider variety of ideas and skills should increase the rate of innovation.
 Two limitations to the power of the internet to help speed innovation remain. 
First, intellectual property issues must be solved. Book and journal publishers have 
 Table 1  Culturally evolved mechanisms for improving the efﬁ cacy of cumulative culture 
 Mechanism 
 Examples 
 Development of off-line storage 
of information 
 Literacy, numeracy, and cheaper media such as 
clay tablets, paper, and electronic storage 
 Improvements in the dissemination 
of information 
 Cheap printing, lending libraries, internet search 
engines 
 Improvements in the capacity of individuals 
to innovate and the number of individuals 
prepared to learn 
 Mass education, specialized scientiﬁ c and 
technical occupations, specialist textbooks 
and journals 
 Development of institutions designed 
to favor innovation 
 Intellectual property rights, research universities, 
lavish government support for basic and 
applied research, “Silicon Valley culture” 
P.E. Smaldino and P.J. Richerson
989
so far prevented rapid, inexpensive access to all potentially useful information, even 
in the realm of academic publishing where authors expect to be paid mainly in the 
form of prestige rather than money. Companies that crowdsource innovation, like 
Spigit and Innocentive, restrict access to their services to a closed community to 
protect intellectual property rights. Complicating the issue, the protection of intel-
lectual property rights likely provides a key incentive for innovators in the modern 
world of global interconnections. Users of information will often be strangers who 
will not be inclined to bestow prestige rewards on innovators, much less material 
rewards. Some small, simple, and automated per-view or per-download royalties 
would compensate creators of group-beneﬁ cial innovations, who would not other-
wise beneﬁ t from their work. 
 Second, as Polanyi ( 1966 ) argued, much knowledge is “tacit”—the ﬁ ngertip feel 
for things that is very difﬁ cult, if not impossible, to reduce to print or pictures. For 
example, to educate scientists we still rely on the highly personalized, labor inten-
sive PhD system pioneered in Germany in the early nineteenth century precisely 
because it allows for the transfer of tacit knowledge. Similarly, ﬁ rms expect to have 
to inculcate their organization’s ethos into technical and management hires. And 
one might reasonably entertain the possibility that most undergraduate students pre-
fer to attend residential universities, perhaps not entirely for the parties. Thus, the 
need to transmit tacit knowledge is enduring, and as such, seems to act as a funda-
mental limit on the rate of cumulative cultural evolution. 
 As we proceed into the future, what it means to improve our ability to generate 
and maintain cultural innovations may grow considerably less straightforward. The 
pace of evolution is set by the rates of dissemination and innovation. Human com-
munities are now integrated with digital devices that are themselves excellent learn-
ers, ratcheting up our ability to innovate. With more people producing more 
technology with more variation than ever before, culture is evolving at increasing 
rates. A concern, however, is that modern cumulative culture operates much more 
rapidly in some areas than in others. Technology that can be adopted by an indi-
vidual, for example, can often spread faster than institutions that require coordina-
tion among many individuals. 
 Which problems we solve with our technology will depend partly on what we 
perceive to be the salient problems. Culture inﬂ uences how we perceive the world 
(Smaldino and Richerson  2012 ). If our problems continue to be framed in terms of 
the accumulation of wealth and power, then the human computational engine will 
surely continue to apply its problem-solving powers in that sphere. That strategy, 
however, will very likely lead to a catastrophe with the potential to disable the infra-
structure of the global human computer that made it possible. As Nardi writes in her 
eloquent chapter (this volume), “There is no energy cornucopia waiting for us to tap 
into; we live on a speciﬁ c planet, with speciﬁ c resources. We are in the process of 
using up those resources.” A more promising direction, in terms of prolonging the 
existence of our impressive culture achievements, is to attempt to guide the evolu-
tionary forces that shape cultural change toward those individual mindsets and 
social and legal institutions that promote forethought and sustainability. 
Human Cumulative Cultural Evolution as a Form of Distributed Computation
990
 Summary 
 Cumulative culture is the engine that drives the remarkable power of the global 
human computer. It enables societies to act as super-duper computers by ratcheting 
up technological and cultural innovations. Once culture can accumulate, the ability 
of a society to maintain and spread complex technologies is directly related to the 
size of the population and its connectivity with other populations. Larger and more 
connected societies can maintain more complex technologies. This also means that 
sudden isolation or a drop in population size can lead to a loss of technology. The 
modern world maintains highly complex technology requiring the interactions of 
many varied, superbly trained individuals. A catastrophic loss in terms of either life 
or connectivity has the potential to trigger what some may consider an equally dev-
astating loss of technology. While our interconnected society may have the resources 
to avert such a second-order crisis, our best bet in the face of a loss of technology is 
to retain knowledge of its existence in our collective memory and to continue devel-
oping the kinds of human computational tools that have served us in the past. As the 
accelerated pace of our cultural evolution comes at the cost of increased resource 
use, however, we may need to focus on shifting the evolutionary forces that guide 
the norms and institutions that deﬁ ne the psychological state space of problems and 
solutions. It would be a shame to damage the global human computer through a 
product of its own doing. 
 References 
 Aiello LC, Wheeler P (1995) The expensive-tissue hypothesis: the brain and the digestive system 
in human and primate evolution. Curr Anthropol 36:199–221 
 Allely S, Baker T, Comstock P, Hamm J, Hardcastle R, Massey J, Strunk J (1992) The traditional 
Bowyer’s Bible. Lyons Press, Guilford 
 Ambrose SH (1998) Late Pleistocene human population bottlenecks, volcanic winter, and differ-
entiation of modern humans. J Hum Evol 34:623–651 
 Boyd R, Richerson PJ (1995) Why does culture increase human adaptability? Ethol Sociobiol 
16:125–143 
 Boyd R, Richerson PJ (1996) Why culture is common but cultural evolution is rare. Proc Br Acad 
88:73–93 
 Boyd R, Richerson PJ, Henrich J (2011) The cultural niche: why social learning is essential for 
human adaptation. Proc Natl Acad Sci 108:10918–10925 
 Chudek M, Henrich J (2011) Culture–gene coevolution, norm-psychology and the emergence of 
human prosociality. Trends Cogn Sci 15:218–226 
 Davidson I, Roberts DA (2009) On being alone: the isolation of the Tasmanians. In: Crotty M, 
Andrews DA (eds) Turning points in Australian history. University of New South Wales Press, 
Sydney, pp 18–31 
 Diamond JM (1978) The Tasmanians: the longest isolation, the simplest technology. Nature 
273:185–186 
 Donald M (1991) Origins of the modern mind: three stages in the evolution of culture and cognition. 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge 
P.E. Smaldino and P.J. Richerson
991
 Ehn M, Laland K (2012) Adaptive strategies for cumulative cultural learning. J Theor Biol 
301:103–111 
 Enquist M, Eriksson K, Ghirlanda S (2007) Critical social learning: a solution to Rogers’ paradox 
of non-adaptive culture. Am Anthropol 109:727–734 
 Goral M, Levy ES, Obler LK (2002) Neurolinguistic aspects of bilingualism. Int J Biling 
6:411–440 
 Henrich J (2004) Demography and cultural evolution: how adaptive cultural processes can produce 
maladaptive losses – the Tasmanian case. Am Antiq 69:197–214 
 Henrich J, Boyd R (2008) Division of labor, economic specialization and the evolution of social 
stratiﬁ cation. Curr Anthropol 49:715–724 
 Henrich J, Gil-White FJ (2001) The evolution of prestige: freely conferred deference as a mecha-
nism for enhancing beneﬁ ts of cultural transmission. Evol Hum Behav 22:165–196 
 Henrich J, McElreath R (2003) The evolution of cultural evolution. Evol Anthropol 12:123–135 
 Herrmann E, Call J, Hernández-Lloreda MV, Hare B, Tomasello M (2007) Humans have evolved 
specialized skills of social cognition: the cultural intelligence hypothesis. Science 317: 
1360–1366 
 Hill K, Barton M, Hurtado AM (2009) The emergence of human uniqueness: characters underly-
ing behavioral modernity. Evol Anthropol 18:187–200 
 Keinan A, Clark AG (2012) Recent explosive human population growth has resulted in an excess 
of rare genetic variants. Science 336:740–743 
 Kline MA, Boyd R (2010) Population size predicts technological complexity in Oceania. Proc R 
Soc Lond B 277:2559–2564 
 Kosorukoff A (2001) Human based genetic algorithm. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern 5:3464–3469 
 Loulergue L, Schilt A, Spahni R, Masson-Delmotte V, Blunier T, Lemieux B, Barnola J-M, 
Raynaud D, Stocker TF, Chappellaz J (2008) Orbital and millennial-scale features of atmo-
spheric CH4 over the past 800,000 years. Nature 453:383–386 
 McBrearty S, Brooks AS (2000) The revolution that wasn’t: a new interpretation of the origin of 
modern human behavior. J Hum Evol 39:453–563 
 McDougall I, Brown FH, Fleagle JG (2005) Stratigraphic placement and age of modern humans 
from Kibish, Ethiopia. Nature 433:733–736 
 Pardoe C, Bowdler S, Brace CL, Plomley NJB, Turner CG, Wolpoff MH (1991) Isolation and 
evolution in Tasmania [and comments and reply]. Curr Anthropol 32:1–21 
 Perreault C (2012) The pace of cultural evolution. PLoS One 7:e45150 
 Polanyi M (1966) The tacit dimension. Doubleday, Garden City 
 Powell A, Shennan S, Thomas MG (2009) Late Pleistocene demography and the appearance of 
modern human behavior. Science 324:1298–1301 
 Ray N, Currat M, Berthier P, Excofﬁ er L (2005) Recovering the geographic origin of early modern 
humans by realistic and spatially explicit simulations. Genome Res 15:1161–1167 
 Read L (1958) I, pencil: my family tree as told to Leonard E. Read. In: The freeman; reprinted by 
The library of economics and liberty. Retrieved 27 Feb 2013 from  http://www.econlib.org/
library/Essays/rdPncl1.html 
 Richerson PJ, Boyd R, Bettinger RL (2001) Was agriculture impossible during the Pleistocene but 
mandatory during the Holocene? A climate change hypothesis. Am Antiq 66:387–411 
 Richerson PJ, Boyd R, Bettinger RL (2009) Cultural innovations and demographic change. Hum 
Biol 81:211–235 
 Ridley M (2010) The rational optimist: how prosperity evolves. HarperCollins, New York 
 Rogers AR (1988) Does biology constrain culture? Am Anthropol 90:819–831 
 Smaldino PE (in press) The cultural evolution of emergent group-level traits. Behav Brain Sci 
 Smaldino PE, Richerson PJ (2012) The origins of options. Front Neurosci 5:50 
 Tennie C, Call J, Tomasello M (2009) Ratcheting up the ratchet: on the evolution of cumulative 
culture. Philos Trans R Soc B 364:2405–2415 
 Tomasello M, Carpenter M, Call J, Behne T, Moll H (2005) Understanding and sharing intentions: 
the origins of cultural cognition. Behav Brain Sci 28:675–735 
Human Cumulative Cultural Evolution as a Form of Distributed Computation
992
 White TD, Asfaw B, DeGusta D, Gilbert H, Richards GD, Suwa G, Howell FC (2003) Pleistocene 
 Homo sapiens from Middle Awash, Ethiopia. Nature 423:742–747 
 Woolley AW, Chabris CF, Pentland A, Hashmi N, Malone TW (2010) Evidence for a collective 
intelligence factor in the performance of human groups. Science 330:686–688 
 World Bank (2012) Mobile phone access reaches three quarters of planet’s population. 
Retrieved 27 Feb 2013 from  http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2012/07/17/
mobile-phone-access-reaches-three-quarters-planets-population 
 Zachos JC, Shackleton NJ, Revenaugh JS, Palike H, Flower BP (2001) Climate response to orbital 
forcing across the Oligocene-Miocene boundary. Science 292:274–278 
P.E. Smaldino and P.J. Richerson
