CHI 
+ 
GI 
1987 
Experiences With The Alternate Reality Kit 
An Example of the Tev_sion Between Literalism and Magic 
Randall B. Smith 
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center 
3333 Coyote Hill Rd. 
Palo Alto, CA 94304 
ABSTRACT 
This paper presents an overview of the Alternate Reality Kit 
(ARK), 
an 
animated 
environment 
for 
creating 
interactive 
simulations. 
ARK is built upon a physical-world metaphor: all 
objects have an image, a position, a velocity, and can experience 
forces. Users manipulate objects with a mouse-operated "hand" 
which enables them to carry and throw objects, to press buttons, 
and to operate sliders. 
The interface features are discussed in light of a general user 
interface tension between literalism and magic. Literal features are 
defined to be those that are true to the interface's metaphor. 
Literal features enhance an interface's learnability. 
Magical 
features are defined to'be those capabilities that deliberately 
violate the metaphor in order to provide enhanced functionality. 
Discussion of each ARK feature includes informal observations of 
early ARK users, an assessment of the feature's learnability, of its 
usefulness, and of its position on the magical-literal axis. 
Even 
though 
ARK 
includes 
magical 
features, 
applications-level users have be trained in a few minutes. Although 
this paper is about ARK, the tension between literalism and magic 
raises some interesting questions on its own. 
Some of these 
questions are presented briefly in the conclusion. 
RI~SUMI~ 
Cette presentation donne une description g~n~rale d'une 
¢¢trousse ~ outils pour une autre r~alit~ (ARK: Alternate Reality 
Kit), qui consiste en un environement anim(~ pour faire de la 
simulation interactive. ARK est bast sur un module du monde 
physique: les objets y ont une image, une position, une vitesse, et 
y sent soumis ~ des forces. Les utilisateurs manipulent les objets 
I'aide d'une ~cmain~ contr61~e par la souris, qui leur permet de 
porter et lancer des objects, d'appuyer sur des boutons et 
d'aj uster des l eviers. 
Les propri~t~s de I'interface sont d~crites en fonction d'un 
conflit entre rdalisme et magie. Les propri~t~s r~alistes sont celles 
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted 
provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct 
commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the 
publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by 
permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy 
otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. 
©1987 
ACM-0-89791-213-6/87/0004/0061 
$00.75 
qui respectent le module physique sur lequel est bask I'interface 
et qui facilitent I'apprentissage de ce dernier. 
Les propri~t~s 
magiques sont celles qui violent les regles du modEle physique 
pour en accro•tre les fonctions. La discussion portant sur chaque 
propri~t~ de ARK comprend les r~sultats d'observations des 
premiers utilisateurs, une ~valuation de la facilit~ d'apprentissage 
de la propri~tE en question, de son utilit~ et de sa position le long 
de I'axe magie-r~alisme. 
Bien que ARK comprenne des propri~t~s magiques, ses 
utilisateurs, au niveau des applications, ont pu ~tre entratn~s en 
quelques minutes. Quoique cette presentation porte sur ARK, le 
conflit entre r~alisme et magie soul~ve de son propre chef des 
questions, dont certaines sont bri~vement pr~sent~es en 
conclusion. 
Keywords: simulation, visual programming, Smalltalk, learnability, 
graphical interfaces 
Introduction 
The designer of a system for use by novices can gain great 
advantage by basing the interface on a known metaphor. 
If the 
computer behaves in a way analogous to a system already understood by 
the user, the learning time will be greatly reduced. Interface features 
that are true to the designer's metaphor might be called literal The 
learnability of literalism makes it a good thing. 
However, the designer can always provide the user with enhanced 
capabilities at the price of breaking out of the metaphor. These features 
might allow the user to do wonderful things that are far beyond the 
capabilities of literal features. Capabilities that violate the metaphor in 
order to provide enhanced functionality might be called magical The 
power of magic makes it a good thing. 
There is a tradeoff [11] between the learnability of literalism and 
the power of magic. I employ this tension as a way to present my 
experiences in designing and observing users of the Alternate Reality 
Kit, a metaphor-based system being developed for non-expert computer 
users. 
The Alternate Reality Kit (ARK) is intended to allow users to play 
in their own simulated worlds and to create new ones. ARK is based on 
a strong analogy to the physical world. 
Many of the important 
capabilities of ARK are literal: they are transcriptions into the computer 
of physical world behavior. Even though the system is designed for use 
by inexperienced users, ARK has certain magical characteristics. 
Observations of ARK users suggest that novices are not significantly 
61 
CHI 
+ 
GI 1987 
hampered by a small amount of magic. Although each magical feature 
requires a brief explanation, ARK's basic functionality can still be taught 
in a few minutes. 
This paper is about the Alternate Reality Kit: it is a brief 
introduction to the ARK user interface in terms of the magic-literalism 
dimension. 
A more complete description of the functionality and 
philosophy behind ARK is in reference [14]. 1 will not attempt much in 
the way of a general discussion of the tension between magic and 
literalism: I simply employ this tension as a useful way of analyzing the 
central features of ARK's interface. However, ARK does serve as an 
example of a magic vs. literalism tradeoff which I believe to be present 
in all user interfaces that are firmly grounded in a single metaphor. In 
the conclusion I will present some questions raised by the magical-literal 
view of this kind of user interface. 
Literalism vs. Magic in ARK 
The Alternate Reality Kit (ARK) [14] is a system for creating 
interactive animated simulations. ARK simulations are intended to 
enable the development of intuitive understanding of the simulation's 
interaction rules by making these rules appear as accessible physical 
objects called interactors; 
ARK also supports the modification and 
creation 
of new simulations from within the animated ARK 
environment. 
The interface is quite faithful to a physical-world metaphor: all 
objects have a visual image, a position, a velocity, and can experience 
forces. One of the objects is a hand, which the user controls with a 
mouse. With the hand, the user can carry objects, throw them, press 
buttons and operate slider controls (see Figure 1). As in the real world, 
many things are happening simultaneously: a pendulum can swing while 
numbers change on a control box in response to the operation of a slider. 
The intent is to have the user conclude very quickly that the screen 
depicts a physical world, and that the user is directly manipulating 
physical objects. This is the advantage of literalism -- interfaces strongly 
based on a well-known metaphor require very little explanation to users 
[4, 5,61. 
However, sticking completely to a metaphor can cripple a system's 
functionality [7, 10]. For example, an ARK user may wish to connect a 
simulated pushbutton to some ARK device, perhaps for turning the 
device on and off. Both the button and the device are depicted as 
physical objects that can be directly manipulated with the hand. Should 
the user be required to connect the button by drilling a hole in the ' 
device and cutting into metaphorical electrical work? Something like 
this would be required if ARK were perfectly analogous to the everyday 
physical world. In the design of ARK, I considered perfectly literal ways 
of connecting buttons to be too tedious. Instead, the ARK user connects 
the button simply by dropping it onto the device. Buttons have the 
message they send stamped on the surface - if the device does not 
understand the button's message, the button will fall right through the 
object (see Figure 2). If the button's message is meaningful, it will stick 
to the surface of the object. 
An invisible connection is established 
automatically, and the button is immediately functional. Furthermore, 
buttons can be created that cause non-physical effects such as doubling 
an object's size and mass, or causing the object to vanish. Features like 
these are called magical because they enable the user to do powerful 
things that are outside oft_he possibilities of the metaphor. 
Admittedly, literalism and magic are not part of conventional 
computer science parlance. 
However, I find them to be particularly 
appropriate for discussing ARK, where even the name "Alternate 
Reality Kit" suggests both the real (literal) and the ability to choose 
between or modify realities (magic). 
Although ARK is more literal than most systems, it does contain 
certain magical features which are useful where literalism would be 
limiting. But one of the lessons of ARK is that the literal aspects of the 
interface are often obvious while magical capabilities are harder to learn. 
In ARK, the time to explain the basics is actually measured in seconds. 
@ 
0 
iiiiiiiiiii~iiilHi!i 
iiiMotion'i!il 
i iii!iiiiii~iiiiiiiiii 
~~iiii}ii 
Gravltyiiiili 
Figure 1. 
Appearance of the 
screen as seen by a user of the 
Alternate Reality Kit. 
Each 
window 
and 
the 
objects 
it 
contains represent an alternate 
reality. 
The mouse-operated 
hand 
(near the center) 
is 
casting a shadow that indicates 
it 
is 
"above" 
the 
alternate 
realities. The hand is the user's 
means of interacting with the 
system. It is used for picking up 
and carrying objects, and for 
pressing 
buttons. 
Two 
interactors are present in the 
alternate reality under the hand. 
One, labeled "Gravity," causes 
a gravitational force field to be 
present; 
the 
other, 
labeled 
"Motion," 
causes objects to 
change their position according 
to their velocity. (The windows 
shown here are considerably 
smaller than 
those 
typically 
used in ARK.) 
62 
Figure 2. Manipulation of buttons. In (a), the user is preparing to 
pick up the "on off" button from the surface of the Vertical 
Launcher. In (b), the button is carried over to the simulated 
photograph. 
In (c), the button has been released. Since the 
photograph does not understand how to turn on or off, the button 
has fallen through~ 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
ill 
Every piece of added magic is relatively "expensive" because it requires 
its own explanation: it does not "come for free" as it does when the user 
realizes there is a physical metaphor. In designing ARK, I am therefore 
faced with a tension between the limitations imposed by literalism and 
the obscurity of magic. Or, in positive terms, between the power of 
magic, and the learnability of literalism. 
Overview of ARK 
ARK is a project under development in the System Concepts 
Laboratory of the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center: it is being 
implemented in the Smalltalk-80* programming environment [8]. The 
system described here has already evolved under the influence of user 
feedback, and will continue to do so. The six kinds of objects mentioned 
in this paper are shown in Table 1. 
The system consists of a collection of "physical" objects that can be 
manipulated with a simulated hand. Except for rare use of the keyboard 
for typing text, the hand is the user's sole means of interacting with the 
system. The ARK user can do three kinds of things with the hand: 
directly change an object's position or velocity (by carrying or throwing), 
send an object a message (by pressing a simulated button), and introduce 
a new object or button into the environment (by selecting from 
"pop-up" menus). 
The user can change the state or query objects by sending them 
messages: messages are represented by buttons. Examples of button 
* Smalltalk-80 is a trademark of the Xerox Corporation. In this paper 
the term "Smalltalk" refers to "the Smalltalk-80 language." 
CHI 
+ 
GI 1987 
messages are velocity, set mass to:(some parameter), and describe 
yourself. One special button, the message menu button, causes a very 
magical effect: attaching it to an object and pressing it will cause the 
object to create a menu that lists all of the messages the object 
understands. 
Selecting a message from this menu will cause a 
corresponding button to be created, attached to the object and ready for 
use. 
Buttons that send an unparameterized message with no response 
are caUed simple buttons and are illustrated in Table 1. 
Buttons 
requiring parameters or representing an object's reply to a message are 
called non-simple and are shown in Figures 3 and 4. 
The warehouse object contains one copy of every kind of object in 
the system, including one of each type from the underlying Smalltalk 
environment. By pressing the appropriate button, the user can cause the 
warehouse to display a menu listing all of the objects the warehouse 
contains. Selecting from the menu causes a copy of the named object to 
be introduced into the alternate reality. 
There are buttons that allow the user to create new kinds of objects 
and store them in the warehouse. Ways to combine existing buttons into 
new kinds of buttons are still being explored. 
Types of ARK User 
ARK, like some other visual programming environments, [2, 9], is 
intended to have more than one kind of user. The applications-leveluser 
might typically be a student carrying out a simulated lab. At a lower 
level, the simulation builder is the creator of a particular application. 
There may be a role for another layer below that, populated by 
individuals who create tools for use by simulation builders. 
So far, I have observed about 50 applications-level users and two 
simulation builders. 
Most applications-level users are part of an 
experiment studying people's reactions to the violation of physical laws 
[12]. These users do not have to create new objects, or new kinds of 
objects. The accumulated empirical evidence enlightens only certain 
Figure 
3. 
Buttons 
that 
ta) 
ire a parameter (such as 
set velocity to: button 
m here) have a small 
]" used for specifying 
parameter. 
In (a), the 
user 
reaches 
for the plug. In 
(b) 
the 
user 
has 
grabbed 
the plug and is 
carrying it over to the 
parameter object. In (c) 
the user has dropped the 
plug onto the object, and 
(c) 
is preparing to activate 
the button. 
Once the 
parameter is specified, 
the 
small 
dots 
start 
moving along the path 
connecting the plug to 
the button. 
(Only simple 
Q 
buttons, shown in table 1, 
"'.'.... 
have 
been 
used 
in 
the 
" ;~i~i~i~, 
experiments in which users 
have been observed.) 
63 
CHI 
+ 
GI 
1987 
portions of the interface: the applications-level users made no use of 
menus and the non-simple button types illustrated in Figures 3 and 4. 
Every user comes to the computer with expectations about what 
will be encountered. Some sophisticated computer users take slightly 
more time to learn the literal features of the interface -- they appear to 
expect more magic than ARK contains. On the other hand, extremely 
naive users (young children) have sometimes expected the interface to 
be more literal than it is, apparently expecting less magic. ARK's 
balance between literalism and magic seems about right for computer 
novices above the age of ten. However, the effect of user sophistication 
is not great: misunderstandings have always been correctable with one or 
two sentences. 
Limitation of the Magic-Literalism Analogy: External Factors in ARK 
This presentation of the Alternate Reality Kit depicts the designer 
as only violating a metaphor in order to provide enhanced functionality 
(magic). 
But sometimes designers face factors beyond their control. 
Input devices, computer performance limitations, or other constraints 
can cause the metaphor to be violated in a way that does not necessarily 
enhance functionality. These fixed requirements are called external 
factors because they are imposed upon the designer. That is not to say 
that external factors are unimportant - successfully presenting external 
factors to the user can be absolutely crucial. 
I have found external factors difficult to present as either literal 
features or magical enhancements to the ARK interface. 
In ARK, 
external factors typically degrade learnability Without enhancing 
functionality: I consider such features to be neither literal nor magical. 
For example, when an alternate reality contains a very large 
number of strongly interacting objects, the animation rate (frames per 
second) drops and it can become noticeably harder to grab and throw 
objects. 
The "jerky" motion of objects makes them look less like 
Figu re 4. Buttons that elicit a response from their message send 
are large objects that have a "view" rectangle for representing 
the result. 
Both the velocity button, and the negated button 
shown here receive answers to the messages they send. The 
answer is displayed as some text or graphics within the view 
rectangle. The answer is accessible as an object living within the 
view. Objects within the view rectangle can be accessed with 
buttons just like any other object. 
Here the negated button is 
attached to the TwoVector object displayed in the velocity 
button's view. ,Similarly, the plug specifying the parameter to the 
set velocity to button is specifying the TwoVector object in the 
negated button's view. 
Buttons that capture responses are 
somewhat magical, especially in their ability to represent objects 
that are "really there" in the view rectangle. (Buttons that 
represent responses have not been part of the experiments in 
which users have been observed.) 
real-world things, and makes them harder to interact with. This external 
factor has broken the metaphor in a way that degrades functionality. 
This behavior is clearly not literal. And even though it is outside the real 
world's behavior, I prefer not to use a sense-of-wonder term like 
"magic" for this odd and annoying visual phenomenon. 
A second example is the mouse, which is used to operate the hand. 
The use of an indirect input device like the mouse breaks the real world 
metaphor without providing enhanced functionality. 
As a pointing 
device, the mouse is known to take a small but finite amount of time to 
learn [3]. Furthermore, one mouse button is used to make the hand 
grab objects, another to make the hand activate the simulated buttons. 
Every observed user has at some point confused these two functions [1, 
13]. Not only does the mouse take a while to learn, it does not even 
enable users to do things within the capability of their physical world 
hand. 
Observations of the system's users indicate that these external 
factors are the most troubling aspects of the system. As indicated in 
Figure 5, the operation of the mouse and the occasionally slow 
animation rate are neither enhancements to the functionality nor aids to 
ARK's learnability. The ideal system would be one in which everything, 
including external factors, fit along the magical-literal spectrum. But 
due to unfortunate constraints, I believe that metaphor-based interfaces 
will usually have some features that are neither literal nor magical. 
Selected Interface Aspects 
This section describes in greater detail some of the aspects of the 
interface which have been used by applications-level users. This is not 
intended to be a complete list, but a sample of the more important 
aspects of the interface. For each feature listed, I evaluate the magic 
content, discuss the power vs. learnability tradeoff, and note user 
experiences. The more literal aspects are listed first. This section is 
summarized in Figure 5. 
Use of the hand: 
The user can pick up any object with the 
simulated hand. As the grasped object is carried about., it casts a shadow 
on the alternate reality beneath it. When a grasped object is released, it 
falls back into the alternate reality and maintains any velocity imparted 
by the hand's motion. 
In this way the user playing in the gravity 
simulation depicted in Figure 1 can throw the moon into orbit around 
the planet.. 
Magic vs. l.iteralism: Literal 
Power vs. Learnability: The hand has only limited abilities. It 
enables users to change position and velocity of objects, and establish 
physical contact relationships between objects. However, it contributes 
quite a bit to the user's understanding of the system's basics. Users need 
only be,told "This mouse moves the hand on the screen. The left 
mouse-burtonenables you to grab hold of an object.," and "Try throwing 
something." Some of this is about the mouse. The remainder of this 
brief explanation is about the use of the hand, from which most users 
infer the following: 
* The objects on the screen are physical entities. 
* Physical proximity has semantic content. (Only one subject, an 
experienced mouse user, has asked if it was necessary for the hand to be 
over an object in order to pick it up.) 
* The hand can carry an object and drop it at a new location, thus 
changing its position. 
* The hand can change an object's velocity. (After being invited to 
throw an object, some users ask how throwing is done. When asked to go 
ahead and guess, most of these users have guessed correctly: start the 
hand moving and release the held object. Experienced mouse users have 
64 
sometimes asked if throwing is accomplished by pressing a special 
mouse-button.) 
* The use of shadow to indicate that an object is "above" the 
reality has only been moderately successful. 
For a few users, an 
additional sentence or two of explanation is required. ("See the shadow? 
That indicates the object in the hand is hovering over the objects in the 
window.") 
Activation of Simple Buttons: A user playing in the planetary orbit 
simulation of Figure 1 may wish to suspend gravity temporarily. On the 
right side of the figure there is a kind of controller device labeled 
"Gravity" with an off button on its surface. All buttons have the name 
of the message they send stamped on them. 
The user activates a 
simulated button by positioning the hand over it and pressing the middle 
mouse button. Only simple buttons (as shown in Table 1) have been 
used by applications-level users: buttons which require parameters 
(Figure 3) or which both send messages and represent responses (Figure 
4) have net yet been used in ARK experiments. 
Magic vs. Literalism: Literal 
Power vs. Learnability: Buttons are moderately useful. They 
enable users to send a message to an object. They are fairly easy to 
explain: users seem to understand immediately what buttons are for. 
The only training time is spent in pointing out to the user the 
CHI 
+ 
GI 
characteristic visual presence of a button. 
The idea that an object 
responds to a button press in a way suggested by the name stamped on 
the button is simply assumed. Thus, without explicit instruction, the 
user adopts a model consistent with the picture of a button as a thing 
that "sends a message." The button builds on the importance of physical 
contact in establishing relationships between objects. 
Manipulating buttons: A simulated button can be picked up from 
the surface of an object and put down anywhere, even on top of certain 
other objects. A button will stick to the surface of any object that can 
respond to its message. Ira button is dropped on an object that does not 
understand its message, the button will "fall through" the object, failing 
to stick to its surface. Many buttons can be simultaneously attached to 
an object. Sometimes a button will be larger than the object upon which 
it rests. It is not uncommon for an object to have a button "hanging off 
the edge," or even completely covering the object upon which it rests. 
Magic vs. Literalism: Moderately Magical 
Power vs. Learnability: 
Buttons are easily connected and 
removed, enabling the user to communicate with objects in a flexible 
way. It is not uncommon to have several generally useful buttons laying 
about. The "selective sticking" of buttons prevents a certain class of 
semantic errors. (As an example, sending some text the message cube 
root would result in such an error.) 
1987 
iii!!iiiimk 
ii ..................................... jl!ilii!i!7"iiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
i . . . . . .  
} ~.~ .~r~r.~m 
I 
Table 1 
The Hand The hand is the user's primary means of interacting with the system. It is used to 
activate buttons and to carry objects. At left, the hand is shown in its normal "relaxed" 
position. At right, the hand is shown carrying a button. The shadow being cast indicates that 
the hand and its held object are in Meta Rea/ity. 
Simple Buttons 
User inputs originate through buttons. 
Buttons can be picked up and 
dropped on objects, then activated by the hand. Buttons bear the name of the message they 
send (e.g., the Xerox button is for making copies). Non-simple buttons (which require 
parameters, or which capture a response to a message) are depicted in Figures 3 and 4. 
The Warehouse The Warehouse icon "contains" one of every kind of object in the system, 
including those in the Smalltalk environment in which ARK is implemented. The objectMenu 
button creates a list of all the kinds of objects from which the user can select. The selected 
object is emitted into the alternate reality from the warehouse. 
Representatives Any Smalltalk object can be made to appear within ARK. If it is not itself a 
kind of ARK object, it will appear inside a representative object. A representative has an image 
or some text describing the object being represented. 
~iii~iiiiiiii~!iii,iiiiiiliiiiiiiiiiiiii- ii ~iiiiiiiiiii;~iiiiiiiiii~iii;iiiiiiiiiii;i~ 
i?i!i 
~ 
!iii:: I 
Slider Controls Sliders are a convenient way to specify numbers. The hand can grasp the 
tab in the center and move it along the groove, 
~c;~;~i~ii~ 
i iliTiiiiii~iiiiiiiiiii 
~ Niiiiiii 
Colision =iiii i iii Gravity 
EiE}i 
Interactors 
Interactors are the physical manifestation of the normally intangible rules of 
nature. The physical manifestation provides a place for interaction with the rule, as well as a 
tactile presence that denies the mystical character normally attributed to these universal laws. 
These highly magical objects are of central importance in the ARK strategy for enabling 
intuitive understanding of a simulation's interaction rules. 
65 
CHI 
+ 
GI 
1987 
While the manipulability of the buttons is useful, these aspects 
require a few sentences of explanation. The fact that a button will "stick 
to" or "fall through" an object depending on the object's ability to 
respond to the button's message is a bit of a tale. Uninformed users have 
sometimes discovered accidentally that buttons can be picked up from 
an object; they are slightly startled. Some of these users wonder if a 
button will still work when removed from the surface of an object and 
dropped offto the side. Some have dropped the button onto the surface 
of a large, non-understanding object, only to have the button 
"disappear." (Actually, the button is lying underneath the object, having 
fallen through.) 
Interactors: In ARK, an interaction law of the simulated universe 
(Newton's law of gravity, for example) is represented by a "physical" 
object called an interactor, lnteractors form an interface between the 
user and the fundamental laws of the simulation. 
Magic vs. Literalism: Highly Magical 
Power 
vs. 
Learnability: 
Interactors 
are 
the 
physical 
embodiment of normally intangible abstractions, and are therefore 
important actors in the story of how the design of ARK attempts to 
provide intuition by making things concrete. In enabling the user to 
change physical laws, interactors provide capabilities fundamentally 
beyond those suggested by the real-world metaphor. 
Most users have no trouble accepting the idea of a "control center" 
for gravity, for example. 
However, they do need to be explicitly 
introduced to the idea that an interactor object represents some 
abstraction. On occasion, users have had difficulty in understanding 
exactly what abstraction is being controlled. These users may require a 
minute or two of discussion to clarify the interactor's role in the 
simulation. While this is a short time in absolute terms, it is much longer 
than is required by any literal feature. 
Multiple Realities: When regarding the computer screen, the ARK 
user sees one or more possibly overlapping rectangular windows. Each 
window represents a separate alternate reality. 
To move between 
alternate realities, the user simply moves the hand over the exposed 
portion of the window, and that window will automatically become 
completely exposed, moving to the "top of the stack" of overlapping 
worlds. 
The user can carry objects between the various alternate 
realities. 
Magic vs. Literalism: Highly Magical 
Power vs. Learnabilitv: 
The use of overlapping windows 
brings the usual advantage of enlarging the virtual screen area. The 
provision of multiple realities enables users to organize their ARK tasks 
-- for example, one world can be used for building new objects, another 
for trying them out. 
For example, two side by side windows can 
facilitate comparison of separate worlds, each with its own speed of light, 
for example. 
Users understand the idea quite readily. A brief description and 
one or two trials are required before most users are comfortable with 
their ability to go "reality hopping." However, users who accidentally 
bring a buried alternate reality to the top are startled. 
In certain 
applications, objects may drift off the window, disappearing under t_he 
edge. 
Users are sometimes concerned or amused at this -- it is not 
always clear what has happened to the object. Can it be retrieved? Does 
it still exist? (In fact, the coordinate system for each window world is 
indefinitely large, and an object can go as far as is allowed by the 
computer's ability to allocate new words for storing its growing x and y 
coordinates.) 
As with the interactors, the absolute time to teach the use of 
overlapping worlds is short, but is longer than time taken by a typical 
literal interface feature. 
helpful 
Impact 
On 
Functionality 
!iiiii~%,,, .... 
MAGICAL 
=~iiii!!~iiiiiii~iii!iiiii!!iiii!iiiii!!~iii!iiii!i~!ii~ ~ .... 
Occasionally 
Slow Animation 
Rate 
LITERAL 
':%iiil 
Ioseso't"e"an  I 
Impact On 
Learning Time 
helpful -) 
Figure 5. Various aspects of the ARK interface are represented 
on a graph in which easier to learn things are to the right, and very 
useful things are toward the top. 
Interface aspects tend to lie on 
a line with magical features in the upper left, and literal features in 
the lower right. The existence of a void in the upper right is a sign 
of the fundamental tension between literalism and magic: 
interface 
designers 
can 
always 
provide 
more 
powerful 
functionality at the price of violating the metaphor. Sometimes a 
broken metaphor is not particularly enabling, as evidenced by 
ARK's occasionally slow animation rate and use of the mouse. 
(Menus have been included here even though they have only 
rarely been used as part of the user experiments with the system.) 
66 
The preceding list demonstrates the inverse correlation between 
power and learnability. 
Interface aspects that are literal are easily 
understood -- in fact, some important parts of the literal functions are 
simply assumed by the user. Those aspects that are magical are quite 
useful, but require the majority of the training time. ARK's limited use 
of magic does not prove too confusing for novices, and the total teaching 
time remains quite short. After a few minutes of explanation, most 
novices are able to use the capabilities outlined above. 
Conclusions and Questions 
I have used the magic-literalism tension to discuss some of the 
central features of the Alternate Reality Kit because it serves as a useful 
way to analyze some of ARK's design issues and user experiences. In 
particular, because a large portion of ARK is at the literalism end of the 
spectrum, many of/the important aspects do not need to be explicitly 
explained. Furthermore, although each magical aspect requires its own 
explanation, limited use of magic in ARK keeps the total teaching time 
quite low. User experiences indicate that applications-level functionality 
can be taught in a few minutes. 
Features that are neither magical 
enhancements nor literal adherents to the metaphor are the most 
troubling in ARK. 
CHI 
+ 
GI 1987 
The magic vs. literalism tradeoff may be an interesting perspective 
on other systems whose interfaces are centered about a single metaphor 
(such as other graphical programming environments or desktop-like 
window systems). Some questions are raised by this way of viewing 
metaphorical user interfaces. How does the designer decide when to 
implement a capability magically instead of literally? Literalism can be 
carried too far. When does an interface become so literal that it surprises 
even novice users? Building systems with both literal and magical ways 
of doing the same task may enable users to move smoothly into wizard 
status -- how is this best done? What is the minimum set of magical 
capabilities that allow users to build their own magic spells? 
Is it 
possible to find a metaphor that puts all external factors along the 
literalism-magic spectrum? Questions like these can lead to interesting 
discussions of ways to enable controlled release of the magic latent in 
computers. 
Acknowledgements 
The following individuals were sources of stimulating discussion 
and thoughtful comment: Sara Bly, Adele Goldberg, George Goodman, 
Laura Gould, Jane Laursen, Tim O'Shey, Dave Robson, and Frank 
Zdybel. 
References 
Bewly, W.L., 
Roberts, T.L., 
Schroit, D., 
and 
Verplank, 
W.L."Human Factors Testing in the design of Xerox's 8010 'Star' 
Office Workstation." Proceedings of the Conference on Human 
Factors in Computer Systems. (Boston, December 1983) pp. 72-77. 
Borning, A.H. The Programming Language Aspects of ThingLab, 
a Constraint-Oriented Simulation Laboratory. ACM Transactions 
on Programming Languages and Systems 3(4):353-387, October 
1982. 
Card, Moran, and Newell The Psychology of Human-Computer 
Interaction. 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, New 
Jersey, 1983. 
Carroll, J.M. and Mack, R.L. Metaphor, computing systems, and 
active learning. Int. J. Man-Machine Studies (1985) 22, pp. 39-57. 
Carroll, J.M. and Thomas, J.C. 
"Metaphor and the cognitive 
representation of computing systems." Yorkiown Heights; N.Y.: 
IBM Watson Research Center technical report no. RC 8302. (1980). 
Genmer, D. 
"The structure of analogical models in science." 
Report 4451 (Bolt, Beranek, and Newman, July 1980) 
Gittins, D. 
"Icon-based human-computer interaction." 
Int. J. 
Man-Machine Studies (1986) 24, pp. 519-543. 
Goldberg, A.J., and Robson, D. 
Smalltalk-80: The Language 
a~M its Implementation. 
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1983. 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
Gould, L., and Finzer, W. 
"Programming by Rehearsal." 
Technical Report SCL-84-1 (Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, 
.May, 1984). A short version appears in Byte Magazine, VoL 9 No. 
6, June 1984. 
Halasz, F., and Moran, T.P. 
"Analogy Considered Harmful." 
Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computer 
Systems. ( 
Gaithersburg, Maryland). March 1982. 
Norman, D.A. 
"Design Principles for Human-Computer 
Interfaces." Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in 
Computer Systems. (Boston, December 1983) pp. 1-10. 
O'Shea, T. and Smith, R.B. 
"Violating the Laws of Nature: 
Experiments in Understanding Physics by Exploring Alternate 
Realities." To appear in Proceedings of the 1987 Computer Assisted 
Learning Conference. (Glasgow, 1987). 
Price, L.A., and Cordova, C.A. 
"Use of Mouse Buttons." 
Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computer 
Systemx (Boston, December, 1983) pp. 262-266. 
Smith, R.B. 
"The Alternate Reality Kit: An Animated 
Environment for Creating Interative Simulations." Proceedings of 
the 1986 IEEE Computer Society Workshop on Visual Languages. 
(Dallas, June 1986) pp. 99-106. 
67 
