 
Croquet – A Collaboration System Architecture 
 
David A. Smith 
104 So. Tamilynn Cr. 
Cary NC, 27513 
davidasmith@ 
bellsouth.net 
 
Alan Kay 1 
1209 Grand Central Ave 
Glendale, CA  91201 
alan.kay@ 
viewpointsresearch.org 
 
Andreas Raab 
University of 
Magdeburg, Germany 
andreas.raab@ 
squeakland.org 
 
David P. Reed 
MIT Media Laboratory 
20 Ames Street 
Room E15-492 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
dpreed@reed.com
ABSTRACT1 
Croquet [18] is a computer software architecture built from 
the ground up with a focus on deep collaboration between 
teams of users. It is a totally open, totally free, highly 
portable extension to the Squeak [5] programming system. 
Croquet is a complete development and delivery platform 
for doing real collaborative work. There is no distinction 
between the user environment and the development 
environment.  
Croquet is focused on interactions inside of a 3D shared 
space that is used for context based collaboration, where 
each user can see all of the others and what their current 
focus is. This allows for an extremely compelling shared 
experience. A new collaboration architecture/protocol called 
TeaTime has been developed to enable this functionality. 
The rendering architecture is built on top of OpenGL [13]. 
KEYWORDS 
Croquet, collaboration, User Interface, 3D graphics, 
Squeak, Smalltalk, TeaTime, OpenGL, peer-to-peer. 
INTRODUCTION 
Croquet was built to answer a simple question. If we were 
to create a new operating system and user interface knowing 
what we know today, how far could we go? What kinds of 
decisions would we make that we might have been unable 
to even consider 20 or 30 years ago, when the current 
operating systems were first created? 
The landscape of possibilities has evolved tremendously in 
the last few years. Without a doubt, we can consider 
Moore’s law and the Internet as the two primary forces that 
are colliding like tectonic plates to create an enormous 
mountain range of possibilities. Since every existing OS 
was created when the world around it was still quite flat, 
they were not designed to truly take advantage of the 
heights that we are now able to scale.  
What is perhaps most remarkable about this particular 
question is that in answering it, we find that we are 
revisiting much of the work that was done in the early 
sixties and seventies that ultimately led to the current set of 
popular system architectures. One could say that in reality, 
                                                           
1 Sr. Fellow Hewlett Packard and President, Viewpoints Research 
Institute, Inc. 
 
this question was asked long ago, and the strength of the 
answer has successfully carried us for a quarter century. On 
the other hand, the current environments are really just the 
thin veneer over what even long ago were seriously 
outmoded approaches to development and design. Many of 
the really good fundamental ideas that people had were left 
on the cutting room floor.  
That isn’t to say that they thought of everything either. A 
great deal has happened in the last few decades that allows 
for some fundamentally new approaches that could not have 
been considered at the time.  
We are making a number of assumptions: 
 
Hardware is fast – really fast, but other than for booting 
Windows or playing Quake no one cares – nor can they 
really use it. We want to take advantage of this power 
curve to enable a richer experience. 
 
3D Graphics hardware is really, really fast and getting 
much faster. This is great for games, but we would like 
to unlock the potential of this technology to enhance the 
entire user experience. 
 
Late bound languages have experienced a renaissance 
in both functionality and performance. Extreme late-
bound systems like LISP and Smalltalk have often been 
criticized as being too slow for many applications, 
especially those with stringent real-time demands. This 
is simply no longer the case, and as Croquet 
demonstrates, 
world-class 
performance 
is 
quite 
achievable on these platforms. 
 
Communication has become a central part of the 
computing experience, but it is still done through the 
narrowest of pipes, via email or letting someone know 
that they have just been converted into chunks in 
Quake. We want to create a true collaboration 
environment, where the computer is not just a world 
unto itself, but a meeting place for many people where 
ideas can be expressed, explored, and transferred.  
 
Code is just another media type, and should be just as 
portable between systems. Late binding and component 
architectures allow for a valuable encapsulation of 
behaviors that can be dynamically shared and 
exchanged.  
 
The system should act as a virtual machine on top of 
any platform. We are not creating just another 
application that runs on top of Windows or the 
 
Macintosh – we are creating a Croquet Machine that is 
highly portable and happens to run bit-identical on 
Windows, Macintosh, Linux, and ultimately on its own 
hardware… anywhere we have a CPU and a graphics 
processor. Once the virtual machine has been ported, 
everything else follows; even the bugs are the same. 
Most attempts at true multiplatform systems have 
turned out to be dangerous approximations (cf. Java) 
rather 
than 
the 
bit-identical 
“mathematically 
guaranteed” ports that are required. 
 
There are no boundaries in the system. We are creating 
an environment where anything can be created; 
everything can be modified, all while still inside the 3D 
world. There is no separate development environment, 
no user environment. It is all the same thing. We can 
even change and author the worlds in collaboration 
with others inside them while they are operating . 
 
Figure 1. Croquet multi-user environment. 
 
Croquet Is… 
Croquet is a computer software architecture built from the 
ground up with a focus on deep collaboration between 
teams of users.  
Croquet is a totally ad hoc multi-user network. It mirrors 
the current incarnation of the World Wide Web in many 
ways, in that any user has the ability to create and modify a 
“home world” and create links to any other such world. But 
in addition, any user, or group of users (assuming 
appropriate sharing privileges), can visit and work inside 
any other world on the net. Just as the World Wide Web has 
links between the web pages, Croquet allows fully dynamic 
connections between worlds via spatial portals. The key 
differences are that Croquet is a fully dynamic environment, 
everything is a collaborative object, and Croquet is fully 
modifiable at all times. 
The current computer user paradigm is based upon a 
completely closed individually focused system. The user has 
a very low-bandwidth communication capability via e-mail, 
or instant messaging, but outside of some very simplistic 
document sharing capabilities, the user is quite alone on his 
desktop.  
Croquet has been focused on high bandwidth collaboration 
from its inception. Simply put, the fundamental building 
block of the Croquet architecture is a system that makes 
every single object in the system collaborative.  
Croquet’s collaboration architecture is based upon the 
concept of replicated versioned objects coordinated by a 
universal timebase embedded in the communications 
protocol. This part of the architecture is referred to as 
TeaTime. 
One way to think of the Croquet environment is as a high 
bandwidth conference phone call. Once a connection is 
made, the user not only has voice communication with the 
other participants, he also has the ability to exchange 
documents, 
collaboratively 
design 
systems, 
perform 
complex simulations, develop complex project plans, and 
manage complex projects.  
Croquet utilizes OpenGL as the basis of its rendering 
/component framework called TeaPot. The architecture 
utilizes a semi-retained model, such that it uses a rendering 
hierarchy based upon dynamically composable objects, but 
each of these objects has full access to the OpenGL libraries 
and can extend the capabilities of the rendering engine in 
virtually unlimited ways. 
Squeak is… 
Croquet is built on top of Squeak [5], a modern variant of 
Smalltalk, hence it is a pure object oriented based system. 
This allows for significant flexibility for the design and the 
nature of the protocols and architectures that have been 
developed.  
Squeak is a 21st century dynamic-object wide-spectrum 
operating and authoring environment derived from the 
1970s Xerox PARC Smalltalk [4] system in which 
overlapping window GUIs, Desk Top Publishing, media 
authoring, and many other familiar software systems were 
first developed. Several of the authors of Squeak were 
principals at Xerox and were co-creators of many of the 
PARC inventions. 
An essential part of our development process is Squeak’s 
ability to keep the system running while testing and 
especially while making changes. Squeak allows even 
major changes to be performed incrementally and they take 
no more than a fraction of a second to effect. Another key 
feature of Squeak is its generalized storage allocator and 
garbage collector that is not only efficient in real-time (so 
that animations and dynamic media of many kinds can be 
played while the gc is collecting), but that allows reshaping 
of objects to be done safely. 
 
Related Work  
There are a number of seminal efforts over many years to 
which Croquet owes a great deal. Many of these early 
efforts were the first building blocks of the current popular 
windowing computer interface and usability paradigms. 
What is particularly interesting is that the focus of the 
Croquet project tends to be on the parts of these early efforts 
that were not picked up by what has become mainstream 
computing. 
Sutherland’s work [20] on direct manipulation and 
modeling of graphical object based entities clearly 
established the first true fundamental steps toward an 
interactive human computer user experience. Not only did 
he establish a great deal of the fundamental methods for 
how to create and manipulate interactive environments that 
are still quite relevant, but his focus was on creating a tool 
that would fundamentally amplify human capabilities.  
His further work on the “Ultimate Display”[21] – the first 
immersive 3D experience, demonstrated the potential, still 
unrealized, of 3D interactive environments as the basis of a 
complete user experience to display and interact with 
computer data, creating "a looking glass" into what he 
described as a "mathematical wonderland." His vision of the 
system would represent data in 3-dimensional form, 
allowing the construction of entirely believable 3-
dimensional, computer controlled, virtual worlds. He went 
much further than this in his description of the potential. 
"The ultimate display” he wrote, “ would, of course, be a 
room within which the computer can control the existence 
of matter. A chair displayed in such a room would be good 
enough to sit in. Handcuffs displayed in such a room would 
be confining, and a bullet displayed in such room would be 
fatal. With appropriate programming such a display could 
literally be the Wonderland into which Alice walked." 
The efforts at Xerox PARC under the leadership of Alan 
Kay that drove the development of both pure object oriented 
development environments in the form of Smalltalk and 
powerful bit-mapped display based user interfaces was key 
[7]. In some ways, all we are doing here is extending this 
model to 3D and adding a new robust object collaboration 
model.  
Douglas Engelbart’s videoed first demonstration in 1968 of 
everything from a mouse to hypertext, object addressing and 
dynamic 
file 
linking, 
and 
especially shared-screen 
collaboration involving two persons at different sites 
communicating over a network with audio and video 
interface has been a major inspiration to this project. It is 
telling that this level of rich, deep collaboration between 
widely separated physical environments has still not been 
properly achieved. [2] 
The Croquet component model architecture is similar to the 
OpenDoc system developed by Apple [1] and the Squeak 
2D Morphic architecture developed by John Maloney [8] 
Both of these were designed around composable 2D objects 
– or components. The main ideas behind these systems are 
that the majority of the environment interactions that the 
components have to deal with are already available in the 
base classes that make up the system. The programmer’s 
task is simply to override the behaviors of the objects – how 
they render themselves, and how they respond to “stimuli” 
from their surrounding components and from the user. Then 
the programmer and ultimate user can “compose” these 
intelligent blocks to form a useful document or application. 
Smith’s work on ICE – the Interactive Collaboration 
Environment, a multi-user shared component environment 
and later the Virtus OpenSpace architecture [17] acted as an 
important guide to the resulting Croquet system and in a 
sense Croquet is a far more complete result of this work.  
Fisher et al [3] developed a powerful, totally immersive 3D 
working environment. This system included the ability to 
dynamically interact with the system via 3D menus and 
window documents, and the ability of the user to directly 
manipulate his position and orientation inside the world and 
interact with the objects that inhabited it. Further, the 
system could interact with the user as if he were just 
another object inhabiting the space. The best example of 
this was the virtual escalator that the user could step on that 
would then carry him up to another floor. 
The TeaTime time based collaboration protocol/architecture 
is directly based upon early work of Reed [14, 15]. 
Jefferson's work [6] is related, but does not include the idea 
of maintaining a partial history, managing replicated 
objects, or incorporating two-phase commit. Miller and 
Dennis’s Timewarp [9] protocol extends Jefferson's work to 
support "multiple versions", a central concept in TeaTime. 
Mirtich [11] employed the timewarp model to implement a 
graphics simulation architecture for maintaining complex 
physical modeled state. 
CROQUET ARCHITECTURE 
Like any complex system, it is impossible to account for the 
architecture of Croquet without describing its various pieces 
and the interrelationships they share with each other.  
Croquet has been designed to operate as a peer-to-peer 
architecture. This ensures the greatest level of flexibility in 
the design of the system and its ultimate usability. All 
objects are symmetric in their ability to act both as local and 
remote recipients of the same messages. There is no 
intermediate step to be performed to interpret and 
rebroadcast these messages. A central server can be used to 
establish the initial connections.  
The peer-to-peer architecture is also in keeping with the 
philosophical roots of Croquet, which is to act as a broad-
band phone call (or better, as a conference call). Though a 
central server may play some role in a phone connection, its 
role is strictly limited to redirecting the pertinent 
information with no changes. Any messages sent from a 
 
Croquet user will arrive and be used by all other users 
without intermediate interpretation. This has the additional 
benefit of dramatically simplifying secure data transfer.  
 
Figure 2: The other user is dragging a window up into 
the air. 
A remote user can do anything in this peer-to-peer shared 
world that you can. The environment acts as a single shared 
place that every inhabitant can manipulate and modify. You 
have a context to see and understand where the other user’s 
interest is and further, what it is they are doing. 
The key part of the architecture making up Croquet 
enabling this rich level of peer-to-peer interaction is 
TeaTime, which is the basis for component object-object 
communication and world/object synchronization, including 
initial content synchronization.  
The Croquet component architecture is an extension to the 
base TeaTime class structure to support user/system 
interactions with the object and the objects ability to 
perform internal TeaTime based simulations and external 
rendering.  
A user interface has been developed that allows the user to 
create and manipulate objects inside the virtual world as 
well as easily traverse it. It is important to note that even the 
user interface is more a property of the object that represents 
the user in the space, and that this can easily be modified to 
support fundamentally different approaches. 
The Teapot graphics engine is based upon OpenGL. The 
system is built around the ideas of a retained graphical 
engine pipeline, but with the developer retaining the ability 
to make direct calls to the OpenGL library at any of the 
nodes.  
A scripting language has been developed that is focused on 
extremely high-level control of objects that make up the 
Croquet environment. Though this scripting language is 
ideal for relatively naïve users of the system, it is intended 
to be used for virtually all high level control and interaction. 
It is designed to be implicitly collaborative, so that the users 
need not even be aware of the fact that all scripted actions 
result in synchronous responses across the peer-to-peer 
network. 
TeaTime: 
A 
SCALABLE 
REAL-TIME 
MULTI-USER 
ARCHITECTURE 
TeaTime is the basis for object-object communication and 
synchronization. It is designed to support multi-user 
applications that can be scaled to huge numbers of users in 
a common space, concurrently interacting. The most directly 
visible part of this architecture is the TObject class which is 
used to define and construct subclassed Tea objects. A Tea 
object acts with the property that messages sent to it are 
redirected to replicated copies of itself on other users 
participating machines in the peer-to-peer network. All of 
the interesting objects inside of Croquet are constructed out 
of subclasses of TObject. This messaging protocol supports 
a coordinated “distributed two-phase commit” that is used 
to control the progression of computations at the 
participating user sites. 
In one way, the protocols we have developed are simply an 
extension of the message passing model employed by 
Squeak. This is really a meta-protocol, as any message may 
be dynamically redirected to the entire group of users while 
maintaining the appropriate deadline based scheduling. 
TeaTime is designed to allow for a great deal of adaptability 
and resilience, and works on a heterogeneous set of 
resources. Rather than develop highly specific, optimized 
algorithms, TeaTime is a framework of abstraction that 
works over a range of implementations that can be evolved 
and tuned over time, both within an application, and across 
applications. This approach is based on the work of Reed 
[14, 15] since the mid 70s. 
Elements of approach 
 
A coordinated universal timebase embedded in 
communications protocol. 
 
Replicated, versioned objects – unifying replicated 
computation and distribution of results. 
 
Replication strategies – that separate the mechanisms 
of replication from the behavioral semantics of objects. 
 
Deadline-based scheduling extended with failure and 
nesting. 
 
A coordinated “distributed two-phase commit” that is 
used to control the progression of computations at 
multiple sites, to provide resilience, deterministic 
results, and adaptation to available resources. Uses 
distributed sets. 
 
Time-synchronized I/O. Input and output to real-time 
devices are tied to coordinated universal time. 
Synchronous vs. asynchronous computing? 
The key issue is that we want to be able to provide a 
continuous experience that coordinates users at multiple 
locations, interacting in a tightly collaborative way. It isn’t 
 
unreasonable to expect that all users can see the effect of 
actions at other sites within 10’s of milliseconds. 
Consequently, the approach we propose is an architecture 
that is synchronous to the degree that I/O is synchronized, 
but at the same time allows for adaptation of computational 
strategies. 
The key idea for I/O coordination is that input and output 
events (to interactive devices) are synchronized with global 
universal time, which is coordinated among all sites 
involved in a computation. 
At the same time, objects behave like processes that exist in 
time, and each object’s behavior is implemented by 
methods that explicitly manage the temporal evolution of 
the object. In a sense, object internal states are maintained 
as ordered histories, and operations are performed at 
“pseudo-time” instants that are properly ordered with 
respect to I/O operations whose data connect with the 
objects. 
Device I/O is temporally ordered as well. I/O events exist in 
real time, and provide the coordination between real time 
and “pseudo-time” that is necessary and sufficient to 
achieve the proper user interface behavior. This provides an 
adaptive approach to real time programming that is not 
limited to “real time programming”. 
A Perspective On This Approach 
The standard view of a networked virtual environment 
implementation describes the system as a set of state 
variables that represent instantaneous system state. [16] 
Temporal changes are reflected as a sequence of updates to 
elements of state, and communications distributes the 
updated state values. This essentially decouples processing 
from "static" state - that is state that does not change 
without operation by an external processor that reads and 
updates it. The model separates processing from storage, 
and treats consistency as a property of the stored state. 
Displayed information is then derived from a snapshot of 
the stored state. 
Our view takes Alan Kay's original idea [7] of objects as 
entities that have behaviors, where messages affect the 
behavior (state variables are invisible outside the object, 
and equivalent behavior has meaning independent of how, 
or even whether, state is represented in any particular way). 
This allows us to think of self-contained objects that have 
dynamic behavior even when not driven by external 
processors. In essence, objects exist in both space and time. 
Croquet objects interact by exchanging messages. The 
Croquet view of objects easily incorporates I/O devices, and 
even real-world objects outside the system, as first class 
objects in a natural way, whereas modeling objects as 
abstractions of storage only cannot represent such things as 
normal objects. 
In Croquet, computational time and real time are loosely 
coupled. The code that executes the dynamic behavior of 
objects typically can execute a lot faster than the real-time 
behavior represented, so an object can carry out many 
seconds worth of behavior per second, if left to itself. The 
Croquet system's job is to coordinate the execution of 
objects so that all behaviors that can have a visible effect 
are completed in time to communicate those effects through 
the system interfaces. 
Since this is the only constraint, objects in the Croquet 
environment are free to implement a wide variety of 
strategies for computing their behaviors. This kind of 
object-specific strategy dramatically reduces the need for 
lock-step coordination among distributed concurrent 
activities. Because they maintain some element of past 
history in the object representations, this kind of approach 
requires additional storage overhead per object. But the 
benefit of dramatically better scalability and reduced latency 
far outweigh the cost of extra storage. 
The other key idea in TeaTime is our approach to resilience 
and fault tolerance. Most large scale distributed virtual 
environments are quite difficult to handle because at any 
point in time some elements may become disconnected and 
other elements may be dynamically added. We recognize 
this issue in the Croquet object model - each object is 
responsible for maintaining sufficient information to recover 
from system disruptions. The key idea in TeaTime is that 
the state of objects evolves through a distributed two-phase 
commit protocol. Behaviors of all objects that influence 
each other are first computed, contingent on completion of 
all dependent object behaviors, and then those behaviors are 
atomically committed. If the behaviors are not completed in 
time, all contingent calculations are undone by the 
individual objects. 
The principle of giving an object responsibility for its own 
behavior allows for a wide variety of strategies for 
individual objects to implement the proper resilience and 
recovery. In a networked virtual environment, these 
strategies can include dynamically adaptive behavior that 
can cope with heterogeneous hardware, wide variations of 
delay, and so forth. Applications programmers can tune 
applications to use new strategies that derive from the 
unique requirements of their application objects, or use 
packaged libraries that embed those strategies in abstract 
object classes that can be specialized for specific 
implementation 
COMPONENTS 
We use the term “component” to describe the basic unit of 
composition in the Croquet 3D environment The TeaPot 
suite of component level classes are built on top of the 
TObject base class. The base class of these components is 
TFrame. The subclasses of TFrame act as frames in an 
OpenGL rendering hierarchy, as event handlers, and as time 
based simulation objects as described above as part of 
TeaTime.  
 
Rendering Engine 
The philosophy behind Croquet’s TeaPot rendering engine 
is based on allowing the programmer complete access and 
control of the underlying graphics library, in this case 
OpenGL, while at the same time, providing a rich 
framework within which to embed these extensions with a 
minimal level of effort. This allows the naïve graphics 
programmer and 3D artist a way to easily create interesting 
graphic artifacts with minimal effort, yet allows the expert 
the ability to add fundamental extensions to the system 
without the need to modify the underlying architecture.  
A rendering frame includes a transform matrix which 
defines the orientation and position of the object in a 3D 
space relative to its parent object in the hierarchy as well as 
the ability to render itself in that position in global space. A 
rendering message is sent to the object when its position in 
the hierarchy is reached. The object then calls the 
appropriate OpenGL library functions to render the object. 
Event Manager 
An event handler can respond to user events such as 
keyboard and mouse/pointer events. Again, this interface is 
quite extensible by the programmer, but the default is that 
the TCamera carries a TPointer object which tracks the 
objects that are underneath the current mouse position. A 
TPointer is a 3D analog to the mouse event object. Instead 
of being just a 2D position on the screen, the pointer 
includes vector information, in this case from the camera to 
the selected object in both global and local (to the selected 
object) frame transforms.  
Keyboard events are also forwarded to the currently selected 
object. This model allows us to embed 2D objects into a 
scene, where the containing 3D object simply converts the 
TPointer vector data back into a 2D mouse position on the 
surface of the 2D object. 
CROQUET SCRIPT 
Our goal in developing a scripting language is to provide 
ways to dynamically adjust the complexity that's exposed to 
the user. E.g., we know we are going to have a variety of 
users, starting from kids over graphics designers up to 
hardcore hackers. All of them need different levels of 
accessibility and the key question is how we can give them 
access at the level they can deal with. 
The way we are addressing this problem is by conceptually 
"slicing" the system along various boundaries. The first 
"slice" is what we find in the TFrame hierarchy - a user at 
this level has access to the "guts of the system" being able 
to manipulate Croquet objects at a very low level. The 
second one is a side-ways "slice" which effectively 
encapsulates the core notions of the framework and exposes 
a simplified interface to scripting users. Most of what can 
be done here in terms of "modifying the framework" 
happens by parameterization; the intrinsic behavior of 
frames (such as rendering or picking) cannot be touched 
from here. Since hardly any user of the system will ever 
have the need to do this, this seems to be the place where 
most scripting activities are going to happen. The third 
"slice" is one that provides an even more simplified view on 
objects with a different user interface for scripting (tile-like 
interfaces such as that found in Squeak’s eToys). Here, we 
aim for supporting users who start learning the system by 
providing them with the essential vocabulary for 
manipulating aspects and the core properties of these 
objects. 
By providing these different ways to access the system we 
are able to define learning curves in terms of what users 
have to know when and where. As we grow in our 
explorations of the system we are able to teach users more 
of the aspects that make it tick. We are aware that many 
users will not go "deeply enough" into the system to (say) 
manipulate the core framework notions, yet if there is a 
need to do this, they can. The scripting system provides a 
learning curve with "intermediate plateaus" along the path. 
USER INTERFACE 
A key part of the Croquet architecture is that the user 
interface is just another collection of objects that can easily 
be replaced or enhanced. The way the user controls his 
position in space and how he manipulates objects inside of 
it is controlled by a camera object which is easily replaced.  
 
Figure 3: The user moves forward and back by moving 
the mouse up or down, and rotates by either moving the 
mouse to the left or right.  
In the current system, to move around inside the world, just 
click and hold the right mouse button. Where you click 
relative to the cross hair determines how you move. The 
closer you are to the cross hair, the slower you will move. 
To move forward, move the cursor on top of the cross hair 
and click. The distance from the center determines your 
forward velocity. Click and hold just above the cross hair 
and you will move forward very slowly. Click far from the 
cross hair and you will move quickly. 
 
If you move the mouse underneath the cross hair, you will 
move backwards. Moving it right rotates you to the right. 
Again, distance determines velocity – in this case, angular 
velocity, or the speed at which you rotate. If you are directly 
over or under the cross hair you will move in a straight line 
with no rotation. If you move directly to the left or right of 
the cross hair, you will rotate around your center without 
any forward or backward motion. If you put the cursor in 
just above and to the right of the cross hair you will move 
forward a bit and rotate to the right a bit – all at the same 
time. This allows you to walk in a circle.  
Objects can be selected and manipulated just as they are in 
2D space. Simply click and drag with the left mouse button. 
A 3D window can be dragged, resized, and even rotated – 
depending upon where on the window’s frame you select. 
Additional controls are available through 3D buttons on top 
of the window. Simply click and release as you do in a 2D 
environment. 
Figure 4: An open portal. We can see into the linked 
Space, in this case the entrance to a multiplayer game. 
SPACES and PORTALS 
Simply put, a Space is a place. In Croquet, a space is a 
container of objects, including often the user. A good 
example of a space might be a child’s play room. All of his 
toys are objects that happen to be lying on the floor, or 
perhaps put away. A child can always come into the room 
to play, or even pick up a toy and carry it outside. In 
Croquet, Spaces can act like rooms, but they can also act as 
landscapes, or virtual conference rooms, or any kind of 3D 
container of any size. 
Portals are simply a 3D spatial connection between spaces. 
If you place one portal in one space, and a second portal in a 
second space and link them, then you can view from one 
space into the other. In the example of the child’s room, a 
portal is simply the door to the hallway. The hallway is just 
another space. One key difference between Croquet portals 
and spaces and the real world of course is the concept of 
actual versus virtual location. In the real world, the hallway 
must be physically next to the child’s play room, or the door 
simply won’t go anywhere – at least it won’t lead into the 
hall. In the virtual world, a portal can connect ANY two 
spaces, even if one is located on a computer half a world 
away. 
Physical 
location 
doesn’t 
mean 
anything. 
Connections are all virtual. Consider as an example, the 
mirror. In Croquet, a mirror is actually a portal that happens 
to be linked back to itself. In other words, it is actually a 
door that happens to open into the room it is leaving from. 
Figure 5: Here the portal has been rotated toward the 
user. Just like a mirror, we get a slightly different view 
into the game world by rotating its “container”. 
One of the key aspects for Croquet is the ability to have a 
portal dynamically move around in a space, while allowing 
the proper view through the portal. This is a bit strange, but 
it works like this: when you look through a window, what 
you see is determined partially by your position relative to 
the window. If you move to your left, you can see more of 
the space to your right (and vice versa). But, if you could 
pick up the window and move it relative to your position - 
instead of you moving relative to its position, the exact 
same thing should happen. It should be much like picking 
up a box and looking through a hole in it. You turn the box 
around to see different areas. 
The big win for portals is that they allow the user to jump 
from one virtual space to another by simply walking 
through the portal, just as the child walked through the door 
from his play room. What is different in Croquet is that the 
portal can lead to anywhere in the virtual world. In turn, 
portals that are contained within these spaces can 
themselves lead to other worlds. This essentially replicates 
the workings of the World Wide Web as these portal 
“links” can point to any other connected machine on the net. 
FURTHER WORK 
Croquet will include both a robust IP telephony capability, 
in keeping with our philosophy of the system acting as a 
broad band telephone call, and an instant messaging system 
that will act as the dial-tone and ring tone – where other 
 
users can indicate their interest in initiating a collaboration 
session. 
A name space and security model is being developed. Our 
early study seems to indicate that a capabilities model 
similar to that used by the “E” [10] language is the proper 
course. 
Preliminary work has been done on a multi-dimensional 
matrix package. The focus of this work is to develop a very 
high-performance mathematical package for use in 
simulation and rendering. 
Sound is a crucial part of any immersive environment. We 
are studying the developing industry standards for 3D 
sound. In particular, the work in OpenAL [12] seems to be 
promising. 
CONCLUSION 
Croquet has been designed from the ground up with a focus 
on enabling large scale peer-to-peer collaboration inside of 
a compelling shared 3D environment. A number of new 
technologies have been developed to support the robust 
deployment and development of this system including the 
TeaTime 
communication/collaboration 
architecture/ 
protocol, TeaPot, a semi-retained graphics engine based 
upon OpenGL, a powerful space and portal paradigm which 
mirrors web pages and links on the web, and a scripting 
engine that enables relatively naïve users to develop 
powerful multi-user applications using Croquet. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank Kim Rose, Michael Rueger, Bill Cole, Michael 
Moody, and of course the Squeak Central team of Dan 
Ingalls, Ted Kaehler, Scott Wallace, Andreas Raab and 
John Maloney. The Croquet project was generously 
supported by Hewlett Packard Corporation, Chris Cole, and 
Applied Minds, Inc. 
REFERENCES 
1. Apple Computer, Inc. OpenDoc Programmer’s Guide 
for the Mac OS. Addison Wesley, 1995. 
2. Engelbart, Douglas, 1968 NLS Demonstration Video: 
http://sloan.stanford.edu/mousesite/1968Demo.html.  
3. Fisher, Scott S., James Humphries, Michael McGreevy, 
Warren Robinett, “The Virtual Environment Display 
System,” 1986 ACM Workshop on Interactive 3D 
Graphics.  
4. Goldberg, Adele, David Robson, Smalltalk-80: the 
language and its implementation, Addison-Wesley 
Longman Publishing Co., Inc., Boston, MA, 1983 
5. Ingalls, Dan, Ted Kaehler, John Maloney, Scott 
Wallace, Alan Kay. Back to the Future: The Story of 
Squeak, A Practical Smalltalk Written in Itself, in 
Squeak: OpenPersonal Computing and Multimedia ed. 
Guzdial, Mark and Kim Rose. Prentice Hall, 2002 
6. Jefferson, David R. “Virtual Time”. ACM Transactions 
on Programming Languages and Systems, 7(3):404-
425, July 1985. 
7. Kay, Alan. "The Early History of SmallTalk", in 
Bergin, Jr., T.J., and R.G. Gibson. History of 
Programming Languages - II, ACM Press, New York 
NY, and Addison-Wesley Publ. Co., Reading MA 
1996, pp. 511-578, 
8. Maloney, John. “An Introduction to Morphic: The 
Squeak User Interface Framework”, in Squeak: 
OpenPersonal 
Computing 
and 
Multimedia 
ed. 
Guzdial, Mark and Kim Rose. Prentice Hall, 2002. 
9. Miller, John A. and Aideen Dennis, "Hybrid Time 
Warp (HYT): A Protocol for Parallel Database 
Transaction Management," UGA-CS Technical Report, 
University of Georgia (December 1996) 42 pages. 
10. Miller, Mark and Marc Stiegler. “E” Website: 
http://www.erights.org.  
11. Mirtich, B., Timewarp “Rigid Body Simulation”, ACM 
SIGGRAPH 2000 Proceedings, pps 193-200, July 
2000. 
12. OpenAL Web Site: http://www.openal.org/home/. 
13. OpenGL Architecture Review Board, Mason Woo, 
Jackie Neider, Tom Davis, Dave Shreiner, OpenGL 
Programming Guide, Third Edition. Addison-Wesley. 
1999. 
14. Reed, David Patrick, Naming and Synchronization in a 
Decentralized Computer System, Ph.D. thesis, M. I. T. 
Dep't of EE & CS, September 15, 1978. Available as 
MIT Laboratory Computer Science Technical Report 
MIT/LCS/TR-205. 
15. Reed, David P., “Implementing atomic actions on 
decentralized data”, ACM Transactions on Computer 
Systems 1, 1 (February 1983), pp. 3-23. 
16. Singhal, Sandeep, Michael Zyda. Networked Virtual 
Environments: Design and Implementation. Addison 
Wesley, 1999. 
17. Smith, 
David 
A. 
OpenSpace: 
A 
Small 
System 
Architecture. 
Virtus 
Corporation. 
Unpublished 
Document. 1994. 
18. Smith, David A., Andreas Raab, David P. Reed, Alan 
Kay. Croquet User Manual v.0.01 Web site: 
http://www.opencroquet.org.. 
19. Squeak Web Site: http://www.squeak.org/ 
20. Sutherland, I. Sketchpad: A Man-Machine Graphical 
Communications System, MIT PhD Thesis, 1963. 
21. Sutherland, I. “The Ultimate Display”., Proceedings of 
IFIPS Congress 1965, New York, New York, May 
1965, Vol. 2, pp. 506-508. 
 
