IOP PUBLISHING
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PHYSICS
Eur. J. Phys. 28 (2007) S83–S94
doi:10.1088/0143-0807/28/3/S08
RealTime Physics: active learning labs
transforming the introductory
laboratory
David R Sokoloff1, Priscilla W Laws2
and Ronald K Thornton3
1 University of Oregon, USA
2 Dickinson College, USA
3 Tufts University, USA
Received 25 September 2006, in ﬁnal form 11 January 2007
Published 30 April 2007
Online at stacks.iop.org/EJP/28/S83
Abstract
Computer-based tools that enable students to collect, display and analyse
data in real time have catalysed the design of a laboratory curriculum that
allows students to master a coherent body of physics concepts while acquiring
traditional laboratory skills.
This paper describes RealTime Physics, a
sequenced introductory laboratory curriculum that is based on the results of
physics education research, and uses computer-based tools to facilitate student
learning.
(Some ﬁgures in this article are in colour only in the electronic version)
Each year in the USA, over 300 000 college and university students pass through introductory
physics laboratories designed to help them acquire investigative skills and verify equations
already presented in textbooks and lecture sessions.
Each year over 800 000 students do
similar laboratory exercises in high school classes. The intent of introductory courses is to
establish a basis for further study in physics, engineering and other experimental sciences.
Instructors also hope to interest students in further study in physics. Although there has been
relatively little research on the educational value of weekly physics laboratory sessions [1],
we do know that many students ﬁnd traditional labs tedious and boring. Revitalization of both
the lecture and laboratory components of introductory courses is essential to the long-term
health of physics as a discipline.
In a traditional introductory physics laboratory, a student typically spends 2 or 3 h a week
in the laboratory collecting data, performing calculations and graphing results that verify only
one relationship. The time, effort and expense of maintaining laboratory programs, coupled
with faculty and student concern about their educational value, has led some universities
including prestigious research institutions such as Harvard and MIT to reduce or even abandon
introductory laboratories.
0143-0807/07/030083+12$30.00
c⃝2007 IOP Publishing Ltd
Printed in the UK
S83
S84
D R Sokoloff et al
Emerging computer technologies and new understanding of student learning difﬁculties
can help us make physics laboratory programs more engaging and effective. In addition,
by doing research on learning in laboratory settings, we can establish a basis for continuous
improvement of student learning in laboratory programs. In this paper, we document that
the RealTime Physics laboratory curriculum that we have developed can lead to dramatic
improvements in student understanding of vital physics concepts.
Microcomputer-based laboratory tools
Beginning in 1986, new microcomputer-based laboratory (MBL) tools4 have become
increasingly popular for the real-time collection, display and analysis of data in the introductory
laboratory. MBL tools consist of electronic sensors, a microcomputer interface, and software
for data collection and analysis. Sensors are now available for measuring motion (position,
velocity and acceleration), force, sound, magnetic ﬁeld, current, voltage, temperature,
pressure, rotary motion, humidity, light intensity and many other physical quantities.
MBL tools provide a powerful way for students to learn physics concepts. For example,
students can discover motion concepts for themselves by walking in front of an ultrasonic
motion sensor while the software displays position, velocity and/or acceleration in real time.
Students can see a cooling curve displayed instantly when a temperature sensor is plunged
into ice water, or they can use a microphone to see how a sound pressure versus time plot
changes as one of them sings.
MBL data can also be analysed quantitatively. Students can then obtain basic statistics
for all or a selected subset of the collected data and then either ﬁt or model the data with
an analytic function. They can also integrate, differentiate or display Fourier transforms of
data. A software feature allows students to generate and display calculated quantities from
collected data in real time. For example, since mechanical energy depends on mass, position
and velocity, the time variation of potential and kinetic energy of an object can be displayed
graphically in real time. The user just needs to enter the mass of the object and the appropriate
energy equations ahead of time.
The need for a new laboratory curriculum
In the mid-1980s we also began to collaborate on the development of curricular materials,
apparatus and MBL tools to help students learn physics concepts and skills through guided
activities. The design of our curricular materials took the outcomes of physics education
research into account. Since then we have been testing and reﬁning our activities based on
research on student learning at our own institutions and elsewhere.
Our initial efforts were focused on two curriculum projects: Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking5
and Workshop Physics [2]. A set of Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking laboratory modules was
developed to help students use MBL tools to enhance their understanding of physics concepts
in mechanics and thermodynamics. The Workshop Physics curriculum was developed as the
basis for a two-semester introductory sequence in which lectures were replaced by hands-
on activities [3].
Computer tools were used extensively to help students interpret their
4 These tools were originally developed at Technical Education Research Centers (TERC) and Tufts University
Center for Science and Mathematics Teaching. The most popular current versions in the US are distributed by Vernier
Software and Technology (www.vernier.com) and PASCO Scientiﬁc (www.pasco.com). Besides probes, they also
distribute other appropriate hardware like low-friction dynamics cart and track systems. The latest version for the
Vernier software package, LoggerPro v. 3, also includes a complete video analysis package.
5 The Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking, Motion and Force and Heat and Temperature curricula are available from Vernier
Software and Technology, www.vernier.com.
RealTime Physics: active learning labs transforming the introductory laboratory
S85
observations.
These included MBL tools, spreadsheets and, more recently, digital video
analysis software (see footnote 4).
As these curricula were developed, the teaching community was becoming more aware
of how students’ naive conceptions of the physical world interfere with their learning.
For example, consider a ball tossed vertically.
Most students who successfully complete
introductory physics can use kinematic equations to calculate the exact position and velocity
of the ball given its initial velocity and position. Physics education researchers discovered that
most of these students retain the belief that there is an upward force and acceleration while
the ball is rising, and zero force and acceleration when it is at its highest position. Using
an MBL motion sensor we designed activities that allow students to see in real time that the
acceleration of a ball is the same during the entire toss. Similarly, while physics students can
analyse simple direct current circuits using Ohm’s or Kirchhoff’s laws, many retain their belief
that electrical current is ‘used up’ in passing through a light bulb or ohmic resistor. Using
MBL current probes on either side of a light bulb, students can see that the current is identical
on a moment-by-moment basis at both circuit locations, no matter how the voltage applied to
the circuit is varied.
Based on the outcomes of physics education research, many high school and college level
instructors wanted to enhance conceptual learning in the laboratory while developing their
students’ quantitative laboratory skills. Many instructors found that the Tools for Scientiﬁc
Thinking curriculum was not comprehensive enough while adoption of the Workshop Physics
curriculum required too many changes in the laboratory environment and in course scheduling.
It seemed logical to combine elements from each of these curricula in the development of a
new laboratory program.
The RealTime Physics curriculum
In 1992 we set out to develop a set of RealTime Physics (RTP) laboratories, with funding from
the National Science Foundation6. Four laboratory guides (modules) are currently published
by John Wiley and Sons [4]: Module 1: Mechanics, Module 2: Heat and Thermodynamics,
Module 3: Electric Circuits and Module 4: Light and Optics.
Each laboratory guide includes activities for use in a series of related laboratory sessions
that span an entire quarter or semester. Lab activities and homework assignments are integrated
so that they depend on learning that has occurred during the previous lab session and also
prepare students for activities in the next session. The major goals of the RTP project are to
help students: (1) acquire an understanding of a set of related physics concepts; (2) experience
the physical world directly by using MBL tools for real-time data collection, display and
analysis; (3) develop traditional laboratory skills and (4) master topics covered in lectures and
readings using a combination of conceptual activities and quantitative experiments. These
goals align well with the goals proposed by the American Association of Physics Teachers
(AAPT) for the introductory laboratory [1]. In order to achieve these goals we developed a
set of design principles based on educational research. These principles are summarized in
table 1.
6 This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grant number DUE-9455561, ‘Activity
Based Physics: Curricula, Computer Tools, and Apparatus for Introductory Physics Courses’, grant number USE-
9150589, ‘Student Oriented Science’, grant number USE-9153725, ‘The Workshop Physics Laboratory Featuring
Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking’ and grant number TPE-8751481, ‘Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking: MBL for Teaching
Science Teachers’, and by the Fund for Improvement of Post-secondary Education (FIPSE) of the US Department of
Education under grant number G008642149, ‘Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking’, and number P116B90692, ‘Interactive
Physics’.
S86
D R Sokoloff et al
Table 1. Design principles for the RTP laboratory guides.
RealTime Physics design principles
Each laboratory guide includes activities that
• are sequenced to provide students with a coherent observational basis for understanding a single topic area in
one semester or quarter of laboratory sessions
• provide activities that invite students to construct physical models based on observations and experiments
• help students modify their common conceptions about physical phenomena that make it difﬁcult for them to
understand powerful general principles of physics
• work well when performed in collaborative groups of two to four students
• incorporate MBL tools so that students can test predictions by collecting and graphing data in real time
• incorporate a learning cycle consisting of prediction, observation, comparison, analysis and quantitative
experimentation
• provide opportunities for class discussion of student ideas and ﬁndings and
• integrate homework assignments designed to reinforce critical concepts and skills
Table 2. Titles of labs in the four modules of RTP.
RealTime Physics table of contents
Module 1: Mechanics
Module 2: Heat and Thermodynamics
Lab 1: introduction to motion
Lab 1: introduction to heat and temperature
Lab 2: changing motion
Lab 2: energy transfer and temperature change
Lab 3: force and motion
Lab 3: heat energy transfer
Lab 4: combining forces
Lab 4: the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics
Lab 5: force, mass and acceleration
Lab 5: the ideal gas law
Lab 6: gravitational forces
Lab 6: heat engines
Lab 7: passive forces and Newton’s laws
Lab 8: one-dimensional collisions
Lab 9: Newton’s third law and conservation of momentum
Lab 10: two-dimensional motion (projectile motion)
Lab 11: work and energy
Lab 12: conservation of energy
Module 3: Electric Circuits
Module 4: Light and Optics
Lab 1: batteries, bulbs and current
Lab 1: introduction to light
Lab 2: current in simple dc circuits
Lab 2: reﬂection and refraction of light
Lab 3: voltage in simple dc circuits and Ohm’s law
Lab 3: geometrical optics: lenses
Lab 4: Kirchhoff’s circuit rules
Lab 4: geometrical optics: mirrors
Lab 5: introduction to capacitors and RC circuits
Lab 5: polarized light
Lab 6: introduction to inductors and LR circuits
Lab 6: waves of light
Lab 7: introduction to ac currents and voltages
Lab 8: introduction to ac ﬁlters and resonance
The core activities for each laboratory session can be completed in 2 h.
Extensions
provide more in-depth coverage when longer lab periods are available. The materials are
comprehensive enough so that students can use them effectively even in settings where
instructors and teaching assistants have minimal experience with the curricular materials.
Table 2 lists the labs contained in each of the four modules of RTP. The curriculum is
distributed in both print and electronic formats. The latter allows instructors to make local
modiﬁcations and reprint those portions that are suitable for their equipment and programs.
A case study: RealTime Physics Mechanics
In order to illustrate the essential features of the RTP laboratory curricula, we will discuss the
Mechanics curriculum in more detail. According to sales statistics from the publisher, as of
RealTime Physics: active learning labs transforming the introductory laboratory
S87
Fall 2006, RTP Mechanics has been adopted by 58 colleges and universities in the USA. This
represents about 15 000 introductory physics students. (The actual number of users is believed
to be considerably higher, since earlier editions were distributed nearly free of charge before
the current editions were published by Wiley.)
The primary goal is to help students achieve a solid understanding of classical mechanics
including Newton’s three laws of motion. Physics education researchers have discovered that
a majority of physics students begin their study of mechanics with preconceptions about the
nature of motion. Most students have a great deal of difﬁculty understanding Newton’s laws,
if they are not challenged to test the viability of their preconceptions.
Newtonian dynamics is basically a study of the relationship between forces and motion.
The simultaneous use of an MBL force probe and motion sensor is powerful because students
can display force–time graphs in real time along with any combination of graphs of position,
velocity and/or acceleration versus time. The availability of low-friction dynamics cart and
track systems (see footnote 4) makes it possible for students to study the relationship between
applied forces and resulting motions in simple cases where friction forces are essentially
negligible.
As an example of the approach taken in RTP Mechanics, let us consider a critical MBL
activity taken from Lab 3 on relating force and motion. After a careful study of kinematics and
the development of a force scale in previous lab activities, students are asked to predict how
force and motion are related. Next they discuss their predictions in their lab groups. Many
students believe that when a force is exerted on an object, the object will move with a velocity
that is proportional to the net applied force. This fundamental preconception that there is a
proportional relationship between force and velocity is a major impediment to understanding
Newton’s second law.
Students are asked to test their force–motion predictions by mounting their calibrated
force probe on a low-friction cart. Then they can push and pull on the cart–force probe system
to create a variable force on it while the velocity and acceleration of the cart are recorded using
a motion sensor, as shown in the laboratory write-up for this activity in ﬁgure 1. A typical set
of real time velocity–, force– and acceleration–time graphs is shown in ﬁgure 2. It is clear
that on a moment-by-moment basis, it is acceleration and not velocity that is proportional to
the force applied to the low-friction dynamics cart.
The students then go on to examine the relationship between applied force and acceleration
(Newton’s second law) quantitatively, using a modiﬁed Atwood’s setup in which a string
attached to a falling mass applies a constant force to the force probe mounted on the low
friction cart.
Evaluating the effectiveness of the RealTime Physics Mechanics laboratory
curriculum
How effective is RTP Mechanics in helping students understand Newton’s Laws of motion?
To evaluate student learning in dynamics we developed the research based, multiple-choice
examination called the Force and Motion Conceptual Evaluation (FMCE) [5, 6]7. Responses
on open-ended written questions and during interviews were used to identify basic mechanics
concepts that students ﬁnd difﬁcult, and multiple choice questions were developed based on
these.
7 The FMCE and conceptual evaluations in other topic areas can be found at the Workshop Physics website
http://physics.dickinson.edu/∼wp web/wp resources/wp assessment.html.
S88
D R Sokoloff et al
Activity 2-1: Pushing and Pulling a Cart
In this activity you will move a cart by pushing and pulling it with your hand. You will
measure the force, velocity and acceleration. Then you will be able to look for
mathematical relationships between the applied force and the velocity and acceleration, to
see whether either is (are) related to the force.
1.
Set up the cart, force probe and motion detector on a smooth level surface as shown
below. The cart should have a mass of about 1 kg with force probe included. Fasten
additional mass to the top if necessary.
.5 m
Be sure that the force probe body and cable do not extend beyond the back of 
the cart, and tape the cable back along the body to assure that the motion 
detector "sees" the cart.
The force probe should be fastened securely to the cart so that the body and cable do not
extend beyond the end of the cart facing then motion detector. (Tape the cable from the
force probe back along the body to assure that it will not be seen by the motion detector.)
Prediction 2-1: Suppose you grasp the force probe hook and move the cart forwards and
backwards in front of the motion detector. Do you think that either the velocity or the
acceleration graph will look like the force graph? Is either of these motion quantities
related to force? (That is to say, if you apply a changing force to the cart, will the
velocity or acceleration change in the same way as the force?) Explain.
2.
To test your predictions, open the experiment file called Motion and Force (L3A2-
1). This will set up velocity, force and acceleration axes with a convenient time
scale of 5 sec, as shown below. Calibrate the force probe using a 2.0 N pull from a
spring scale, if you haven't already done this in Activity 1-4.
Velocity (m/s)
0
+1
-1
Time (sec)
0
2
3
4
5
1
0
-2
+2
Acceleration (m/s/s)
0
Force(N)
+2.0
-2.0
Figure 1. Excerpt from investigation 2 of RTP Mechanics lab 3 which illustrates that acceleration—
not velocity—is proportional to force.
The FMCE has been administered before instruction (pre-test) and after instruction (post-
test) to many high school and college level students.
However, we have done our most
extensive controlled testing at the University of Oregon, in the algebra–trigonometry-based
general physics course and separate introductory laboratory course, and at Tufts University in
the calculus-based course.
RealTime Physics: active learning labs transforming the introductory laboratory
S89
Figure 2. Velocity–, force– and acceleration–time graphs for a low-friction cart pulled away from
the motion sensor beginning at about 0.6 s and then quickly stopped, then pushed back towards
the motion sensor beginning at about 1.6 s and again quickly stopped, as in RTP Mechanics lab 3,
activity 2-1. The pulls and pushes are repeated beginning at about 3.1 s.
By examining pre- and post-test results we can illustrate how the RTP laboratory affects
student understanding of dynamics. For example, two sets of questions explore the relationship
between force and motion by asking about similar motions in two different ways. The ﬁrst is
a series of ‘Force Sled’ questions (see ﬁgure 3) that can be used to gauge how well students
can understand natural language descriptions of motion. The ‘Force Graph’ questions (see
ﬁgure 4) are intended to measure whether or not students can understand graphical descriptions
of the same motions.
The Force Sled questions (Natural Language evaluation) are written in natural language
and make no reference to graphs or coordinate systems. The force acting on a moving object
is described explicitly. On the other hand, the Force Graph questions (graphical evaluation)
make explicit references to coordinate systems, and do not explicitly describe the force that
is acting. In spite of these differences in the questions, student responses are very similar
whenever there is an exact analogue between a Force Sled question and a Force Graph
question.
During 1989 and 1990, 240 students in the Oregon algebra–trigonometry-based lecture
class were not also enrolled in the separate introductory laboratory course. Figure 5 shows
the percentage of these students who answered the Natural Language questions and Graphical
questions in a Newtonian way both before and after traditional instruction on dynamics that
included standard lectures, homework problems, quizzes and examinations. To make precise
comparisons, the identical questions were asked before and after instruction. These results
show that fewer than 20% of students answered dynamics questions in ways that are consistent
S90
D R Sokoloff et al
A sled on ice moves in the ways described in questions 1-5 below.
Friction is so
small that it can be ignored.
A person wearing spiked shoes standing on the ice can
apply a force to the sled and push it along the ice. Choose the
one force (A through
G) which would keep the sled moving as described in each statement below.
You may use a choice more than once or not at all but choose only one answer for
each blank. If you think that none is correct, answer choice
J.
1. Which force would keep the sled moving toward the right and speeding
up at a steady rate (constant acceleration)?
2. Which force would keep the sled moving toward the right at a steady
(constant) velocity?
3. The sled is moving toward the right.   Which force would slow it down at
a steady rate (constant acceleration)?
4. Which force would keep the sled moving toward the left and speeding up
at a steady rate (constant acceleration)?
5. The sled is moving toward the left.  Which force would slow it down at a
steady rate (constant acceleration)?
E.
F.
G.
The force is toward the left and is
decreasing in strength (magnitude).
The force is toward the left and is of
constant strength (magnitude).
The force is toward the left and is
increasing in strength (magnitude).
Direction of Force
A.
B.
C.
The force is toward the right and is 
increasing in strength (magnitude).
The force is toward the right and is of
constant strength (magnitude).
The force is toward the right and is 
decreasing in strength (magnitude).
Direction of Force
D. No applied force is needed
Figure 3. A selection of Force Sled (Natural Language) questions from the Force and Motion
Conceptual Evaluation that probe student understanding of Newton’s ﬁrst and second laws using
natural language.
with a Newtonian view of the world either before or after traditional instruction. Also, the
normalized learning gain from pre to post-instruction was less than 10%.8
We need to emphasize that these results are typical, and not unique to the University
of Oregon. Our ﬁndings are consistent with other research into student understanding of
dynamics. The fact that traditional instruction has little effect on student beliefs about force
and motion is conﬁrmed by research involving thousands of students enrolled in traditional
introductory physics courses [5–9] (see footnote 7).
How well do students understand dynamics concepts after completing RTP Mechanics
laboratories? Figure 6 shows the results for groups of University of Oregon students who
were enrolled in both lecture and the RTP Mechanics laboratory during 1992, 1993 and 1994.
The improvement based on their laboratory work is dramatic. (No pre-test was given in these
years, but the average pre-test results in 1989–1991 are included for comparison.) These
8 Normalized learning gain is the actual improvement divided by the possible improvement, i.e., ⟨g⟩= 100% ×
(post-test score −pre-test score)/(perfect score −pre-test score).
RealTime Physics: active learning labs transforming the introductory laboratory
S91
Time
F
o
r
c
e
+
-
0
Time
+
-
0
F
o
r
c
e
Time
F
o
r
c
e
+
-
0
Time
F
o
r
c
e
+
-
0
Time
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
F
o
r
c
e
+
-
0
F
o
r
c
e
+
-
0
Time
Questions 1-7 refer to a toy car which 
can move to the right or left along a
horizontal line (the positive part of the 
distance axis).
+
0
Assume that friction is so small that it
can be ignored.
You may use a choice more than once
or not at all.  If you think that none is 
correct, answer choice J.
A force is applied to the car.  Choose the
one force graph ( A through H) for each 
statement below which could allow the 
described motion of the car to continue.
The car moves toward the right
(away from the origin) with a 
steady (constant) velocity.
__1.
The car moves toward the right
and is speeding up at a steady rate
(constant acceleration).
__2.
The car moves toward the left 
(toward the origin) with a steady 
(constant) velocity.
__3.
The car moves toward the right
and is slowing down at a steady rate
(constant acceleration).
__4.
The car moves toward the left and
is speeding up at a steady rate
(constant acceleration).
__5.
The car moves toward the right,
speeds up and then slows down.
__6.
The car was pushed toward the
right and then released.  Which
graph describes the force after 
the car is released.
__7.
None of these graphs is correct.
J
F
o
r
c
e
+
-
0
Time
H
F
o
r
c
e
Time
+
-
0
Figure 4. A selection of Force Graph (Graphical) questions from the Force and Motion Conceptual
Evaluation that probe student understanding of Newton’s First and Second Laws using a graphical
format.
results represent about an 80% normalized learning gain (see footnote 8). Because of the
redundancy in the test, we are able to determine that these students are using Newton’s laws
of motion in a quite consistent fashion. More information on this research may be found in
[5, 6, 8].
Figure 7 shows that the students in the Spring semester calculus-based course at Tufts
University showed similar learning gains in dynamics after completing RTP Mechanics
S92
D R Sokoloff et al
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Before Instruction 
After U O Traditional Instruction
N = 240
Force and Motion Evaluation
Nat.Lang
Evaluation
Graphical
Evaluation
% of Students Understanding
Figure 5. Student understanding of dynamics before and after traditional instruction. This graph
shows the percentage of University of Oregon algebra-based introductory physics students in 1989
and 1990 who understood dynamics concepts related to Newton’s ﬁrst and second laws before and
after traditional instruction that included lectures, problems, quizzes and examinations. The same
240 students were evaluated before and after instruction.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Before Instruction 1989-91 N=390
1992 After UO RTP Mechanics
N=230
1993 After UORTP Mechanics N=185
1994 After UO RTP Mechanics N=204
% of Students Understanding
Force and Motion Evaluation
Nat. Lang.
Evaluation
Graphical
Evaluation
Figure 6. Effect of using RTP Mechanics labs on Oregon algebra-based introductory physics. The
graphs show the percentage of students who understood dynamics concepts before instruction and
after instruction that included completing RTP Mechanics lab sessions.
laboratories in 1994 and 1995.
It is interesting to note that the average scores of Tufts
students enrolled in the calculus-based physics course are consistently about ten percentage
points higher on the pre-test than those of the University of Oregon students enrolled in the
algebra–trigonometry-based physics course.
These learning gains were achieved at the development sites, Oregon and Tufts. While,
as expected, the learning gains at secondary adaptor sites are not as high, still very dramatic
learning gains have also been accomplished at a number of secondary sites. For example, in a
research study in 1999, California Polytechnic State University (Cal Poly) in San Luis Obispo,
RealTime Physics: active learning labs transforming the introductory laboratory
S93
Before Instruction
After Tufts RTP Mechanics
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
% of Students Understanding
N = 88
Force and Motion Evaluation
Nat. Lang.
Evaluation
Graphical
Evaluation
Figure 7.
Effect of using RTP Mechanics labs in Tufts calculus-based introductory physics.
The graph shows the percentage of students in the Tufts University Spring semester calculus-
based introductory physics courses in 1994 and 1995 who understood dynamics concepts before
instruction and after instruction that included the RTP Mechanics labs. The same 88 students were
evaluated before and after instruction.
California, and Paciﬁc University outside of Portland, Oregon achieved normalized gains of
nearly 65% using RTP Mechanics [10].
The retention of Newtonian concepts by students who have completed the RTP Mechanics
labs is also excellent. Whenever questions from the FMCE were asked again at Oregon and
Tufts up to 6 weeks after instruction in dynamics had ended, the percentage of students
answering in a Newtonian way increased by 5–10%, rather than decreasing, as is often the
case. We attribute this increase to assimilation of the concepts.
Conclusions
RTP Mechanics has been used in a number of different educational settings. Like the examples
just cited, many university, college and high school faculties who have used this curriculum
have reported improvements in student understanding of Newton’s laws. These comments
are supported by our careful analysis of pre-and post-test data using the FMCE reported here
and elsewhere [5, 6, 8]. Similar research on the effectiveness of the other RTP modules,
also demonstrates dramatic conceptual learning gains in other topic areas. We feel that by
combining the outcomes of physics educational research with microcomputer-based tools, the
laboratory can be a place where students acquire both a mastery of difﬁcult physics concepts
and vital laboratory skills. These exciting outcomes with RTP labs have encouraged us to
develop a Suite of active learning materials [11], including Interactive Lecture Demonstrations
[12], and a physics education research-based text, Understanding Physics [13].
Acknowledgments
We could not have developed RTP without the hardware and software development work
of Stephen Beardslee, Lars Travers, Ronald Budworth and David Vernier. We acknowledge
PASCO scientiﬁc for their development of the low-friction dynamics cart system. We also
S94
D R Sokoloff et al
thank the faculty at the University of Oregon and Tufts University for assisting with our
conceptual learning assessments and the students for participating in these assessments as
well as in the testing of our laboratory activities. Both were essential for the development
of the curricula. We appreciate the help of Curtis Hieggelke, Maxine Willis, Robert Morse,
John Garrett and many other instructors who have used and tested our materials. This work
was supported by the National Science Foundation and the US Department of Education under
the Fund for Improvement of Post-Secondary Education (FIPSE) and the Secretary’s Fund for
Innovation.
References
[1] American Association of Physics Teachers 1998 Goals of the introductory physics laboratory Am. J. Phys.
66 483–5
[2] Laws P W 1991 Calculus-based physics without lectures Phys. Today 44 24–31
[3] Laws P W 2004 Workshop Physics Activity Guide: Modules 1–4 2nd edn (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley)
[4] Sokoloff D R, Laws P W and Thornton R K 2004 RealTime Physics: Active Learning Laboratories, Modules
1–4 2nd edn (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley)
[5] Thornton R K and Sokoloff D R 1998 Assessing student learning of Newton’s laws: the Force and Motion
Conceptual Evaluation and the evaluation of active learning laboratory and lecture curricula Am. J.
Phys. 66 338–52
[6] Thornton R K 1997 Learning physics concepts in the introductory course: microcomputer-based labs and
interactive lecture demonstrations Conf. on the Introductory Physics Course ed J W Wilson (Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley) pp 69–85
[7] McDermott L C 1991 Millikan lecture 1990: what we teach and what is learned—closing the gap Am. J.
Phys. 59 301–15
[8] Thornton R K 1996 Using large-scale classroom research to study student conceptual learning in mechanics
and to develop new approaches to learning Microcomputer-Based Laboratories: Educational Research and
Standards (Computer and Systems Sciences series F, vol 156) ed R F Tinker (Berlin: Springer) pp 89–114
[9] Hestenes D, Wells M and Schwackhammer G 1992 Force concept inventory Phys. Teach. 30 141–58
[10] Wittmann M unpublished evaluation report for Fund for the Improvement of Post-Secondary Education
dissemination project
[11] Redish E F 2003 Teaching Physics with the Physics Suite (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley)
[12] Sokoloff D R and Thornton R K 2004 Interactive Lecture Demonstrations (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley)
[13] Cummings K, Cooney P, Laws P and Redish E 2004 Understanding Physics (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley)
View publication stats
View publication stats
