The Computers Nobody Wanted
My Years with Xerox
Other publications by Paul A. Strassmann:
Information Payoff: The Transformation of Work in the Electronic Age – 1985
The Business Value of Computers – 1990
The Politics of Information Management – 1994
Irreverent Dictionary of Information Politics – 1995
The Squandered Computer – 1997
Information Productivity – 1999
Information Productivity Indicators of U.S. Industrial Corporations – 2000
Revenues and Profits of Global Information Technology Suppliers – 2000
Governance of Information Management Principles & Concepts – 2000
Assessment of Productivity, Technology and Knowledge Capital – 2000
The Digital Economy and Information Technology – 2001
The Economics of Knowledge Capital: Analysis of European Firms – 2001
Defining and Measuring Information Productivity – 2004
Demographics of the U.S. Information Economy – 2004 
The Economics of Outsourcing in the Information Economy – 2004
Paul’s War: Slovakia, 1938 – 1945
The Economics of Corporate Information Systems – 2007
Paul’s Odyssey: America, 1945 – 1985
The Computers Nobody Wanted
My Years with Xerox
Paul A. Strassmann
The Information Econonomics Press
new canaan, connecticut
2008
Copyright © 2008 by Paul A. Strassmann
All rights reserved.  No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any 
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the Pub-
lisher.  This publication has been authored to provide personal recollections and opinions 
with regard to the subject matter covered.
Published by the Information Economics Press
P.O.Box 264
New Canaan, Connecticut 06840-0264
Fax: 203-966-5506
E-mail:  publisher@infoeconomics.com
Design and composition: David G. Shaw, Belm Design
Produced in the United States of America
Strassmann, Paul A.
The Computers Nobody Wanted
1. Biography; 920;  2. History of Computers
Version 1.0 – June 2008
US Copyright Preregistration Number: PRE000001135
ISBN 978-1-4276-3270-8
v
Table of Contents
Prelude 
1
The IBM 360 Promises  2
The Honeywell Installation 
4
The IBM Counter-Attack 
7
Computer Leasing 
8
The Deterioration of IBM 
9
Gideon Gartner  
11
Amdahl Computer Systems  
12
Being Recruited 
15
An Unexpected Offer 
15
Moving to Xerox  
17
The Xerox Tower  
18
Visit from Joe Wilson 
20
Scientific Data Systems 21
My First Sigma Computer 
22
The IBM Divorce  
24
Dislodging Computers 26
XDS Conversion  
29
The Leningrad Caper 
31
Dealing with the Soviets  
34
Exploring Opportunities in Education  
35
Project Plato 
37
The Xerox 530 
39
The End Game 
40
Winding Down XDS 
42
Thoughts about XDS 
45
Corporate Information Systems  
49
The Equipment Billing Situation  
50
General Manager of the Information Services Division  
52
Organization of ISD 
54
vi
The Corporate Data Center 
56
Manufacturing Systems  
57
European Regional Centers 
59
Fuji-Xerox 
60
The APL Computer Language  61
DanRay Telecommunications  63
Brazilian Computer 
67
COIN: An Attempt to Change the System 
68
Unwinding ISD 69
Copier Troubles 71
Selling Copiers 73
A Fatal Injury 
75
Strategic Planning 
77
The Planning Job  
80
Planning for the Office of the Future 
81
PIMS Research Findings  
83
The Pendery Papers 
85
The Architecture of Information  
90
The Information Products Group 
91
The Xerox 860 Word Processor 92
 Xerox 820 Microcomputer 
93
Digital Equipment Corporation’s Personal Computer 94
Diablo Data Systems 
95
Shugart Floppy Disks  
97
Century Data Corporation  
98
Versatec Electrostatic Printing  100
Kurzweil Computer Products  
101
Western Union International 
101
Xerox Computer Services 
102
Computer Laser Printers 
104
Splitting Marketing  
107
vii
PARC 111
Assembling the Staff 
112
First Encounter with PARC 
113
PARC and XDS 117
PARC and the Internet 119
The Xerox ALTO  
120
Elkind Probes 
123
From ALTO to a Product  
125
The Nixdorf Visit  
128
Xerox 6085 Professional Computer System 
130
The Decline of Xerox  
131
Don Pendery 
134
Retrieval of Information  
135
Document and File Control 
137
Search for the Carlson Legacy 
140
Myth Making and Myth Exploitation 
144
The Paperless Office 
149
Paper Merchants  
150
Swedish Royal Academy  
152
Lobby Exhibit 
153
Chester Carlson’s Notebook 
157
The Carlson Jinx  
158
The Mirage of a Miracle  
162
A Historical Point of View 
166
A Postscript 
171
Proceeding with Retirement 
172
Prelude
W
hile I was waiting for my year-end bonus at General Foods in 
1964 I received a call from a managing partner of Arthur An-
dersen. Would I consider talking to the Chief Financial Officer 
of the National Dairy Products Corporation in New York who was looking 
for a corporate systems director? Working for some sort of a dairy com-
pany was certainly not my idea how to advance my career until I looked 
up information about the NDPC. It was larger than General Foods! NDPC 
was a holding company that owned well-known brands such as Kraft and 
Sealtest. The firm had been consistently profitable.
I went for the interview with Mr. Kenneth B. Fishpaw, who in my 
view could be typecast as person who looked and acted as an ideal CFO 
who was completely trustworthy. He talked in reasoned, carefully phrased 
clear sentences as if his words would require audit certification. I took an 
immediate liking to this man of grace and old-fashioned courtesy. Ken 
explained that the NDPC was not an operating company but provided 
headquarters oversight over widely diversified global operations. Though 
the firm included more employees than General Foods the entire head-
quarters operation was squeezed into modestly furnished small quarters 
located a walking distance from the New York Grand Central station. The 
headquarters, smaller than one hundred people, consisted of auditors, ac-
countants, lawyers and investor relation executives. My job would be to 
organize a corporate staff that would guide the various units of NDPC on 
an accelerated migration to pervasive computerization. The firm already 
operated over fifty small computers and was now facing, as a major invest-
ment, the soon to be announced IBM 360 series. 
The scope of my job would be to oversee spending that would be 
a multiple of what I proposed for General Foods. I was particularly im-
2 paul strassmann
pressed with Mr. Fishpaw’s recitation of the logistic challenges. The NDPC 
operating units produced and distributed perishable products where mis-
takes or delays, such as in the distribution of ice cream, could not be toler-
ated. The firm was vertically integrated, which included the ownership of 
delivery trucks that brought products directly to stores. The truck drivers 
also placed the goods directly on the shelves or into the freezers. Out-of-
date merchandise would be lifted for return to the company’s warehouse. 
Accounting for the deliveries and the issuing of credit for return merchan-
dise would be the driver’s responsibility. As Fishpaw described the NDPC 
operations he presented what I would consider a textbook case of how 
one must deploy a rapid-response logistics value-chain. It appears he must 
have been coached about my work on COPT at General Foods and about 
the sort of centralization vs. decentralization conflicts I had to address. It 
dawned on me that IBM must have had a hand in setting up the interview. 
After rather perfunctory greetings from the CEO, the head counsel and 
the treasurer I was offered the position as the corporate Director of In-
formation Systems. Later I found out that there were no other candidates 
interviewed for the job.
The IBM 360 Promises
Early in 1964, while Kraft as well as Sealtest would be studying the 
restructuring of their computer set-ups, all planning was suspended by 
the news from the IBM sales force that a new computer series, the IBM 
360, would radically change ways how one should think about comput-
erization. By consolidating its increasingly disjointed and incompatible 
lines of computers, IBM promised to increase the technology life of their 
hardware from four to at least seven years. With a longer technology life, 
the purchase instead of leasing of added capacity would become more at-
tractive. IBM also claimed that software applications would be portable re-
gardless of the size or configuration of the hardware. All of this turned out 
to be false claims even though it persisted as a part of IBM’s promotional 
advertising. A time- sharing operating system would make it feasible to 
set up telecommunications links with terminals. This promise turned out 
to be wrong because the IBM time-sharing system never worked properly. 
the computers nobody wanted 3
Processing power, memory and magnetic storage would be infinitely scal-
able but that was true only in a very limited sense. 
Software firms would now have an incentive to offer standard 
applications for IBM computing, thus reducing the costs of innovation. 
Most importantly, all applications now running on IBM equipment, which 
had its 1400 series installed throughout NDPC, would be able to run and 
migrate upwards on the new equipment without any change in code or 
without loss in performance. That was not true at all because all that IBM 
offered was a degraded capability named “emulation.” High-level languag-
es, such as COBOL, would make it possible for companies to use simpler 
and more reliable instruction codes. In other words, comes April of 1964, 
IBM would offer a nirvana in the computing heaven, where everything 
that used to be difficult would now become easy to do. Behind much of 
the hoopla and misrepresentation were the IBM marketing machine that 
promoted capabilities that the IBM technologists could not deliver imme-
diately, and some cases only a decade later.
Starting in January, IBM salesmen visited major customers with 
blank order forms for machines with unknown specifications, unknown 
performance and unknown prices. Customers were told that there would 
be limitations on the production capacity would constrain the ability of 
IBM to fulfill orders. Therefore, IBM was introducing a priority system. 
Blank orders, with only a brief description, stated which version of the 
equipment would be placed on order. The orders would be time-stamped. 
Orders would then receive a sequential position in an order queue. Af-
ter the equipment specifications would be released customers would have 
an opportunity to modify or cancel their orders. This was salesmanship 
the likes I have not seen since my starvation days in the summer of 1944 
when city folks gave to peasants deposits for parts of a pig that would be 
slaughtered after Christmas. Without exception, everybody ordered more 
processing capacity than they could possibly use. Corporate purses would 
be loosened to promote innovation that would be able to take advantage 
of IBM’s extravagant claims. 
By the time I gathered all of the information, I found out that 
NDPC divisions placed worldwide over fifty orders for IBM 360s. Despite 
jubilant anticipations and priority placement on the waiting line, I did not 
4 paul strassmann
share the optimistic outlook with my peers in other corporations or with-
in NDPC divisions. The news I was getting from the Air Force testers was 
that emulation was hard to do, error prone and unlikely to work across a 
broad spectrum of computers that were running frequently patched Auto-
coder programs or versions of RPG (Report Planning Generator).
Shortly after the IBM series was announced I was able to add up 
the bill for the NDPC equipment that was on order. Although the new 
computers offered a theoretically attainable quadrupling in processing ca-
pacity the cash cost of rentals and maintenance would double. Purchasing 
options, if amortized over seven years, would made the computers more 
affordable. However, based on my understanding of the rapidly chang-
ing technologies seven-year amortization of computer capital looked to 
me like a far-fetched horizon. I was not going to endorse any purchases 
until such time that performance tests would give us an indication about 
actual capacity of the new equipment running in emulation. Meanwhile, 
the probable consolidation of computer operations within NDPC left me 
without the ability to plan what computers would be needed and where. 
The Honeywell Installation
The most worrisome aspect of the IBM 360 computers concerned 
the portability the existing code from the in-place IBM 1401s and IBM 
1460s to the IBM 360/30, 360/40 and 360/50 machines. The emulation 
capabilities remained shrouded in pithy bulletins from IBM. Without an 
efficient emulation capability the new equipment would be useless. Com-
pounding the problem were the alarms I received from two Sealtest Di-
visions. While waiting for the IBM 360 they held back on any upgrades. 
They were now flat out of processing capacity. Their operations started 
experiencing delays. Upgrading the now obsolete IBM computers did not 
make sense and IBM discouraged that.
I tried to placate the divisional managers by passing on to them 
whatever scraps of hope I could garner from IBM. We pleaded to be al-
lowed at least to observe an “alpha” (working prototype) to gain confidence. 
That would not be possible. How about letting us in a “beta” testing? When 
that would be feasible was unknown. Bill Reedy, the IBM major account 
the computers nobody wanted 5
representative to Kraft who scooped up most of the NDPC orders and was 
already paid hefty sales commissions, did his best to encourage patience 
because IBM would surely deliver the emulation capabilities soon. Besides, 
other than ordering upgrades to the existing equipment, which would be a 
retrogressive step, there were no easy alternative options. The IBM repre-
sentative offered to install a totally incompatible IBM 7010 computer at a 
substantial discount but at an insanely expensive conversion cost. 
Meanwhile we marked time and I met with other senior computer 
executives at the American Management Association to find out what they 
were doing. The bad news was slowly seeping in. IBM would not or could 
not deliver on its promises not only on emulation but also on the ease of 
portability from the old to the new.
After waiting for about four months, I received a phone call from 
Art Messerschmitt, the Sealtest controller in Schenectady, New York. 
Would I consider forgetting, for the time being, about IBM promises and 
consider the installation of a Honeywell 200 Liberator? Art had in his of-
fice a Honeywell salesperson. Art was offered to install Honeywell equip-
ment at no cost. Honeywell would run it in parallel with the Sealtest IBM 
1401 until such time that auditors could certify 100% compatibility for both 
machines. There was sufficient space in the computer room to house both 
computers, side by side. If the 200 could run as expected and provide the 
much needed extra capacity the monthly rental payments to Honeywell 
would be pegged at 50% of whatever IBM would have charged for a com-
parable IBM 360. 
It just happened that a week before I saw an Air Force briefing 
commenting favorably on Honeywell equipment they would be installing 
to support worldwide communications for their strategic strike force. I 
told Art to proceed with the Honeywell, which could be delivered the fol-
lowing week. When it was installed I would show up in Schenectady for a 
reality check.
After I hung up the phone I walked into Ken Fishpaw’s office. We 
were going to have a storm on our hands as soon as the news leaks out that 
we would be testing out the Liberator. Ken’s only question was whether 
Art was out of processing capacity. Would there be any damage to opera-
tions during a conversion? After Art confirmed that he would be account-
6 paul strassmann
able for any problems, he got an OK to proceed. I do not think it took 
more than two hours after that to receive a call from the IBM national 
account manager. Was I canceling NDPC orders for the IBM 360s? No, we 
were not canceling any orders, just waiting for IBM to demonstrate the 
conversion to whatever 360s we ordered and then to pass a test that the 
emulation features would perform as advertised. The IBM salesman was 
unhappy and I was sincerely sorry for him because he was an exception-
ally pleasant person. He then recited, apparently from a prepared legal text, 
that under the existing consent agreement with the Justice Department he 
had to cease further conversations about the prospective installation of a 
Honeywell computer in Schenectady. He invoked the so called unhooking 
clause from an anti-trust settlement which prohibited IBM from engaging 
in any sales efforts after a customer had placed an order with a competitor. 
In the following days I received visits, carefully pre-announced as social 
get-acquainted occasions, from the District, Regional and Eastern Area 
IBM executives. Based on the titles on their business cards I could fig-
ure out the latest organization chart for IBM marketing. During each visit 
Schenectady was never mentioned.
The following week, Honeywell people broke their back and in-
stalled a fully operational Honeywell 200 one day ahead of schedule. It 
performed better than expected and the IBM 1401 was removed a month 
later. The story did not end there. Suddenly, all the other regional manag-
ers wanted to get a similar deal. Negotiations with Honeywell started and 
were consummated in one more case, but as the time passed, the IBM 
marketing machine managed to strengthen its position by enhancing em-
ulation capabilities, at an increased cost that was not sufficient for anyone 
to secede from IBM. 
All that changed when another brash controller, Alec Moon, in 
Kraft-UK decided to ask for Honeywell to bid on upgrading his comput-
ing facilities because his ICL 1301 could not keep up with his workload 
and was completely incompatible with the rest of Kraft. The Australians, 
always trying to best the Brits, followed shortly after that with a similar re-
quest to Honeywell. The game would now shift to the international scene 
where the comparative costs of IBM equipment were at a disadvantage and 
different legal rules applied.
the computers nobody wanted 7
The IBM Counter-Attack
Just when I thought that the IBM 360 situation, which consumed 
much of my time, would pass into oblivion I got a call from the Gordon 
Edwards, the NDPC CEO. Gordon never called before. He said that he just 
received an invitation from a Joseph B. Flavin, the executive vice president 
and chief financial officer of IBM World Trade. Would I have any idea why 
Flavin would wish to meet? I summarized the situation in Schenectady 
that Gordon already knew and ventured a guess that the antitrust provi-
sions against unhooking would not apply to IBM World Trade, a corpo-
ration that operated outside of the US. Gordon, who found the IBM 360 
unhooking efforts amusing, took the call from Flavin. It was an invitation 
to join him for a game of golf.
What happened during the golf outing was subject of entertain-
ment at the next bi-weekly lunch of NDPC executives. Gordon, who loved 
to tell and enjoy his own tales, described how they played the obligatory 
twelve holes, with Flavin — obviously a low par player — making sure Gor-
don was winning all the way. It was only afterwards, in the club house, that 
Flavin asked whether Gordon was not concerned about Strassmann’s risk-
taking in managing NDPC computers. In effect, Flavin was trying to get 
me fired which was a fairly common IBM practice of last resort whenever 
all the other approaches to keep an account failed or, when IBM believed 
that the information technology was mismanaged. Such a decapitation 
was always executed under informal circumstances. Any dismissals would 
be then discussed only in general terms. In this case, IBM was free to un-
hook because they could always claim that even the implied conversation 
concerned a situation outside of the US. Subsequently, my discreet legal 
advisor told me that IBM misjudged the situation when they paired Flavin 
with Edwards. The only valid way to dislodge me would be to dig up an 
incident where I did some damage. A generality, such as doubts about the 
wisdom of NDPC choosing somebody who would engage in unnecessary 
“risk-taking” would work at General Foods, but certainly not with a former 
milk delivery-man.
 Gordon, properly briefed, asked Flavin whether NDPC had placed 
orders for IBM 360 computers. Were any of these orders ever cancelled? If 
8 paul strassmann
orders had been placed six month ago, why would IBM not proceed with 
the installations when NDPC divisions needed added capacity? Whether 
Flavin was informed as well as Edwards, I do not know. When they part-
ed, Edwards announced that the NDPC was paying Strassmann to see to 
it that its computers were running properly, which meant that pick lists 
would show up on time on the loading docks for ice cream deliveries. As 
long as that was done Edwards would not mix into computer decisions he 
knew nothing about and did not wish to know anyway. The next morning 
my wife received, with compliments from the CEO of NDPC a bucket of 
freshly made Breyer’s rum-raisin ice cream. It was at that time the best ice 
cream anywhere. Our kids did not get any of it because it was laced with 
Baccardi rum, specially mixed for executive consumption.
Computer Leasing
When the IBM 360 series was introduced, salesmen boasted about 
its much longer technological life than for any prior computers. This 
opened, as an unintended consequence, the possibility that leasing firms 
would find it attractive to purchase the computers outright and then re-
lease it to customers at a substantial discount for three to four year fixed 
term. If a leasing firm could repeat fixed term leases two or even three 
times it would reap enormous profits. 
The IBM purchase/monthly lease ratio was set at less than sixty. All 
revenues over five years would be then pure profit to the leasing company 
since IBM would charge identical maintenance fee regardless whether the 
computer was purchased or rented. What was IBM top management’s 
thinking in offering such a pricing deal is a mystery. An inducement for 
customers to insert a financially motivated intermediary into what used 
to be extremely close service relationships would surely corrode a long 
cultivated trust relationship between IBM and customers. 
The new leasing companies were run by ex-Wall Street operators 
who were in effect were arbitrageurs between the valuations of computers, 
as conceived by Armonk pricing experts, and the worth as seen by the 
customers. There were additional angles to be considered in order to ex-
tract maximum advantages for a leasing firm. For instance, IBM assigned 
the computers nobody wanted 9
a numerical delivery priority to customers who ordered 360 early. That 
was supposed to serve as an inducement to rush into placement of orders 
without any analysis. Leasing companies offered special inducements to 
firms, such as NDPC who were high up in the queue for deliveries of new 
equipment. A clever leasing company could induce a firm with a favorable 
shipping position to purchase a 360 computer through a leasing firm and 
then have it shipped to someone who would be willing to pay a premium 
price.
Harvey Goodman, CEO of one of the most aggressive leasing firms, 
showed up in my office one morning. He did his homework. He had a list 
of all NPDC IBM 360 computers on order. He offered us a 30% discount 
from IBM monthly rentals for non-cancelable but upgradeable machines. 
Our portfolio of machines would be leased from the Data Processing Fi-
nancial & General company. They would permit us to relocate machines 
as we saw fit. In addition, Harvey would also finance the replacement of 
IBM’s expensive tape drives by fully compatible Telex or Systems Dynam-
ics Corporation drives for added savings. Effectively, Harvey offered us 
IBM equipment at prices that were equal to what Honeywell could charge 
for equipment with lesser capacity. 
I found Goodman to be a sophisticated financier but with no 
knowledge or care about computerization. Behind him were private inves-
tors looking for extraordinary profits from what appeared to be an IBM 
error in the valuation of what they were selling. As I considered NDPC’s 
penny-pinching habits I could not turn down an offer to cut costs. It took 
weeks of legal work and negotiations about every conceivable detail before 
we signed up with DPF&G. 
The Deterioration of IBM
The entire leasing experience with DPF&G left me with a bad taste 
about IBM as well as about the prospects that what used to be revered icons 
of US industrial achievement. It looked to me that IBM was becoming an 
organizations that made decisions regardless how it affected customers. 
Although IBM had been consistently rated for years by Fortune magazine 
as the most respected corporation I saw in their actions an abdication from 
10 paul strassmann
a long history of keeping up trusted relationships with customers. Though 
the shift by IBM from monthly leases to selling computers outright can be 
traced back to the mid 1960s it did not take long before IBM’s market posi-
tion started to crumble. By the mid 1980s there were serious doubts about 
IBM surviving as it started shedding half of their employees while their 
stock market price plunged from a high of $578 to a low of $42. In many 
respect this deconstruction of a company was to be repeated years later by 
Xerox, when it started selling off its lease base and substitute purchase ar-
rangements that alienated the sales force and the customers.
When IBM failed to deliver the IBM 360, as promised, this could 
be explained as a technological glitch. However, pricing a product line for 
the rapid generation of cash though outright sales made no sense. Surely, 
IBM’s cost of capital would be less than Goodman’s. IBM’s ability to man-
age the technology risks were vastly superior to that of a leasing company 
consisting mostly of MBA’s looking out for quick profits. 
Computerization of the US was still in its nascent stages. Custom-
ers did not have sufficient experience to evaluate how much capacity they 
would need even six months ahead. Committing to purchases placed cus-
tomers at a disadvantage, as compared with the prior practice of contract-
ing with IBM for only monthly leases and then trusting the IBM organi-
zation to deliver rapidly whatever capacity or features were needed. The 
close and trusted partnership between the IBM organization, believed to 
hold the care of customers on top of all other priorities, would be now 
broken. The sales commissions from outright sales were much larger than 
the trickle realized from pay as you go monthly billings. The IBM support 
team would now have less of an incentive to provide ongoing support. The 
only way the entire schema made any sense if IBM’s 360 would have a 
much shorter technology life than was promoted. In that case, IBM would 
be unloading in five years to second-hand users an obsolete technology, 
which only they could control. 
In fact, the IBM 360 had a much longer life than was expected. 
That was not the result of rapidly falling prices of semiconductors, but the 
consequence of rising difficulties in the management of application soft-
ware. The industry was changing from a focus on the costs of hardware to 
software development and maintenance. By shifting from rental to sales of 
the computers nobody wanted 11
equipment IBM commenced a liquidation of their previously unassailable 
position. It was not computing capacity that mattered any more. The man-
agement of information technology was now wrapped up in the develop-
ment and conservation of application software.
Gideon Gartner
It was during this period that I ran, during a MIT Sloan school 
alumni reunion into Gideon Gartner of IBM. He found out that I was 
controlling a pool of IBM 360 computers and wanted to know more about 
the risks a large corporation would be willing to take in buying instead 
of paying IBM monthly rentals. It turned out that while at IBM Gideon 
was one of the leading analysts in setting up an extremely complex price 
list for IBM equipment, which included purchase prices, rental prices and 
equipment maintenance prices. Whether a customer would find purchas-
ing or renting advantageous turned out to be an arbitrage between cleverly 
over-complicated quoted prices, delivery terms and the short-term rental 
costs for probable equipment upgrades. My point to Gideon was that IBM 
equipment would have a very long life not because of increasingly lower 
costs of computers but because of the rapidly rising expense of application 
maintenance.
Shortly after meeting with Gideon he left IBM and set up a lucra-
tive consulting firm advising clients how to exploit weaknesses in what 
were not readily discernible inconsistencies in IBM pricing. Theoretically, 
this would allow customers to selectively purchase some components of 
an IBM 360 computer, while leaving more risky peripherals on rentals. 
Gartner made a fortune from providing advice to equipment leasing firms 
as well as to their customers how to understand what turned to be a delib-
erately confusing price list. In this way the Gartner firm gained enormous 
influence because they were advising both the sellers as well as the buy-
ers how to get around increasingly convoluted IBM pricing practices that 
started plaguing the computer business. 
Subsequently, over the period of several years, Gideon and some 
of his executives approached me about the possibility of joining their firm 
located nearby from where I lived. The Gartner firm appeared to me much 
12 paul strassmann
more as a Wall Street brokerage firm that extracted data from computer 
vendors and then serve up this information in pre-digested form for a 
steep advisory fee. Though Gartner called that “research”, it was nothing 
but astute re-packaging and re-editing of generally available information 
that the vendors would be pressured to channel through the Gartner firm 
as easy-to read summaries. The Gartner firm could justify its fees by show-
ing that computer vendors were notorious in making claims that could be 
false. The Gartner did not need to spend money on expensive testing to 
check the veracity of vendors’ claims. They cultivated the skills of skepti-
cal journalism, which they could then offer in a stream of publications, 
reports and bulletins as unbiased opinions. Gartner prospered by selling 
diversified newsletters as advice for computer managers.
Meanwhile, at NDPC we passed on all of the risks to Goodman, 
though we were left with a conviction that the past total reliance on IBM 
would not be a good policy any more. Although IBM continued to grow 
and prosper for another twenty years, with diminishing profit margins, I 
believe that it was IBM itself and not a competitor who in 1965 started 
eroding IBM’s position as the flagship of American industrial superiority. 
The competitor of IBM was IBM, not some intruder. Twenty-five years 
later IBM was financially, technologically and organizationally a sick en-
terprise even though when I worked for the National Dairy Products Cor-
poration nobody would have believed that. 
Amdahl Computer Systems 
The most dramatic proof of the rising discontent with IBM became 
apparent in a by-invitation-only meeting held at the Mark Hopkins Ho-
tel in San Francisco that took place I believe, early in 1969. I was one of 
the members of the information technology round table advisory group 
to the American Management Association. I decided to attend the semi-
annual meeting because I also wished to spend some time with suppliers 
of IBM plug-compatible equipment that could be installed at a discount. 
Corporate information executives, with a large inventory of IBM equip-
ment, were asked to meet privately with Gene Amdahl, who was known as 
one of the principal designers of IBM 360 hardware. 
the computers nobody wanted 13
Gene, a no-nonsense engineer, explained that he planned to form 
a company that would compete head-to-head with IBM in the large-scale 
mainframe market. He described how that could be accomplished by 
showing, side-by side his own as well as IBM’s circuit boards performing 
identical IBM 360 hardware functions. Amdahl’s version was much small-
er and had fewer components. To get funding from investors Gene needed 
from some of large potential buyers an expression of interest signifying 
the if the Amdahl equipment would be “plug compatible” and if it were to 
cost up to 40% less than IBM’s 360/65 models, the dozen computer execu-
tives sitting around the table would make such purchases. Though most 
of us considered any attack on IBM to be suicidal, as was demonstrated 
by the exit from the computer business by well-funded corporations, the 
calm analytic description of IBM economics impressed everyone. The IBM 
marketing overhead far exceeded the manufacturing costs and we wished 
to pay only for reliable and cheap computing power and not for all the 
frills. Without incurring any obligation whatsoever a notepad was passed 
around the table asking for the names of the attendees and the estimated 
number of computers we would consider purchasing. I believe that pass-
ing the notepad around generated a pressure for each of us to demonstrate 
how important we were. When the pad made it around the table, Gene 
“sold” over one hundred computers worth well over half a billion dollars 
even though the machines were still only on paper. I understand that Gene 
took our names to the investors, which included Fujitsu who were eager to 
break into the global computer business. A few months later the Amdahl 
Corporation was formed. When the Amdahl machines were delivered on 
schedule they worked exactly as promised. They were installed to run ex-
isting customer applications efficiently and economically. It was Amdahl, 
an IBM insider, who demonstrated that the so far invincible IBM was in-
deed vulnerable to a well-conceived attack.
Being Recruited
I
t must have been sometime in the middle of April 1969, when I received 
a call from George Peck, one of best known executive recruiters. My 
resume had not circulated yet so the call came as a complete surprise. 
Would I be interested in coming for lunch at the Union League Club? I 
could not refuse such an invitation. Without expecting much, since Peck’s 
firm was recruiting only CEO and COO level executives for Fortune 500 
companies, I showed up. George must have hired somebody to check me 
out because he had a thick folder about my prior jobs, family and the price 
of the new house I was finishing in Chappaqua. He knew all the details 
about my recent dealings with IBM, Honeywell and leasing firms. 
An Unexpected Offer
George got to the point before the soup was served. He had a client, 
whose identity he could not reveal, who was looking for a Chief Informa-
tion Officer. They would expect the CIO to displace their entire installed 
base of IBM 360 computers and do that worldwide. I could not imagine 
who would wish to do something as foolish as that. After the initial trou-
blesome years IBM recovered its position. The 360 series were finally per-
forming well and reliably except for the absence of a competitively priced 
communicating computer model, such as could be used for time-sharing. 
Rental payments to IBM increased but so did the demands for new capa-
bilities, such as in manufacturing. My leasing contracts kept the expenses 
for IBM computers at tolerable levels.
How many 360 computers did this client use? George said that no-
body knew for sure, because this was a global firm, but the numbers were 
certainly greater than in NDPC. What equipment would be replacing the 
16 paul strassmann
360s? I needed to know in order to figure out if George was testing me 
with a fictional situation. Harvard Business School graduates were good in 
spinning hypothetical case studies as a way of extracting knowledge from 
others. He laughed and agreed that I was asking the right questions, but 
prematurely. Would I be interested to find out more? The prospective firm 
would double my current compensation whatever that was. He could ar-
range for a private jet to take me to Rochester, New York so I could obtain 
the facts. Of course, the prospective employer would be Kodak because 
the only other notable firm in Rochester was Xerox and they were too 
small and too confused to use that many computers. In order not to com-
promise my existing job I agreed to stop off in Rochester for an interview 
on the way for my next weekly meeting in Chicago. A private jet would 
take me very early in the morning to Rochester and then continue to Chi-
cago so that I could adhere to my schedule.
A limousine was waiting at the airport in Rochester. The chauffeur 
would not tell me where he was going until he pulled into the garage of the 
just completed world headquarters of Xerox. On the top floor waiting for 
me was no other than the man from IBM who had been commissioned 
five years ago to get me fired from NDPC. It was Joseph B. Flavin, now ex-
ecutive vice president and global CFO of Xerox. After a good laugh about 
the fickle vagaries of fortune Joe informed me that the following week Xe-
rox would be entering into the computer business to compete with IBM. 
That would be achieved by acquiring a prominent computer firm. The only 
business computer firm worth acquiring in those days was Burroughs re-
flecting their exceptionally competent software. No, it was not Burroughs. 
Because of the challenges I would be facing in case I take the job, Xerox 
would double my salary. They would also award a performance bounty of 
5,000 options for Xerox shares, at current low prices, for each displaced 
IBM 360 computer. There were at least thirty-eight known IBM computer 
installations at Xerox. Every IBM computer would have to be phased out 
in the shortest time possible. I already carried in my head a plan how to 
consolidate NDPC computing facilities and therefore mashing together 
that many IBM computers into a consolidated data center should make 
any conversion easier. That is exactly what Flavin wished to hear.
the computers nobody wanted 17
Flavin had been looking for candidates from inside IBM for the as-
signment for getting rid of IBM computers. Based on what he knew about 
the backing I had received at NDPC, my experience in placing Honey-
well computers, and his own possible conflicts with a prior employer he 
must have concluded that I was the right man for the job. Furthermore, 
after their computer acquisition was completed, Xerox global corporate 
staff would be moving to Greenwich, Connecticut right next to the White 
Plains airport, which would be less than fifteen minutes from my new 
house. I would be able to come home in time to have dinner with my four 
little children who were quickly growing up as curious, assertive and lively 
bunch that needed a father to show up in daylight. Rochester would be-
come the HQ of the US copier business, with non-copier divisions housed 
elsewhere. It did not take me more than a few seconds to decide that this 
was an unbelievably attractive offer. I accepted the job offer and Joe shook 
my hand and that was that. I would start in Rochester May 1st and work 
there until the new quarters in Greenwich would be ready.
I think there is a moral lesson that can be learned from the rapid 
and unexpected offer from Xerox. I have always found that doing the right 
thing, such as installing Honeywell computers, instead of just following 
conventional thinking such as waiting for IBM 360s, may look like a los-
ing proposition. Ultimately, what’s right may end up working for you in 
ways one could never anticipate. Call it luck, call if fate or just rewards for 
integrity. I do not know which one it is except that I remain convinced that 
even if the opportunists seem to be winning often, the righteous ones — at 
least in America — survive longer and have a more satisfying life.
Moving to Xerox
When I told Mona of an opportunity to become rich on Xerox 
stock options for displacing at least forty IBM computers she was not im-
pressed. My super-conservative wife counseled not to count on any such 
gains until they were deposited in the family savings account. However, 
I should definitely take the job if that is what it took to get me home for 
dinner on time. 
18 paul strassmann
The profits from the stock options never amounted to much as the 
Xerox stock rose like a rocket and fell like a meteor burning out all the way 
down to below option prices. With regard to the 5,000 share bonuses for 
eliminating IBM computers, that never happened. I kept increasing IBM 
processing capacity to meet business demands because the IBM comput-
ers hosted applications I could not displace. The corporation was grateful 
that I never abandoned IBM because that was the only way of getting work 
done. 
Joining Xerox in the position as the Chief Computer Executive was 
supposed to enhance my family life. This expectation turned out to be 
mistaken. The back breaking travel and fire-fighting removed me, for all 
practical purposes, from seeing my family for most of the time, even on 
weekends, for more than five years. If I have any regrets about working 
for Xerox it is because of my absence from the new house at Stornowaye 
in Chappaqua. The only offset was in the form of an increasing prosperity 
of our household as well as a most exciting career. That was insufficient to 
compensate for the increased loneliness of my oldest child, Vera.
The Xerox Tower
When I reported a corner office was ready. The windows were 
lined with copper mesh to prevent electronic snooping. Flavin arranged 
for a staff meeting to meet the twenty people who would be now reporting 
to me. They were told that the staff would be split with the global team de-
parting for Greenwich to fill corporate positions and the remainder stay-
ing in Rochester to support the copier division. The objective of the cor-
porate staff was to organize a state of the art network global network that 
would be recognized for its leadership in managing information technol-
ogy. Now, that we were also a computer company, we owed an information 
technology superiority to our shareholders.
Following introductions I asked the staff to describe the Xerox 
computer establishment. There was a Univac 1108, but that served copier 
marketing only. The Univac installation was valued because it offered Tele-
type terminal access to its marketing database. This giant machine was 
located on the stage of a former theater that had been condemned by the 
the computers nobody wanted 19
local fire marshal as being too risky for housing electronic equipment. 
Next to the Univac were IBM computers supporting the accountants and 
operated by a crew that reported to headquarters finance. On the 13th floor 
was a computer off limits to the systems staff because it was reputed to 
run intelligence reports. In the factory in Webster there were two IBM 
360/65 running manufacturing schedules. The research department in 
Webster had innumerable DEC machines. Each of the five sales regions 
had their own IBM computer installations, though a few sales branches 
had tabulating equipment or used service bureau facilities. Equipment 
reconditioning centers were running small IBM computers. There was 
an education division with a huge data center in Columbus, Ohio. There 
were other computers wherever recent acquisitions had taken place. Xerox 
Canada was known to have least three data centers but nobody knew for 
sure where. Xerox Latin America had computers in Mexico and tabulating 
equipment in Brazil. Then there was Rank-Xerox. It was a joint venture 
and operationally totally separate from the US. Uncoordinated computer 
installations were present in the UK (an ICL computer), Ireland, France 
(of course a Bull), Germany, Spain, Italy, Holland, Switzerland, Australia 
and New Zealand. A joint venture was also operating as Fuji-Xerox in Ja-
pan and in Singapore, but nobody had a clue what the Japanese were doing. 
Not included in any of that were computers in factories and in research 
centers in England, France, Holland, Brazil and Japan. Added to that were 
numerous computer installations at Scientific Data Systems, now renamed 
as Xerox Data Systems (XDS). The scuttlebutt picked up in Rochester was 
that XDS was hiding somewhere an IBM 1460 to perform business data 
processing tasks that XDS could not perform on their own machines. An 
IBM computer in El Segundo worried me because it would give me a clue 
how difficult it would be to run commercial applications in an XDS envi-
ronment. 
Altogether, I estimated that the total information technology 
spending was well over $150 million and growing rapidly as Xerox was ex-
panding as fast as was physically possible. I was going to preside over un-
disciplined and uncoordinated operations that were improvised to meet 
local data processing requirement. My job was to put all of that into order 
so that Xerox computers could take over everywhere. This qualified my 
20 paul strassmann
job as a formidable and probably an impossible assignment. The fact that 
Xerox was highly profitable should somehow allow me to accomplish this 
task by applying money as a lubricant. Ample funds would be available to 
throw at the XDS conversion problems.
Visit from Joe Wilson
Early in the afternoon, on the first day in Xerox, a distinguished 
looking grey haired gentleman walked into my office, un-announced. “I 
am Joe Wilson, just call me Joe” he said. It was the great man himself. The 
founder and spiritual leader of the company was an unassuming and gen-
tle person. He welcomed me to Xerox and wished me well. For some time 
he has been bothered about the problems the company had with billing for 
copies and he hoped that someone who had supervised the printing of mil-
lions of delivery tickets for Kraft would surely know how to get more than 
100,000 copier machines accounted for every month. He also knew about 
my displacing IBM computers with Honeywell and wondered if switching 
to SDS computers was comparable. He was not sure whether making a 
scientific computer behave as if it were a business computer could be ac-
complished in a short time. It was apparent that Joe has checked me out 
before he walked in.
We engaged in a discussion about the future of computers that was 
in the context of what apparently bothered Joe. Apart from the technol-
ogy of xerography, his significant innovation was to think about capital 
equipment as a service instead as capital goods. The Haloid Company, the 
predecessor of Xerox, would have never sold too many of the pioneering 
Xerox 914 machines had they been priced as was then customary, which 
was at manufacturing cost plus mark-up. Joe had faith in what he pro-
duced, which was a far more expensive piece of copying equipment than 
had been ever produced. When the xerographic technology was first of-
fered to Kodak, then to RCA, IBM, 3M and Agfa, everybody turned it 
down because nobody could see how one could justify installing expen-
sive equipment to make only a few copies. Joe solved this difficulty by of-
fering the Xerox 914 machine with a counter device that tallied how many 
copies were made. At the end of the month the customer would record 
the computers nobody wanted 21
what was on the meter, write it on a punched card and mail that to Roches-
ter. This approach was unique and fantastically successful. Customers did 
not perceive that copying was expensive (at five cents per copy) when they 
could get instant quality results, without waiting for the usual wet copying 
process to dry. Office personnel lined up to make copies. Xerox salesmen 
only had to stand by with a form to take orders. 
Success with metering created difficulties in getting in all of the 
metering cards. When I showed up less than 70% of the meter cards from 
the installed base got into the monthly billing system on time. There were 
difficulties about giving credits for bad copies when the machine malfunc-
tioned. There was dishonesty in reporting. Joe now felt that the business 
model on which he built his firm was now failing. How could comput-
erization solve this problem? I did not know the answer. I would have to 
study the problem and get back to Joe, though I commented that in due 
course all metering would be done automatically over telephone or power 
lines. 
I was impressed with Joe Wilson. Here was a genuine, thoughtful, 
unassuming and unpretentious person who talked about real problems. 
He was pleased to hear that a new executive, who was supposed to be an 
expert, confessed that he did not have a ready answer. Apparently I passed 
the Wilson test that he used to apply to all newcomers.
Shortly afterwards Flavin called. The Spring Computer Confer-
ence was starting in Boston and XDS would have a large display on it. It 
would feature the brand new Sigma 7 computer, which was the machine 
I was supposed to start installing immediately to fulfill the promise the 
CEO of Xerox, Peter McColough, made a few days before at a meeting of 
financial analysts. Would I “hop on the airplane” and get to Boston to see 
the Sigma 7. The phase “hop on the airplane” would be repeated often in 
the months to come so that the prospect of having early dinners with my 
four little children in Chappaqua kept receding fast.
Scientific Data Systems
Scientific Data Systems, or SDS, was a computer company founded 
in September 1961 by Max Palevsky and a handful of computer scientists 
22 paul strassmann
who used to work mostly for the military. He leveraged a specialty com-
puter firm into an aggressive scientific corporation with sales of about 
$100 million. SDS was an early adopter of integrated circuits and the first 
to employ silicon transistors because that was what the government asked 
for, regardless of cost. SDS was also a user of early versions of the UNIX 
operating system that was favored by defense firms. The company con-
centrated on processing scientific computations that were used in avion-
ics, missile and space applications, including support of NASA where cash 
was hardly ever accounted for. Forty years later I ended up as the Chief 
Information Officer of NASA and was still trying to unscramble NASA’s 
profligate habits. 
SDS machines were fast and were optimized around real-time ap-
plications that took advantage of many innovative features such as the very 
fast random access disk (RAD) for virtual memory swapping. Leading 
time-share firms, Tymshare and Comshare, relied on SDS equipment. It 
was the RAD that made it possible for SDS to become the premier sup-
plier of computing power to firms delivering real-time computing involv-
ing complex calculations. IBM could not match the performance of SDS 
equipment and certainly not the price. I was also aware that SDS supplied 
special versions of Sigma for the Minuteman ballistic missile launch sites.
My First Sigma Computer
When I showed up in the exhibition hall in Boston on May 1, 1969 
as the newly minted Xerox CIO, the XDS booth was crowded with on-
lookers who tried to figure out how a Sigma 7 could function as a business 
computer because that was now the rationale why Xerox bought SDS. I 
was welcomed with an embrace by Lou Perillo, the SDS VP of marketing 
and their star salesperson. Lou had a salesperson smile and personality 
that could sell ice cream to a frost bitten Eskimo. He understood that I 
came to check out the workings of the Sigma 7. The one on the floor was 
a “cream puff” (a used car salesman’s expression I never heard before) and 
fully configured to demonstrate its versatility. Why not save money for 
Xerox and instead of shipping it back to the plant in El Segundo, Califor-
nia how about packing it after the exhibition and trucking it directly to 
the computers nobody wanted 23
Rochester so that I could start using it? Lou’s suggestion was sensible and 
sincere. After I made a call to Rochester to determine if could make a $1.5 
million dollar purchase on the second day on the payroll I signed for the 
machine on the exhibit floor before somebody else would get it.
A closer inspection of the Sigma showed that it had magnetic tapes 
that could be used only for telemetry recording (making archival records 
of sensor inputs) and certainly not for sorting business files. The attached 
disk files — another key to IBM’s business excellence — were not worth a 
damn. The capability of the Sigma to sort and store records would be es-
sential for it could compete with what IBM excelled in. No problem, said 
the gleaming Lou after he pocketed my order, we can always attach to it 
fast tapes from the Systems Dynamics Corporation. With regard to the 
disk files that could be easily fixed by attaching Memorex drives. Mean-
while the Sigma could function as a time-sharing machine and support 
over fifty Teletype terminals.
The Sigma came only with a slim catalogue of software utilities 
that would be essential for any application that was running on an IBM 
machine. Lou informed me that making the Sigma to behave like an IBM 
360 was my job, as he understood it. He was told that McColough had 
set aside a large war chest for converting the scientifically superb Sigma 
computers to performing business data processing. It dawned on me then 
that I had on my hand a one pilot fighter plane that had to be somehow 
transformed into carrying passengers. My only immediate prospect would 
be to displace the Univac 1108 with its communicating terminals with a 
Sigma 7 time-sharing computer. 
The Boston Sigma 7 did not make it to Rochester for another four 
months because it had to be detoured to the factory for a “retrofit.” It took 
another year, and close to ten million dollars to mate the Sigma to com-
mercially suitable tape and disk drives. Despite all such fixes the Sigma 7 
class of computers remained only superior time-sharing machines. These 
computers were respected for their real time capabilities in support of mul-
tiple terminals and sensors, which was exactly what the national security 
agencies needed. At the time of the Xerox acquisition of SDS the IBM Cor-
poration had no intention to match XDS in cost and performance because 
XDS equipment was seen as filling only a niche market that was unstable. 
24 paul strassmann
The IBM Divorce
In view of his close business as well as social relationships with 
IBM executives Flavin believed that a meeting with IBM executives was 
in order to clarify relationships now that Xerox had declared itself as a 
competitor. I think it was about three weeks after I reported to Xerox that 
such a meeting was arranged. Attending were a large contingent from IBM, 
headed by David Kearns, then a regional IBM executive and a well known 
Rochester citizen. Attending for the Xerox side was Flavin, the chief Xe-
rox auditor Walter Marx, a lawyer and myself. I was coached to watch 
Kearns who was enjoying a stellar career at IBM and would be expected 
to rise in the IBM hierarchy. How Kearns would prevent the loss of one 
of his key accounts — and that is how IBM marketing people were evalu-
ated — would unfold in that meeting.
For openers, Flavin made declared that it was McColough’s policy 
that Xerox would replace all IBM computers and that would henceforth 
dictate all of our relationships. I then rattled of the relevant statistics about 
Xerox computing assets, pointing out that the entire firm, in the foresee-
able future, would have to be depend on support from IBM to meet our 
payrolls, pay vendors and collect revenues. I also offered a realistic opin-
ion about XDS equipment, as a superior time-sharing computer with per-
formance that IBM could not match. Whatever we would propose to do 
would call for a close relationship with IBM while we would migrate Xerox 
into an on-line, interactive environment where the existing IBM 360 series 
was underperforming. Alluding to my prior tussle with IBM, I noted that 
Honeywell-like emulation was not a viable solution, since XDS was opti-
mized around time-sharing, not batch processing. So far, everybody was 
smiling. Kearns, in a most personable manner announced that IBM would 
do everything possible to retain its position as a trusted partner of Xerox. 
They intended to earn their monthly leases to the last moment whenever 
we could proceed to do something else. He also congratulated Xerox about 
thinking about communications-based information systems.
So far, the meeting was a love fest until Flavin remarked that my 
own bonus was totally dependent on the number of IBM computers that 
would be displaced. I thought that this closing remark was unnecessar-
the computers nobody wanted 25
ily confrontational. After the meeting I told Flavin, that regardless of the 
pleasantries, IBM was merciless when it came to competing. We were to-
tally dependent on a dedicated staff of about twenty IBM systems engi-
neers plus a full time residential staff of maintenance people, plus local 
spare parts, to keep our billing and payroll system afloat. I predicted that 
IBM would pull off most of these people out of Rochester and let us suffer 
so that they could use this as a lesson to anyone who ever dared to con-
front the power of Armonk.
The usual arrangement with IBM was that each computer installa-
tion was worth a number of points. A point was a dollar’s worth of month-
ly rental. The typical rental for a medium size mainframe, such as a 360/40, 
was $10,000 to $12,000 per month. That increased to well over $30,000 
for the bigger commercial computers, such as the 360/65. As a rule, for 
every 10,000 points you could expect IBM to dedicate to your account an 
“SE” (Service Engineer). These were systems engineers who assisted with 
installing new software releases, debugging the operating system and do-
ing the customer’s technical work. Systems directors would be always ask-
ing IBM to place more SEs on their site. Safe accounts, which were totally 
committed to IBM and had ample computer capacity, usually received less 
support. So-called “target” accounts could obtain from IBM two to three 
times as many people as the average allowance.
Xerox ended up with a total staff of about seventy IBM people, 
costing us nothing, though they were doing work that was not always for 
our benefit. About half of the SEs would be doing pre-sales work and pre-
installation preparations, because we were upgrading equipment all the 
time. About a quarter of the SEs did feasibility studies and proposals to 
benefit the IBM sales efforts. Another quarter of the SEs would be avail-
able to perform tasks that we didn’t have the budget to do, such as explor-
atory technology work. IBM found such engagements profitable because 
it strengthened the relationships with my staff and accelerated the installa-
tion of computers that ultimately generated greater revenues.
I was completely wrong when I thought that Flavin’s aggressive 
posturing would deprive us of the much needed support staffs from IBM. 
They doubled the number of systems engineers and support people! The 
responsiveness of their service was superb. A senior IBM executive was 
26 paul strassmann
assigned permanently as my liaison. I trusted this man to give me good 
advice in the difficult transition to XDS, which never happened. While I 
was responsible for ordering and installing all computing equipment in 
the US directly, and globally indirectly, IBM revenue from Xerox more 
than doubled.
Following my retirement from Xerox I was invited to address a 
large gathering of IBM marketing executives in San Antonio, Texas. This 
took place during the times when IBM started failing and its shares were 
plunging. I told the story about IBM redoubling its support for Xerox at 
times when any other organization would have cut its commitments. In a 
glowing tribute to the “old” IBM organization which always cared about 
making customers successful, I compared Kearns’ action with the then pre-
vailing IBM practice to focus on filling sales quotas selling equipment. A 
number of the older salespeople came to meet me afterwards and thanked 
me for a tribute to an ethics that had been lost in the intervening years. 
Dislodging Computers
Unfortunately, even with superior capabilities the Sigma could 
not dislodge the Univac. The Univac had a large accumulation of soft-
ware, scientific utilities and a proprietary database. That would block any 
attempts for an easy transfer of applications. In the absence of standards 
and with code-and-patch programming, what was running on the Univac 
was for all practical purposes firmly welded into it. To replace the Univac 
we would have to reprogram what was already running well with the as-
sistance of several dedicated programmers. These custodians were con-
tinually fiddling with undocumented codes. Porting such applications to a 
Sigma was not feasible since the resident custodians of the Univac would 
depend on their careers on their identification with that vendor and not 
with a brand new comer to the Rochester computer community.
The problem was that Xerox top management sold Wall Street on 
buying SDS as a vehicle for growth for what was then seen as an unprec-
edented price of one billion dollars. The justification was that Xerox would 
enter into the data processing business to compete head-on with IBM. Xe-
rox would prove that by demonstrating that it could get rid of all of its 
the computers nobody wanted 27
IBM computers, in short order. Xerox had the man to do it, with prior 
experience of displacing IBM. My job would be in peril if I could not de-
liver on that promise. Meanwhile, recruiters fanned out from Rochester 
with orders to hire as many IBM marketing executives as they could entice 
to switch into key copier sales positions until such time when computers 
could be folded into the Xerox catalogue offerings. 
I got to know many of the ex-IBM executives on airplane trips shut-
tling from the White Plain airport to Rochester, then to Los Angeles and 
then making rounds to regional offices of Xerox where the installed IBM 
computers were the targets for displacement. The IBM executives were 
bright, personable, well groomed and well spoken. They were superb sell-
ers of hardware. Whenever there were technical issues, they could readily 
depend on deep echelons of IBM support personnel to answer questions. 
Hiring IBM executives to sell a technically sophisticated time-sharing 
computer, such as a Sigma, was a lost cause. IBMers never managed to 
sell advanced computer systems even while at IBM. Their skills were in 
building relationships with customers, not in technical competence. In the 
absence of a huge support staff at Xerox, which was never acquired, there 
was no earthly reason why the newly hired IBM executives could ever sell 
XDS computers while enjoying huge salaries at Xerox by marketing copi-
ers. 
It was perhaps preordained that the copier sales force and their 
newly acquired IBM transplants would never be tested how well they 
could sell XDS computers. In less than three months I learned a sufficient 
amount of intelligence about the capabilities of XDS equipment to inform 
Joe Flavin that it would take tens of millions of dollars and many years, 
including a major overhaul of the Sigma operating system, for these ma-
chines to take over a business accounting workload. Such news percolated 
to other headquarters staffs that were now putting brakes on any opportu-
nity to start fail-safe testing of selected business applications. What really 
shocked everyone was the discovery, by one of my eager emissaries, that 
despite an impressive showplace data center at the XDS HQ in El Segundo, 
tucked away in the corner was still an IBM computer performing the most 
essential business XDS functions, such a commission accounting and ma-
terials management. In addition, XDS outsourced just about everything 
28 paul strassmann
they could to service bureaus that took care of applications that XDS could 
never hope to load on their own machines. 
As the disappointments about the potentials of XDS, as the flag 
carrier in the wars against IBM, were rising the XDS revenues kept fall-
ing. I am convinced that the flamboyant claims, about XDS transforming 
itself into a business data processing company damaged its hitherto favor-
able reputation as a company that offered advanced real-time computing 
capabilities. When the engineers and the scientists, who were the primary 
decision-makers in the purchase of such machines, heard that the future 
of XDS would be in business data processing they started placing orders 
with the Digital Equipment Corporation. That was a pity, because there 
were a number of applications, such as in time-sharing and in telemetry, 
where XDS was superb.
Burt Tregub ran a turnkey delivery organization in Rockville, 
Maryland from where he was catering to the requirements from national 
security organizations. He explained to me how Sigma could compete 
both in terms of price and performance in real time applications that sup-
ported such needs. The limited functionality of the Sigma operating sys-
tems, a lack of software clutter and the open interfaces were advantages in 
cases where a client needed fast and raw computing power to serve one of 
a kind remotely located devices. Xerox top management paid no attention 
to that. They kept repeating and publicizing what Peter McColough prom-
ised when he paid out a billion dollars for a dream that had no chance 
of ever succeeding. Instead of making out of XDS a small but profitable 
specialized computer firm until such time when they could redirect its 
technologies, Xerox started shoveling money into another strategy that 
would not pay off for a long time. The problem was that Peter McColough 
wanted results immediately as well as very large profits. So far as I was 
concerned, the migration of XDS equipment as a way of displacing IBM 
machines was doomed from the start. I do not remember when I came to 
that conclusion, but it was early in 1972 that I wrote off any prospects of 
becoming a rich man from the promised 5,000 shares for each displaced 
IBM computer.
the computers nobody wanted 29
XDS Conversion
To proceed with the conversion of IBM equipment to the Sigma I 
proceeded to organize a dedicated staff that would be directly accountable 
for displacing IBM computers. It was necessary to structure such effort 
as totally separate activity from the other business computer operations 
that were already struggling to cope with rapidly increasing demands for 
services. The conversion operation was set up as a separate profit center so 
that it could charge its costs to corporate R&D and not to overhead. This 
was one of the many accounting tricks to disguise the full costs of the XDS 
acquisition. Setting up conversion as a business was a smart decision. As 
the costs of the conversion mounted this effort had to be abruptly aborted 
after three years of spending well over two hundred million dollars in ad-
dition to the cost of equipment at manufacturing prices.
To run IBM applications XDS needed a COBOL compiler as well 
as more powerful sort utilities and a batch processing operating system 
that would have to replace the SDS operating system optimized for time-
sharing. Xerox did not have a staff to develop such capabilities. Late in 
1969 Xerox contracted with the French firm CII, which was subsequently 
merged into the French firm Bull, to develop a Xerox operating system for 
commercial purposes — XOS (Xerox Operating System). The announce-
ment of the XOS as a business operating system was featured late in 1969 
on double-page spreads of The Wall Street Journal. It was slated for beta 
testing by the Xerox internal staff now under my control.
 Starting in 1970, many of the commercial class peripherals which 
were necessary to run XOS, such as printers, tape drives and large capac-
ity disk drives were devices I started purchasing for internal use to reduce 
IBM rental payments. These “plug-compatible” peripherals made it possi-
ble to retain the IBM processors, while cutting the cost of monthly rentals. 
I would have followed that course anyway regardless of conversion to XDS 
because the profit margins for the IBM brand peripherals were excessive. 
As one of the largest purchasers of plug compatible disk drives we gave a 
boost to the Memorex company and to the SDC (Systems Dynamics Cor-
poration) firm coming out with high quality tape drives. To show a reduc-
tion in the number of IBM computers in Xerox I also pursued the policy 
30 paul strassmann
of data center consolidation. For instance, instead of six 360/40 computers 
we rented two very large 360/65 machines. Consolidations combined with 
upgrades gave us a reduction in the number of machines that needed fewer 
operators while yielding a four-fold improvement in price/performance.
Under a corporate contract with XDS some of these peripherals 
were shipped with newly configured Sigma 8 and Sigma 9 equipment that 
were labeled as commercial computers but could not be used as such. At 
the peak of the efforts to transform XDS into a vendor that could compete 
with IBM there were more than hundred people on corporate staff trying 
to boost the capabilities of Sigma computers inside Xerox while picking up 
applications to increase the placement of XDS equipment. Though some 
of these Sigma machines would be put to good use as time-sharing ma-
chines to process APL time-sharing they would never displace IBM equip-
ment. The French XOS would not catch up with what IBM had to offer. 
CII itself, on whom Xerox relied to deliver the critical operating system, 
was a firm in disarray. CII, like SDS, was primarily a process automation 
company with sales to the military sector. It was heavily subsidized by the 
French government hoping that it would become a networking firm. XDS 
would rely on CII as a way of minimizing its own software costs. That did 
not work out. It was like the lame leading the blind, which is not the best 
way to race in a marathon.
My involvement with CII and the XOS got me engaged in negotia-
tions with various French organizations that were seeking out cash-rich 
Xerox for a partnership. On my many trips to Paris I was deputized by 
Xerox management to engage in exploratory talk how Xerox could acquire 
a part of the French Minitel messaging service. I thought that the idea of 
buying into a government controlled European videotext system, that was 
wedded exclusively to the French Postal & Telegraph authorities, was an 
example of acquisition promiscuity in Xerox thinking. Other than sump-
tuous dinners and exquisite entertainment the entire exercise was a waste 
of time. When I finally reported to Stamford that I thought Minitel would 
be yet another train-wreck, nobody paid attention because the prospects 
of a French XOS had just faded away.
the computers nobody wanted 31
The Leningrad Caper
As Xerox top management kept emitting mixed signals about the 
destiny of XDS, loyal government customers accounting for less than 1% 
market share of the computer business even during its peak years, started 
looking for other sources of comparable machines. XDS R&D was also 
in disarray, as the newly minted millionaires cashed in their Xerox stock. 
Since the SDS stock was widely held by employees, who were now wealthy, 
they stayed on the payroll for a while to take advantage of Xerox ben-
efits while waiting to form new ventures or to do whatever they pleased. 
Meanwhile they did not contribute much to Xerox although some of them 
received choice corporate staff positions in Stamford. None of the SDS 
transplants in Stamford stayed longer than six months. We also started 
importing Rochester copier manufacturing people to El Segundo to sup-
port operations, which did not work at all because they would be never 
accepted in a totally different culture that was tainted by a Hollywood out-
look on life. 
Max Palevsky, the SDS CEO was an entrepreneur always looking 
for big gains. After the acquisition was consummated he invested in the 
production of “unconventional” movies, which were even more profitable 
than the computer business. Lou Perillo retired and bought an avocado 
farm. Meanwhile, the revenue of XDS kept declining, which was further 
compounded by the discovery of discrepancies about the accounts receiv-
ables and bookings just prior to completion of the acquisition. 
One morning the telephone rang and Flavin was on the wire. Would 
I “hop on the plane” immediately and go to the Department of Commerce 
in Washington to pry loose an export application that was stuck in some 
sort of a bureaucratic hassle? Apparently, a Sigma 6 computer was sitting 
fully crated on the dock in Southampton, England, waiting to be put on a 
Polish ship for delivery to Leningrad for a computer exhibition. The ship 
would be sailing in a few days to arrive just in time for the show. Flavin 
vaguely remembered that I had served on some sort of Commerce scien-
tific committee. Perhaps I would know my way trough the labyrinth of 
Commerce offices on the 14th Street. On this trip our Washington legal 
counsel would accompany me.
32 paul strassmann
When I arrived at Commerce, I was advised to seek out informally 
the man in charge of “munitions control” because high performance com-
puters were then classified as munitions. The staff responsible for granting 
export licenses were hopping mad about the conduct of Xerox. I was not 
ready for the abusive blast I received, which was totally out of line with 
the usual circumspect conduct of senior civil servants. The regulations on 
export of computer equipment to the Soviet Union were strict and were 
administered by Commerce, acting on behalf of the State Department 
though in reality everything was controlled from Langley, Virginia and Ft. 
Meade, Maryland. The computer we applied for in order to ship to Len-
ingrad matched the profile of computers now in our Minuteman ICBM 
missile silos.
We were accused of trying to pull a “fast one” to circumvent an 
absolute prohibition against any equipment that would be of value to So-
viets in the missile race. The Sigma 6 had a peak data rate (PDR) of over 
250 million bits per second, whereas the best Soviets could obtain from us 
legitimately were instruments with a capacity never exceeding a PDR of 
four. Xerox was just lucky that the Government would not invoke criminal 
provisions that would subject us to enormous penalties, a complete exclu-
sion from doing further business with the government and confiscation of 
contraband property. My lawyer advised me to apologize profusely for a 
misunderstanding caused by our Rank-Xerox subsidiary, without corpo-
rate approval. We begged for an immediate withdrawal of the tainted ap-
plication. In view of my prior services to the Assistant Secretary of Com-
merce for Science and Technology I was informally advised that it was the 
habit of Soviets to entice American companies to participate in exhibits 
from where technology would be either stolen, or taken apart and copied 
during nights.
Flavin would not accept my explanation that we were planning to 
smuggle military contraband to the Soviets. It appears that Lou Perillo, 
desperate for making up for dropping US sales, shifted his marketing ef-
forts to international markets where a few firms would place orders for 
advanced model Sigma computers to copy our intellectual property. This 
is how Lou snatched some sales in France, in Algiers (in cooperation with 
the French) as well as an interest from the Soviets. The Soviets knew that 
the computers nobody wanted 33
Xerox would never get an export license and therefore made arrangements 
for a huge platform, at the forthcoming Leningrad technology show, with 
“guarantees” that the equipment would be fully guarded at all times (by So-
viet guards, of course). After the show it would be immediately repacked 
for return to England. For all of that, Lou paid a huge amount of dollars for 
the exhibit space. Without an export license, the space would be empty. It 
would reflect unfavorably because it would show that we were “not trust-
ing the Soviets”, according to the British Chairman of Rank-Xerox. All 
that rubbed Flavin the wrong way because Rank-Xerox (now reporting to 
Flavin) enjoyed an enormously profitable copier business with the Soviets. 
They threatened now to buy copiers from the Germans. 
If the Department of Commerce would approve only display of 
a computer with a PDR below four, I proposed that we would now offer 
only that. Being well versed in Russian history I remembered the “Potem-
kin villages” where a visiting empress was shown prosperous and happy 
peasants greeting her entourage standing in front of houses that had only 
a painted fronts and nothing behind. The prime minister, a Count Potem-
kin, was then praised for managing the czarina’s estates well. 
Our “Potemkin” computer consisted of gray computer cabinets 
plus a printer. The inside circuitry was gutted, including the extraction of 
the high performance RAD (Random Access Device) that the Soviets cov-
eted. Instead, two simple circuit boards were sealed inside the wiring cage. 
The cabinets were also screwed in with breakable fasteners. One circuit 
board would control the console lights, which would blink in random se-
quence when the power button was pressed. The other board would man-
age the printer that spewed out one of four listing on command from one 
of the many console switches. The amused Commerce Department muni-
tions controllers approved the proposed set-up. It met all of the regula-
tions in every respect. The Sigma 6 was loaded, with much fanfare, on the 
Polish freighter. On the exhibition floor the Sigma was unpacked and set 
up behind ropes that were guarded against any nosy onlookers by guards 
provided by the Soviets. The entire event was a considered a great success 
as a sign of close cooperation between American and Soviet technology 
interests. At a subsequent black-tie dinner in London the Chairman of 
34 paul strassmann
Rank-Xerox acknowledged my work for promoting improved customer 
relationships.
Dealing with the Soviets
The Soviets were upset. After they found out that there was no 
chance of ever acquiring useful XDS equipment, they started pressur-
ing Xerox to license manufacturing rights so that they could start mak-
ing copiers. That would never came to pass after we convinced them that 
much of what went into a copier was not manufactured by Xerox at all but 
was purchased from hundreds of suppliers. That was not the way the Sovi-
ets operated. A Minister in charge of copiers could meet the targets set by 
the Five-Year-Plan only if he could fully control the supply of every part. 
That would involve making electrical motors, drums, switches, belts, pul-
leys and hundreds of other components. The proposed copier factory was 
going to be placed in one of the Baltic countries where the workforce was 
not sufficiently demoralized to make precision components. When the So-
viets insisted that we also provide them with the manufacturing drawings 
of what we bought from our suppliers the negotiations broke down and 
after many years they were dropped altogether. For a couple of years we 
had to dedicate one of our most experienced engineers, Merritt Chandler, 
to attend unending negotiating sessions and responding to increased So-
viet demands. Meanwhile, Xerox was increasing the share of purchased 
components and subassemblies included in our equipment. The Soviets 
simply could not catch up with the rising sophistication of our logistics 
that shrank the company-originated value-added to less than 50% of the 
total manufacturing cost. 
I mention this experience as a way of explaining what finally pre-
vented the Soviets from make much headway with computers or with 
XDS. Although their RIAD series were a poor copy of the IBM 360 series, 
they would be kept lagging behind American progress because the Soviet 
planning mechanisms blocked the development of a standard parts and 
supplies business. When I gave a presentation on the management of com-
puters to the Soviet Council of Ministers, near the Kremlin in 1983, their 
interest concentrated on how I could keep the national Xerox data center 
the computers nobody wanted 35
running with 99% uptime, while relying on an elaborate “supply chain” to 
keep it functioning. They had great difficulties understanding this con-
cept. To them a “supply chain” was circumscribed by the extent to which 
any one Minister could manage everything, preferably in the immediate 
proximity of a single site. 
The next day after the presentation to the Council of Misters, I was 
asked to give a seminar to a group of senior Soviet plant managers. After 
hearing about their difficulties in managing production of even simple 
consumer items, such as television sets, refrigerators or washing machines 
economically I came away convinced that the Soviet regime would not be 
able to produce electromechanical goods in sufficient quantity and qual-
ity. They could certainly mass-produce weapons by creating completely 
integrated factories, at an enormous cost, that were devoted exclusively 
to spewing out tanks, rockets and Kalashnikovs. When the Soviet Union 
finally disintegrated six years later, I attributed its demise not to “Star Wars” 
but to their inherent inability to connect thousands of suppliers with hun-
dreds of producers. A relatively small number of bureaucratically and 
politically managed huge industrial complexes ended up with excessive 
amounts of obsolete and unproductive capital assets, while the employ-
ees grew increasingly inefficient because the absence of any critical part 
would stop an entire assembly line.
Exploring Opportunities in Education
When I arrived in Xerox and became the chief responsible for all 
information technologies as well as the General Managers of the Xerox In-
formation Services Division I became immediately diverted to participate 
in strategic planning committees and task forces that would be address-
ing the question whether the copier business would be sufficient to keep 
increasing Xerox profits. This had to be accomplished at rates that would 
justify the huge price/earnings multiple that the Company was enjoying 
on the stock market. Xerox stock, then with a price-to-earnings multiple 
of over sixty, would be placing an enormous burden on any business that 
could deliver improved financial results and pay off on the generous stock 
options now held by all executives. While xerography, at least temporarily, 
36 paul strassmann
could be priced at premium prices that would be unrealistic to continue 
forever. As a diversification, Xerox had to become engaged in other busi-
nesses as well. 
The first task force that I became involved in 1970 was steered by 
Cliff Teem. He was a physicist who had been analyzing the potential of 
making acquisitions that could become a viable diversification vehicle for 
Xerox. In the late 1960s Teem’s group concentrated on getting Xerox in-
volved in then notoriously inefficient education processes. That was seen 
by Joe Wilson both as a business opportunity as well as a service to society. 
Cliff and his team looked at every conceivable transformation of xerogra-
phy, included some very advanced concepts of on-demand publishing of 
textbooks, but none of these could pass a screen as a financial match for 
the copier business. A number of unrelated acquisitions were then made 
in the education sector, without any possibility of leveraging their diver-
sity into then frequently used term of corporate synergy. The education ac-
quisitions were Basic Systems in 1965 (renamed Xerox Learning Systems); 
American Education Publications also in 1965 (renamed Xerox Education 
Publications, including My Weekly Reader); Professional Library Services 
in 1966; Learning Materials, in 1966; R.R. Bowker, in 1967; Ginn textbook 
company in 1968. Grouped with the educational acquisitions were Univer-
sity Microfilm, in 1962 and Cheshire, in 1967. Despite efforts of able execu-
tives, such as David Culbertson, the educational subsidiaries would never 
contribute to Xerox hoped for growth. In due course every educational 
acquisition was sold off, at bargain prices. Again, the major beneficiaries 
of the educational shopping spree were the original owners. For instance, 
Wesleyan University, who had nursed the Weekly Reader magazine for 
many years as a barely subsisting educational service, suddenly acquired a 
large anount of Xerox stock. For that they could afford building a magnifi-
cent new university campus.
Cliff Teem then turned to start looking at unconventional oppor-
tunities that could be grouped into the category “Office of the Future” that 
would haunt Xerox for the next fifteen years, until its demise. It was dur-
ing these sessions with the corporate planners that I became exposed to 
what was then the prevailing strategic planning wisdom at Xerox. Using 
astrology-like circles and unlabelled three-by-three matrixes (a Harvard 
the computers nobody wanted 37
Business School favorite), the markets considered to be eligible for expan-
sion by Xerox were tagged as to their potential. With Xerox revenues ap-
proaching $1 billion, “education” could be seen as a huge market, but only 
vaguely related to anything that could be served profitably by the copier 
marketing organization. It was only subsequent to making educational ac-
quisition that the corporate planners finally removed education from the 
shopping list. 
Looking for the next great leap forward the planners were rank-
ing markets such as in telecommunications, computing, paper (yes, buy-
ing paper mills was examined every year and rejected), commercial leas-
ing, printing, book publishing and magazines as to their potential. Hav-
ing been exposed to techniques of strategic analysis that were adopted by 
the General Electric Corporation and that were now disseminated by Sid 
Schoeffler of the Strategic Planning Institute, I found that the Xerox ap-
proach was based more on arguments and wishes, than on facts. Every 
strategic choice was argued as if it were an MBA case study but with hardly 
any of the depth of insight that would demonstrably narrow the focus for 
attaining a leading market share position in whatever segment that came 
under examination.
Schoeffler’s methods, subsequently imitated by the Boston Con-
sulting Group, made it clear than only firms that could gain one of the top 
three ranking market share position in any competitive segment, could 
hope to reap superior profitability. That was not the way Xerox manage-
ment treated strategic planning. Blindsided by the enormous success of 
xerography, the “Carlson jinx” encouraged plunging into new businesses 
without an already established customer base, without top executive’s mar-
ket experience and starting only with a clearly inferior market share. The 
going assumption was that Xerox stock could now buy a market position, 
marketing know-how, executive experience and whatever technologies 
that could overcome entrenched competitors. 
Project Plato
As the last gasp in an education-based strategy the corporate plan-
ners started exploring the possibility that somehow synergy could be ex-
38 paul strassmann
tracted by exploiting the recently acquired XDS time-sharing capabilities 
for computer-aided education. This involved an interest in buying “Project 
Plato” from the Control Data Corporation of Minneapolis. CDC was run 
by Bill Norris a pioneer in scientific high-performance computing. While 
IBM was concentrating on business computing, where just about all of 
the profits in the computer business could be found, there was still open 
a market niche for high performance scientific computing to be delivered 
as a service. Norris, an excellent engineer, formed a corporation that de-
signed and supplied such computers. For a period of about fifteen years 
there were scientists, especially those who wished to keep their computing 
out of the hands of the IBM-oriented data processing organizations, who 
would be the purchasers of this equipment. CDC was also not bound by 
some of the IBM pricing practices and could successfully bid to supply 
computing power to government agencies. In many respects CDC was 
very much like XDS.
For most of the 1960s CDC built the fastest computers in the world 
only losing that superiority when Norris became diverted into other ven-
tures, of which Plato was a favorite because it attempted to harness the 
power of supercomputers for delivery of computer-aided teaching of el-
ementary school children. For that reason Plato was appealing to a num-
ber of Xerox corporate executives. If we could not buy CDC we could 
consider acquiring Plato as a way explaining why Xerox was in the edu-
cation business. Plato offered superior technology in the form of plasma 
screen desktop displays. This system took advantage of CDC’s competent 
time-sharing offering and offered pioneering innovations in instructional 
methods. Besides, Plato kept receiving rave notices from computer scien-
tists and from computing magazines. 
When Norris offered Plato for sale an acquisition team, including 
myself, was dispatched to Minneapolis to check what CDC had to sell. The 
product demonstrations were impressive and the technologies were ahead 
of anything anywhere. Plato certainly fitted the Xerox visions of bringing 
to the world a revolutionary new way of managing information and would 
have enormous public relations potential. 
On the second day of the shopping tour we visited a second grade 
classroom and observed how children were engaged in the testing of their 
the computers nobody wanted 39
arithmetic skills. I priced out the terminals sitting on the children’s desks, 
followed the cabling into the communications room, interviewed the 
support staff and checked out the computing power that was pumping 
interactive screens into the classrooms. The total cost of ownership, per 
classroom seat (at manufacturing prices), was much greater than the to-
tal annual schooling budget for education of a child in Minnesota. There 
were no displaceable costs to offset such expenses because it would have 
acquired more teachers and an increased staff of curriculum developers 
to operate Plato. The Xerox team returned to corporate headquarters with 
glowing reports, recommending that Plato be licensed as a research in-
vestment despite my non-concurrence. With Xerox always on the look-
out for a prestigious acquisition announcement the Plato deal was almost 
approved except that attention was now sidetracked to dealing with the 
rapidly tarnishing luster of Xerox Data Systems.
The Xerox 530
When the Xerox 530 computer was announced in January 1973 to 
replace the Sigma 3, I made a mistake that ruined my reputation as a cau-
tious computer executive. Trying to please the corporate leadership that 
was eager to show that we could install a large number of XDS computers 
internally in support of US administrative operations, I ordered fifty-eight 
Xerox 530 computers to be installed in each branch office in support of the 
newly-developed COIN system. These machines would give administra-
tive clerks on-line access to customer and equipment files and propel Xerox 
into a real-time environment that could deliver enormous improvements 
in the quality of service to customers. Conceptually as well as financially 
the migration of Xerox administrative systems from batch processing to 
on-line processing was a great idea. In practice, it violated every principle 
to which I always adhered: never to pursue more than one, or at most two, 
major systems revolutions simultaneously. 
In this case we were going to install a state-of-the-art new comput-
ing environment, on an extremely short schedule, with unproven hardware, 
with as yet untested software, with newly hired managers, using person-
nel with only batch processing skills. Compounding all of the challenges 
40 paul strassmann
was the growing resistance from the regional financial bureaucracies who 
opposed yielding control over original data entries to branch office per-
sonnel. These were at least seven major sources of risk. Anyone of these 
taken more than one at a time could sink the project. When the risks were 
combined for rapid implementation the failure was inevitable. 
So far my track record in Xerox was close to perfect. Despite good 
advice not to proceed I signed up for the Xerox 530’s and to the vision 
to take Xerox administrative processes into a time-sharing environment. 
With Ray Hay now in the position as President of US operations, it was 
his insistence that pursuing the re-engineering of business processes for 
the copier business was mandatory as a defensive move against Japanese 
encroachments. If I over-ran budgets or schedules that would not matter 
in the long run. When XDS pulled out of the computer business and Ray 
Hay decided to quit, I was stuck with a very bad bet. The much needed re-
forms of the Xerox administrative systems were killed and never restarted. 
This contributed to what Xerox experienced years later by coming close to 
bankruptcy. 
After cleaning up the mess after the COIN project was dismantled 
I expected to get fired. Then the unexpected happened. In 1975 I was pro-
moted to a corporate staff job as Vice President with only 9-5 duties in-
stead of the harrowing around the clock worries about malfunctioning 
hardware and software.
The End Game
In 1972 Archie McCardell became president of Xerox and Peter 
McColough moved up to became chairman. Archie McCardell was an ex-
financial executive from Ford Motor Company and it was said that this 
represented an attempt by the Board of Directors to convert Xerox from 
an undisciplined, fast growth venture to a structured and orderly corpo-
rate enterprise. Archie’s arrival coincided with the slow-down in revenue 
growth and the flattening of the upward trend in the price of Xerox stock.
Applying methods and logic applicable to the declining fortunes 
of Ford, the corporate finance staff now started an interrogation how and 
when XDS would be shipping the much delayed new computers. XOS, the 
the computers nobody wanted 41
Xerox Operating System, a joint venture of CII, would be late and most 
probably not a breakthrough product. Meanwhile, the Digital Equipment 
Corporation and the Control Data Corporation were rapidly gaining mar-
ket share. Financial controls were now getting installed in El Segundo. 
Problems with cash flow accounting and receivables irregularities were 
discovered. The generous sum available for conversion of internal Xerox 
computing based on IBM machines was throttled to subsistence levels as 
the prospects of displacing IBM now receded into an indefinite future. I 
was now quoted that SDS had misrepresented what they could do to de-
liver commercial data processing services. 
Valiant attempts to involve XDS in joint marketing with national 
account copier sales representatives didn’t get anywhere. Copy sales peo-
ple were calling on office managers or the print shop supervisor, with pur-
chasing authority for operating expenses. Computer representative were 
calling on Directors of Information Systems who would have to go trough 
a time-consuming review process prior to approving acquisition of large 
capital investments. Complicating this situation was the absence of com-
mercial selling experience by XDS. Their marketing people never called 
on corporate chief information officers but mostly on scientists, heads of 
university data centers and government program managers. XDS got or-
ders based on competitive bids for purchases. Xerox copier salespeople 
used charm, pricing arrangements and re-shuffling of equipment to talk 
about monthly rentals. A few IBM transplants could not compensate for 
such deficiencies.
The auditors discovered problems with plant management. In a 
shift to functional centralization the computer manufacturing facilities 
in El Segundo were precipitously brought under control of Don Lennox, 
the VP of manufacturing and an experienced automobile production ex-
ecutive. He started placing manufacturing staff from the copier factory in 
Webster, New York, to run the plant in El Segundo. The more they tried to 
run computer manufacturing — in Ford style — the worse it got because 
of the culture and totally different concept of operations. Sigma machines 
could not be serially mass-produced in quantity. They were hand-assem-
bled as one of a kind configuration, in limited quantities. Sigma computers 
were completed to meet the customers’ specifications with only a second-
42 paul strassmann
ary consideration given to direct costs. Good manufacturing practices that 
would perhaps apply in Detroit to mass-produced automobiles (they did 
not, as was shown later) certainly did not work in El Segundo making 
custom computers. The Webster people then tried to improve labor utili-
zation rates in the now mostly empty computer manufacturing facilities by 
transferring production from the East to the West. That made things only 
worse. A labor force and facilities suited for assembly of custom-made 
computers could not be turned around to make copiers at the rate of 300 
a month.
As the losses mounted, the number of task forces looking for bold 
and quick solutions kept growing. I was a member of about more than 
half of them because there were now a large number of XDS machines 
installed or committed under my control. As information about XDS ca-
pabilities became better understood we concluded that the decision to go 
into the computer business was made with little forethought. Going into 
the computer business should have been made strategically, as long-term 
(10 year) commitment in a specialized market niche, instead of attacking a 
broad market which was what the various task forces were now analyzing 
on a quarter-by-quarter basis. While we were examining current bookings 
and order backlogs, the mismatch between public relations pronounce-
ments and viable options how to fix the situation was increasing. After 
current sales dropped by 50% everybody’s attention turned to an examina-
tion how to exit the computer business with minimum losses.
Winding Down XDS
As the financial health of XDS was shriveling the corporate conver-
sion project started assuming some the development tasks should have 
been properly charged to XDS as a cost of entry into commercial data 
processing. The capable Jack Lewis, ultimately the CEO of Amdahl, now 
assumed the leadership of XDS. By 1974 Jack was ready to launch a com-
mercially oriented computer, the Sigma 9 computer that would offer many 
of the desirable characteristics considered suitable for business transac-
tion processing, especially in the manufacturing environment. When Jack 
was ready to present his case for corporate review, and with some of the 
the computers nobody wanted 43
development money now booked as a corporate expense and not charge-
able to XDS, the enthusiasm for becoming a computer firm had evapo-
rated. The funding for an aggressive program to promote the Sigma 9 was 
not approved. An otherwise promising machine that would have gained a 
modest but profitable market niche was allowed to fade away. 
Because XDS could not sell large commercial computers, they 
continued to develop successors to their Sigma 2 and Sigma 3 microcom-
puters. These products were well accepted in laboratories and as control 
devices for manipulating data transferred from scientific instrumentation. 
The new Xerox 530 was a scaled down version of large Sigma machines. 
While it was a part of Xerox, XDS retained its own marketing or-
ganization and its own service organization, except towards the end its 
manufacturing came under Rochester control. That made no sense except 
to hide some of the rising unabsorbed overhead. Originally, SDS was to-
tally autonomous at all times, including research. Their R&D declined im-
mediately prior to the acquisition so that accounting profits could be tem-
porarily increased. After the acquisition by Xerox R&D remained stagnant 
and ultimately vanished.
There was no sharing of resources between XDS and Xerox even 
though many meetings were held to explore ways for working together. 
The principal rationale for the acquisition price of a billion dollars was 
justified by the presumed synergies that never materialized. Unfortunate-
ly, there was no fit with anything one could find among Xerox products. 
There was no fit with copier marketing, even with the newly joined ex-IBM 
executives who knew how to manage sales but not computer technology.
Compounding the misfit between SDS and Xerox was the fact 
that XDS business was already in a slump as defense purchases suffered 
through it customary cyclical decline, starting late into 1968. XDS was go-
ing to make their profit plan for 1969 by shipping a substantial amount 
of equipment, booked at list prices, internally to Xerox. That is why I at-
tracted much attention about all of the XDS equipment I was planning to 
deliver for intra-company information processing.
On a cost performance basis, if you disallow for excessive down-
time and high maintenance charges, the Sigma 7 computer was for a mo-
ment the best real-time computer available because it was designed to 
44 paul strassmann
function with an operating system that relied on virtual memory swap-
ping. We bought a number of such computers for the research center to be 
applied to on-line interactive calculations by the research staff. 
Luckily there was a backlog of information processing needs on 
the analytic side, especially in financial simulations of pricing. Offering 
generous Sigma time-sharing capacity for on-line Teletype terminals was 
an effective way of getting the finance and research staffs off my back. Pric-
ing and marketing analysts loved to invent all sorts of theoretical financial 
models how to optimize prices and sales commission plans. We had hun-
dreds of such model builders looking for computing power to calculate 
hundreds of possible alternatives. The Univac 1108 became totally saturat-
ed and could not support such efforts and therefore workload was shifted 
to Sigma 7 computers, which allowed me to maintain the pretense that I 
was converting to XDS. 
Xerox withdrew from the mainframe computer business on July 21, 
1975 after only five years of pursuing completely unrealistic expectations 
while the overhead costs grew completely out of control. It gave up try-
ing to salvage this diversification only three years after announcing to the 
world that it would carve out a major position in the computer business. 
We sold off the remaining inventory to Honeywell who continued to do a 
competent job maintaining the leftovers of a misconceived venture. I do 
not believe that anyone ever figured out the shareholder costs of the abort-
ed efforts to enter the computer business. The losses were co-mingled with 
the firm’s cash flows and were promptly forgotten. 
In closing the computer business Xerox management missed an 
opportunity to convert its losses into a valuable gain how to avoid repeat-
ing the XDS experience again. That was not done at corporate headquar-
ters, where I was member of a task force consisting of David Kearns, Don 
Pendery, Jim Campbell (of Xerox Computer Services) and myself that rec-
ommended why and how to finally close out XDS. My position was that 
a small and profitable time-sharing business could be salvaged under the 
leadership of Jack Lewis who meanwhile prepared a credible plan how to 
proceed assuming that all past costs were sunk anyway. Retaining XDS as 
a placeholder would have maintained support for the 140 XDS computers 
that I now operated and would provide options to grow the business even 
the computers nobody wanted 45
though the expected spectacular profits would not materialize in the im-
mediate future. The task force had marching orders from McCardell and 
O’Neill to take an extremely short-term view of the cash situation. Con-
sequently the recommendation to proceed with an immediate shutdown, 
except for computer printing, was inevitable. 
Exit from the computer business was never discussed again in the 
two follow-on executive seminars run by the Harvard Business School 
professors and which I attended. That was regrettable, as the next failed 
venture (into the office automation business) would demonstrate soon. 
Failures happen in business and in life. Failures can be valuable if they can 
be converted into learning how not to repeat them ever again. In the case 
of Xerox the collapse was going to be repeated except that in the case of 
the next round the costs would be higher and ultimately cripple the once 
most promising innovative venture in America. 
Thoughts about XDS
In retrospect, the purchase of SDS as well as the later funding of 
PARC can be now understood as a romantic attempt to recreate what oc-
curred when the Haloid bet on a prototype copier demonstrated by the 
Battelle Institute. Accordingly, SDS was offering a daring and bold new ar-
chitecture that offered a capable communications-oriented computer. The 
SDS, through time-sharing, offered new ways how to deliver computing 
services. SDS had nurtured different systems architectures than IBM. It 
offered virtual memory capability, which they did not invent but adapted 
from the UCLA at Berkeley, a notoriously non-conformist place. Its top 
executives would be best described as brash and aggressive operators, who 
went to great lengths to demonstrate their unconventional behavior. The 
SDS headquarters had no elevators to encourage physical fitness. The CEO 
drove to work in a London taxi. IBM style white shirts and short haircuts 
were avoided and kinky life-style habits were emulated in public. SDS dis-
played all of the cocky characteristics of a team ready to subdue IBM with 
a business model aimed at destroying the corporate data center, which 
was IBM’s stronghold. SDS sold Xerox top executives — none of them hav-
ing hands-on experience in running a data center — on the idea that SDS 
46 paul strassmann
could become and instrument of destruction of IBM. As long as Xerox 
was ready to pay for that, SDS executives were eager participant in such a 
joyride.
Such claims, supported without evidence of a single case of ever 
displacing an IBM business data installation, were catering to the wishes 
for Xerox to participate in the rapidly expanding computer business. SDS 
top management and Arthur Rock, the venture capitalist controlling much 
of SDS shares, appealed to Xerox’s quixotic dreams of gaining quick access 
to the future of the computer industry. While SDS had less than 1% of 
market share of the computer industry, and even then only in the narrow 
segment of a notoriously unstable government defense sector, the expec-
tations of making rapid gains that could add to Xerox multi-billion dollar 
revenues were a dream except that such speculations became a rational-
ization for the exorbitant price paid for SDS. After the acquisition, leading 
SDS executives either retired or would be appointed to key corporate staff 
positions in the Stamford HQ while they kept their houses in California 
and quit Xerox when their stock options matured. Most of the XDS top ex-
ecutives were replaced by recent ex-IBM recruits from Rochester. The re-
maining XDS executives delighted in coming to staff meetings at Stamford 
in polyester blue suits with a florescent hue. Dan McGurk, now the XDS 
CEO once showed up with a tie with the picture of a giant green frog. Such 
anti-establishment accentuation of cultural differences were duly noted as 
demonstrations of increased alienation between a failing Xerox subsidiary 
and the HQ staff who would be soon receiving reduced bonuses.
For all practical purposes the ex-IBMers now transplanted to El 
Segundo were useless in redirecting the rapidly declining SDS fortunes. 
Much of that was a matter of life style. The mid-level executives from up-
state New York were from the University of Rochester, University of Indi-
ana and the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. They were committed to cor-
porate careers and practiced mid-American values of family and church 
going. XDS was Berkeley, UCLA and anti-establishment both in beliefs 
and in the way they lived. 
When Xerox tried to make XDS into something that looked like 
IBM that idea was doomed to failure. The technology of XDS would 
never fit what IBM was good at. IBM’s only time-sharing computer, the 
the computers nobody wanted 47
IBM360/67 was an overpriced and poorly performing machine that was 
not a product they sold to large organizations who were their principal 
customers. IBM’s salespeople made money selling hardware, not services 
and therefore their culture did not line up with what was originally seen as 
an SDS advantage. By 1973 IBM gladly got rid of its Service Bureau Corpo-
ration as a part of an anti-trust agreement — something they had wished 
to do anyway because it did not fit their capital-intensive business model.
Corporate Information Systems 
D
uring my interview for the position as Director of Information 
Systems of the Xerox Corporation, I talked with Joe Flavin for 
an hour about my views how the management of information 
resources would be evolving and how providing information as a profes-
sionally managed service would in due course offer the best way how to 
organize corporate systems. Joe agreed with this vision as a concept lead-
ing to the creation within Xerox of an independent Information Services 
Division (ISD) that would operate as a profit center. ISD would be ex-
tracted from the budget of corporate finance and become a servant of any-
one who could pay a quoted competitive price (market price less industry 
marketing expense) for services received. Although these were lofty goals, 
and were explained to everyone in such terms, the real reason for charter-
ing ISD was a politically expedient way how to find one more place where 
to hide the cash hemorrhage from XDS. As is the case in major corporate 
reorganizations, there is always an official explanation as well as a political 
reason for everything. 
When I became the Chief Information Systems Executive of Xerox 
there was already a large staff already in place. In the US there were over 
three hundred data processing people split among the various controller 
organizations. To stage the migration to XDS computers I started moving 
senior staff from reporting to divisional comptrollers and placed them un-
der the direct corporate control within a specially chartered XDS conver-
sion organization that would be affiliated with the Information Services 
Division I would be running. The local controllers would be then given 
generous headcount allowances for backfilling hires. 
50 paul strassmann
The Equipment Billing Situation
As a first priority I decided to concentrate on my prime job of fixing 
what needed to be done with Xerox’s internal business operations. When I 
showed up fewer than 70% of the installed machines could be billed at the 
end of each month. All copiers had meters counting the copy volume. In-
voicing depended on a customer returning a pre-punched card, recording 
the month-end meter reading. There were an exceptionally large number 
of disputes about the timing of meter readings and unsettled credits is-
sued against copy counts. That happened whenever a Xerox service man 
tested a malfunctioning machine. Consequently there were copiers that 
could not be billed. Until disputes were resolved, usually by accommodat-
ing a customer’s claims, the billing system held an account in suspense. 
Compounding this situation was perhaps the most complicated commis-
sion system ever invented for the Xerox sales force. Central marketing staff 
used frequent changes in the pricing plans and commission plans to steer 
the sales force to sell the right products and for the customers to order the 
correct equipment. The continuous fiddling with pricing and commissions 
was inherited from IBM except that in the case of Xerox the changes were 
more frequent along with reorganizations and with the constant shifting 
in salespersons’ territories. When I arrived there were hundreds of pricing 
plans plus all sorts incentive deals and allowances, such as for group pur-
chases. The commission plan was tied into the billing systems. Unbilled 
invoices became a target for entering arbitrary adjustments that fouled up 
the entire invoicing process. In the ensuing years the billing situation got 
progressively worse, especially when Xerox started offering equipment for 
outright purchase in addition to renting it out on a per copy basis. 
Copier prices and commissions were subject to change by the fi-
nancial analysts who were recently minted MBAs without selling experi-
ence. While Xerox enjoyed a quasi monopoly position in the copier busi-
ness they could shape the revenue and profit expectations at will. Invoices 
would be understandable only to an audit expert. What originally was an 
offer of a simple per copy usage fee now become so complicated that com-
petitors advertised that even though Xerox technology was superior the 
invoices were not acceptable. From the purely data processing standpoint, 
the computers nobody wanted 51
the worst offender to this situation was the way the sales force got paid. 
Sales people received checks, under a complex calculation that included an 
allowance for the realization of potential future revenues. In cases that the 
revenue did not materialize, or in cases when a customer returned a copier 
that had generated premium commissions, the system was supposed to 
back-charge a salesperson’s paycheck for any differences. Performing such 
manipulations was a nightmare. 
The billing system and the commission system transactions were 
recorded on magnetic tapes. To retroactively rerun any adjustments re-
quired a looking-back analysis of prior invoices and of prior copy volumes. 
At month-end this required spinning data that existed on a huge bank of 
tape drives in an exact sequence, so that adjustments could be made to 
historical records. Naturally, errors would be made and sales people, each 
with a good smattering of systems know-how, developed a keen eye for 
any errors that did not favor them. This led to inquiries, audits and adjust-
ments that were noted by the financial controllers as MIS (management 
information systems) errors. As long as computers reported to financial 
executives, the noise level of complaints was held to a minimum. Fat 
margins made it possible to reach settlements that were acceptable to the 
marketing people. Later, when computers would be run independently of 
the financial establishment, complaints about commission errors rose to 
highly audible levels.
As the company grew and the squeeze on Xerox profits increased, 
the manipulation of pricing plans, territory re-alignments and sales com-
pensation plans intensified. While we were busy reprogramming the 
billing/sales commission systems — now exceeding 300 million lines of 
patched Auto code with a smattering of COBOL — the sales force got ac-
customed to spending a substantial amount of time figuring out how to 
take a clever advantage of the latest incentives. In a number of cases the 
new plans opened unintended loopholes. When that happened, orders to 
stop the reprogramming of the commission system were released and new 
guidelines were issued. Errors were now added to corrections. As the ef-
fective date of a new pricing plan approached, most selling slowed down 
and programmers had to postpone any fixes until the next software release. 
52 paul strassmann
From this experience grew my understanding of how disorder could be 
self-induced in what could be otherwise an orderly process.
The administrative burden of delivering invoices and payroll plus 
commission checks was overwhelming as Xerox was growing at a fast rate. 
When I showed up I was told that more than a quarter of invoices could 
not be sent out on account of discrepancies caught by a huge number of 
administrative clerks prior to the invoices getting stuffed into envelopes. I 
started concentrating on straightening out the billing and payment system 
instead of addressing the job I was hired to do, which was to get rid of IBM 
computers. 
There was no way I could trust XDS equipment to replace IBM 
computers while I was fixing billing. Until it could prove itself, under con-
trolled and audited conditions, XDS equipment would be restricted to de-
liver only scientific, time sharing and real-time processing services. Cash 
related applications such as accounts receivable, payroll and shareholder 
disbursement would be the last ones ever leaving IBM equipment. These 
applications were never converted to XDS. Because of a steady growth 
in the number of transactions, Xerox expenditures for IBM equipment 
actually increased, which escaped the attention of top management who 
preferred to be oblivious to such trends.
With major help from accounting, I accomplished the acceleration 
of the billing process in less than eight months. Instead of billing only 70% 
of the copiers, we increased that to slightly over 90%. Most of that was 
achieved not through computerization, but by changing the process how 
copier credits were accounted for. Long outstanding disputes were written 
off and all credits were settled instantly. Computerized billing, now unen-
cumbered by suspended customers receivables could now turn around the 
billing cycle faster and more frequently.
General Manager of the Information Services Division
Shortly after I made major improvements in the billing cycle for 
Xerox copiers I was moved from reporting to Joe Flavin, the Staff EXVP 
and CFO to start working for Ray Hay, President of US operations. That 
was most gratifying because Ray had the curiosity as well as a quick intel-
the computers nobody wanted 53
lectual grasp of the importance of systems to the future of Xerox. Instead 
of holding a corporate staff position with a staff of 30 I was now the Gen-
eral Manager of a newly created Information Services Division, ultimately 
with a staff of over 2,000. We operated data centers, telecommunications, 
programming services, systems design and operations research in the US.
Reporting to the President instead of the Chief Financial Offi-
cer was a monumental step. Most chief computer executives have always 
reported to the CFO even as late as the mid 1980s. Placing information 
technology as one of the key functions at the top of the organizational 
hierarchy had far reaching implications. My advancement was duly noted 
and envied by my industry peers. This extricated IT from the possession 
of the CFO where it was always treated as a cost center for automation of 
clerical labor. 
The opposition to the move came from the leading Regional Gen-
eral Manager, Irwin Engelman, who had his eyes set on the position of 
the corporate CFO. Our disagreements culminated in a Harvard Business 
School case study to debate the merits of IT reporting through finance vs. 
a position near the top of the organization chart. My winning argument 
was supported by an analysis of how IT spending was allocated according 
to corporate functions. The largest share of computer spending, per capita, 
was in support of the financial functions with annual costs of IT exceeding 
payroll costs of financial analysts. Customer service personnel who main-
tained equipment at the customers’ premises were receiving less than $400 
of computer services per capita per year. That was seen as an unbalanced 
allocation that would be rectified by setting up the data processing opera-
tions as a service function where response to paid for demand would steer 
the spending for computers. 
My big promotion came in March of 1972, when I was shown on 
the top-level organization chart of the company. Reporting to Peter Mc-
Colough, the CEO, was the COO Archie McCardell. Reporting to Mc-
Cardell was Ray Hay, President of US Operations and Joseph Flavin, now 
President of International Operations. In the US I reported at the same 
level as Jim O’Neill (in charge of Technology) and David T. Kearns (in 
charge of Marketing). This was as high as I ever got in Xerox. It placed me 
on the senior executive roster where I was kept even after I retired in 1985. 
54 paul strassmann
It was clear that I was getting groomed for a position to manage an office 
automation business.
Organization of ISD
Perhaps the best summary of the principles for organizing the In-
formation Services Division (ISD) can be found in an article I penned 
for the Harvard Business Review. It summarizes the economic principles 
that lead to variable pricing of computer services.1 For the computer com-
munity I extended these ideas to pricing concepts that would relate IT to 
profitability.2 The economic charter of ISD was an evolution of concepts 
that I started nursing at General Foods and then commenced to imple-
ment at National Dairy. Years later, at the Department of Defense in 1989, 
I dusted off my papers about service utilities by becoming one of the three 
executives who defined the roles and the structure of the Defense Infor-
mation Services Agency, now a $10.3 billion/year organization. In retro-
spect I have been dealing with the identical challenges at every place of 
employment since 1963.
The ISD was organized into ten business units, each with its rev-
enue, costs and implied profits. My purpose was to measure the efficiency 
of each business unit so that by the end of each quarter one could judge 
performance. The idea of an implied profit for an in-house captive (in-
sourced) operation was completely strange to the financial community 
though Ray Hay understood it and supported it. The metrics were based 
on the principle that I would be allowed to charge prevailing market prices 
for each service minus a 20% allowance for marketing expenses I did not 
have to incur because I had captive customers. In due course my comp-
troller developed a detailed price list for each service. During the first year 
ISD showed a small loss because I was building a data center. In the sub-
sequent years the Division showed a good profit which was pocketed into 
the corporate coffers.
1 
“Managing the Costs of Information,” Harvard Business Review, October 1976.
2 
“The Future Direction of Information Services to Impact the Bottom Line,” Pro-
ceedings of the 8th Annual Conference of the Society for Management Information Systems, 
September, 1976.
the computers nobody wanted 55
The largest unit in ISD were three data operations, each about half 
of an acre in size. In the first room were time-sharing operations as well 
as a showpiece for our XDS Sigma installations. We stocked a large inven-
tory of spare parts for that purpose. In the second room were IBM360/65 
computers each with a huge bank of tape drives to run the incredible sorts 
that were demanded by our complex applications. In the third room were 
smaller computers as well as a line-up of impact printers. The computer 
rooms were individually secure and isolated in case of fire and protected 
against intrusions. In close proximity was a very large output handling 
section where paper printouts were sorted out and staged for delivery. The 
data center did not have a keypunch printing operation because I decen-
tralized that for close proximity to the points of origin of data. In the base-
ment, deeply underground, was a huge vault for storing data tapes. The 
underground tapes were rotated to upstairs storage and then to an outside 
repository.
I set up entrepreneurial operations in small rooms at the data cen-
ter to develop new technologies. This included a surprisingly innovative 
and lucrative microfilm production operation and a remote-print-delivery 
unit that would eliminate labor and transportation costs by distributing 
computer printout electronically.
My programming operations were decentralized to three locations 
in the Rochester area. Programming was organized to be near customers, 
with manufacturing in Webster, business processing downtown Rochester 
and the COIN project in its separate location.
A small but very active Operations Research staff was set up in the 
corporate building to be close to marketing and planning. 
Perhaps the most successful unit of ISD were telecommunication 
operations that proceeded aggressively and with great speed to extract 
voice phones, telex, facsimile and computer terminals out of the hands 
of office services. Particularly impressive was one of the first computer-
driven network switches — an XDS computer — that established data con-
nections with Xerox worldwide subsidiaries. 
Running ISD as a Division General Manager was a killer job. I lived 
in Chappaqua and commuted for three and half years to Rochester. In ad-
dition to that I was serving on a variety of corporate strategy committees 
56 paul strassmann
as well as the global Chief Staff Officer for all of IT. In retrospect, it was 
a job that was not doable. I still have deep regrets that from 1971 through 
1974 my family did not see much of me. Mona, alone in Chappaqua with 
four little children carried her burden without complaint even when on 
weekends I retired to my office to catch up with paperwork. 
The wear and tear was not only on myself but also on my underlings. 
They were pleased to be running their business units because I gave them 
ample freedom to allocate money and manpower as they saw it fit as long 
as they were making the quarterly numbers. It was only years later that I 
discovered that all three of my managers of data center operations had a 
divorce while they were working for me.
By the end of 1974 holding both the job as General Manager as well 
as global Chief Information Officer was too much for any person to carry. 
Also, my failure to execute the COIN project that was based on XDS mini-
computers faltered and I lost support from the finance establishment that 
never liked me anyway. I divested myself of the ISD job by handing it over 
to an accountant who would continue running the Division as a custodial 
operation. My job as the Chief Information Officer was now augmented 
with additional staff responsibilities for global administration staffs, and I 
was able to come home more often.
The Corporate Data Center
The XDS conversion effort would now become an opportunity to 
accelerate the trend towards consolidation of computer operations, first 
in the US and ultimately globally. Flavin knew my bias in this regard and 
asked for a proposal how to accomplish that. 
I had been nursing the concept of a computer utility since my Gen-
eral Foods days. I tried to apply that idea to the consolidations in Kraft, but 
it was not affordable because communication technologies were still too 
expensive if one had to reach to a widely distributed retail delivery sys-
tem. With Xerox now making communications oriented computers and 
with the possibility of huge gains to be realized from an acceleration of 
all transactions, a network-based utility would make sense provided one 
could proceed with caution. Besides, Xerox marketing operations were al-
the computers nobody wanted 57
ready consolidated into five Regions, which reduced the need for a highly 
distributed network. 
What finally swayed the decision to proceed with the chartering 
of the Information Services Division was the recognition that the exist-
ing computer facilities located in downtown Rochester were inadequate. 
Xerox computers were operating in a high-risk environment and were 
physically insecure. I proposed proceeding with the construction of a 
state-of-the-art data center on the campus of Webster manufacturing and 
R&D operations. The new building (Building 300) would be surrounded 
by a high security fence, build-in sensors to control the transportation 
of magnetic media, windows made of blast-proof Lexan, a bomb-proof 
subterranean vault for housing up to 100,000 reels of magnetic tape, an 
uninterrupted battery powered supply of electricity, two huge diesel gen-
erators and a weeks’ supply of fuel. All power and communications wires 
would be buried underground and would be fed from two independent 
sources of electrical power. Monitors would record the movement in an 
out of three compartmented computer rooms that were equipped with a 
wide range of monitoring and fire-prevention gear. When I proposed the 
budget for Building 300 that would have met even stringent Department 
of Defense requirements it was approved without question. The building 
was constructed on time and on budget because any construction change 
orders had to be signed by myself and I did not sign any.
Manufacturing Systems
The big issue in 1970-1971 was installing a new requirements plan-
ning package so that we could schedule production planning for our plants 
in Webster. Manufacturing lead times had to be rolled out so we could see 
whether the incoming components were in synchronization with the fluc-
tuations in the manufacturing schedules. We depended on the coordina-
tion of in-bound components and sub-assemblies from a large network of 
suppliers. Xerox was buying a large share of what parts were needed for 
copying machines such as electrical motors, switches and lenses. While 
we were making as many as 50 models of copying equipment in the facto-
ries at any time we had to order parts averaging 5,000 stock keeping units 
58 paul strassmann
per model per shift. All that required the computers to project a planning 
horizon, by shift, of 52 weeks into the future for every model component 
number. 
The output to produce the desired results started running on a 
Thursday night. To do a weekly production run we assembled the inven-
tory status in the factory and in the plant warehouses, plus anything that 
would be arriving on the shipping dock. We then forecast what the pro-
duction yield would be for Thursday, Friday, and possibly for Saturday in 
case the factory was on overtime. We had to confirm all the in-bound 
materials that had come in during the week plus what was in the trucks 
would be delivering for the balance of the week. We also had to take into 
the master files all of the engineering changes that took place during the 
intervening week. Only after that could we start on a requirement run, late 
Thursday night. If all went well we could be finished Saturday afternoon. 
If there was a problem during the computer run, we had to use Sunday as 
a buffer. 
The component and schedule projections were enormous comput-
er runs and involved twenty tape sorts. The entire system was considered 
to be a state of the art application. All the records were on magnetic tapes 
because disk drives arrived only later on. We had to make sure that there 
was limited delay between written input to tape drives and the final out-
come. Only an IBM 360/65 had the capacity to do such work because the 
more powerful communications-oriented IBM360/67 computers could 
not process our workload. 
The IBM computers supported only a handful of terminals. Be-
cause we had lots of COBOL sequential code we had to modify the IBM 
operating system so that the huge sorts could be executed in the time we 
had available. It was customary in those days for large computer instal-
lations to modify the manufacturer’s operating system, especially if you 
needed a teleprocessing monitor to keep track of what was getting done. 
IBM did much of that work. They used that experience to feed back to 
their organization what needed fixing for the next software release. All of 
this involved a continuous and complex interaction between Xerox pro-
grammers and the IBM staff. Without such close coordination the systems 
would have failed. What mattered was the fact that the parts pick-lists for 
the computers nobody wanted 59
the production starting Monday morning had to be available by 5AM on 
Monday. There was no way how we could cause a halt in the production as 
workers were arriving for the first shift. Tickets had to be ready to be put 
into baskets so that parts could be picked for every copier scheduled into 
production. 
Manufacturing scheduling in a production environment to run a 
plant was a mammoth undertaking in the early 1970s involving thousands 
of tasks. The computer system supported a manufacturing sequence that 
had to be timed by means of time-motion studies to set the pace for the 
assembly. We had to examine all bottlenecks to find which piece you could 
be automated by making sub-assemblies. Without reliable IBM equipment 
and without the IBM systems engineering support delivering what was 
needed would have not been feasible. 
European Regional Centers
The pressure to offer XDS equipment to our Rank-Xerox subsid-
iaries coincided with an enormous expansion in the copier business in 
Europe. Whatever computing and tabulating equipment was performing 
invoicing functions was quickly reaching their capacity. I now received the 
added mission to visit England, Germany, France, Holland, Italy, Spain 
and Sweden to explore the possibility of creating regional data centers that 
could support local operations. This effort was complicated further by an 
offer from the French government to give to Rank-Xerox a substantial sub-
sidy in case we would be interested in creating a European data center in 
Sophia Antipolis near Nice. The French have already attracted IBM as well 
as an airline reservation center to become tenants in what was proposed 
to be a brand new science community dedicated to the creation of an in-
formation society. As was usually the case with similar French projects 
the complex near the Riviera was a highly promoted but badly disguised 
attempt to create a competitor to the Silicon Valley in the US.
In 1971 I must have made at least fifteen trips to Europe to partici-
pate in negotiations how to structure both the installation of XDS equip-
ment as well as the opportunities for consolidation of data processing ser-
vices. I still remember one occasion when it was necessary for me to get a 
60 paul strassmann
decision from Joe Flavin who would be available only at the Hotel de Cril-
lon at Place de la Concorde in Paris. Incidentally, Crillon was by far one 
of the most expensive hotels in the world (it was occupied by the German 
High Command during the war). Living there attested to the high style in 
which Xerox executives became accustomed to live. I left JFK airport in 
New York on the last flight at 9:30 PM, arriving in Paris at 8:30AM, just in 
time to meet Flavin for a 10AM meeting. I returned on the 1:30PM flight 
from Orly to prove that one could go to Europe and return in less than 24 
hours.
The idea of creating a European data center was quickly thrown 
out because none of the available communication links could support 
such consolidation. The European communication costs due to monopoly 
control by their Post Offices, were excessive beyond belief. After much 
negotiation we finally settled on a data center for the UK and Ireland near 
Bletchley Park of World War crypto analysis fame. The French insisted 
to house their regional computer in Paris because their employees would 
not move. An agreement was reached that they would support Italy from 
Paris but that arrangement was quickly broken and the Italian operated 
successfully an XDS machine in Milan. German operations set up a well 
organized, amply funded data center in Frankfurt and somehow managed 
to support Scandinavian operations from there. The Dutch had a large 
factory in Venray. After much hassle whether to import manufacturing 
requirement software from Webster they decided to continue with their 
unique solutions and to support Holland and Belgian business operations 
as well. Rank-Xerox in Spain would not be willing to discuss either XDS 
or any consolidation with anyone especially if that would be to France. 
They retained their IBM computer and managed their unique software. 
Ultimately, the Spaniards turned out to be the most successful and least 
expensive computer set-up in Europe.
Fuji-Xerox
It was with anticipation that I got on the airplane to visit Fuji-Xe-
rox, which theoretically fell under my global responsibility. I was warned 
that this operation was unlike any other and that local privileges were a 
the computers nobody wanted 61
carefully but very politely guarded possession. In Tokyo, after many pre-
liminary visits and with much formal courtesy I was introduced to Michio 
Miyake, the F-X CIO. Out of this connection grew a lasting and most cor-
dial relationship that still continues to this day when Michio is not well but 
still tries to translate some of my writings.
I found Fuji-Xerox fascinating, because their IT costs were low, 
their billing operations were simple and the entire staff — operators and 
programmers — were sitting together in one large undivided space. It took 
me a few more visits to Tokyo before I discovered the secret of their opera-
tions. Each sales district had a small office. The center of the office was a 
large table surrounded by open files shelves. Around the table were sitting 
young, pretty and under-paid girls waiting to get married. The sales people 
were men and they were always out of the office often doubling as copier 
maintenance personnel. When a customer called they reached a girl that 
was assigned to them. She reached behind her shoulder, retrieved from the 
shelf the customer’s file and answered just about any question concern-
ing billing, delivery or service. Fuji-Xerox did not require computers to 
perform complex work. All of the key files were on paper with detailed 
records kept up with great care to always reflect real-time conditions.
Over the years I found Fuji-Xerox a delight to visit because the op-
eration was simple, straightforward and always associated with the utmost 
courtesy,
The APL Computer Language 
The APL (A Programming Language) came to our rescue when all 
of our programming resources were tied up just keeping up with the rapid 
growth of Xerox while we were also burdened to substitute XDS equip-
ment for IBM. Just by happenstance, Ian Sharp in Toronto developed a 
good version of APL for the XDS Sigma equipment. Analysts loved APL 
as a way of constructing their models. The problem was that APL code 
could not be deciphered by anyone without going through the same steps 
as if you were writing it. Even if you wrote your own APL model you had 
a hard time figuring out the logic you recorded after a lapse of time work-
ing on another project. APL became the analyst’s preferred tool because 
62 paul strassmann
each individual could boast about a unique solution. I called it “write once, 
read never” programming which made each programmer indispensable. 
To satisfy the rapidly rising demand we licensed from Sharp APL process-
ing software to be ultimately installed on our own equipment in Rochester 
with the proviso that after two years we would receive an unrestricted li-
cense to their APL software. 
Setting up our own APL capacity would have made it very costly 
to absorb the full initial expense for setting up time-sharing operations 
and then gradually grow the workload. Sharp’s pricing was based on a 
discounted marginal cost. When time came to move all processing back 
to Xerox, Sharp’s marginal costs have declined sufficiently so that an in-
house option would never become economical. This experience taught me 
an important lesson about the difference between average and marginal 
costs for the pricing of information services. It would bias me in favor of 
the acquisition of all software innovation from suppliers who had already 
paid for entry costs and taken all of the risks of failing. Such suppliers 
were now under pressure to build volume through marginal cost pricing 
which they would base on a cumulative experience curve. The trick in in-
formation services was to build revenue-creating volume faster than any 
competitor. Using pricing technique as a competitive weapon a competitor 
who tried to imitate a gaining innovator could never catch up except by 
launching another market entry on a brand new experience curve. 
The highly subsidized APL offering, plus a surplus of MBAs who 
demanded computing power for analyzing every conceivable market-
ing plan made Xerox perhaps the largest user of APL time-sharing in the 
world for a period of one or two years. That was advantageous because it 
generated orders for XDS equipment that we could classify as “commer-
cial” and not as “scientific.” It allowed corporate management to say that 
we were installing XDS equipment at a rapid rate for internal use. The pro-
liferation of APL was attractive because it got the financial staffs diverted 
from bothering my programmers. In fact we converted financial analysts 
to programmers without having to show that on our headcount which 
would be exploding otherwise. Whatever backlog may have existed was 
swept away because the customers now started doing their own coding 
as twenty-four hour, seven days a week services became available. Once 
the computers nobody wanted 63
computer terminals became available and unlimited computer processing 
power became accessible that gave rise to quite a few spectacularly inef-
ficient and irrelevant applications. With everyone tied up in meetings the 
waste of resources and time was not visible. On the positive side, custom-
ers were pleased. Much of the dissatisfaction that I observed by forcing 
reliance on batch processing was now eliminated. Conflicts were resolved 
by dispersing thousands of terminals throughout Xerox. As result we built 
one of the largest local data communications networks in the country.
 There were additional advantages. Customers who do their own 
programming took off the pressure from my operations because now they 
could only blame themselves when job requests were rejected. I imme-
diately launched a campaign to shift key punching from a huge central 
keypunch department that was always blamed for errors to on line key 
entry from teletypes and communicating typewriters. After the new data 
center was completed the massive report printing and report distribution 
department was materially reduced by shifting printing directly to each 
customer location using remote printers. We cut central headcount, where 
it was visible, and moved report distribution responsibilities to local ad-
ministrative support that was classified as secretaries and administrative 
staff. A large share of the clerical workforce were now in a position to place 
their experience in “data processing” on their resumes while qualifying for 
a higher job grade. I could now redefine my job from concentration on 
what was in most corporations “computer management” to “information 
management.” While my erstwhile peers were concentrating on the latest 
hardware technology available from vendors I was moving away to deal 
with a much broader definition of what constitutes office work in the era 
of office automation, which was administrative expense and not computer 
costs.
DanRay Telecommunications 
When MCI received permission to use its microwave technology 
to compete with AT&T that was understood to be an attack on its long dis-
tance telephone service monopoly. MCI located an engineering division to 
be near two of the only companies that were brave enough to supply MCI 
64 paul strassmann
despite AT&T’s virulent opposition. The two companies were DanRay and 
Collins Radio of Richardson, Texas. Meanwhile, the court-ordered break-
up of AT&T opened opportunities to new service providers who needed 
suppliers who would not be tied to AT&T.
It was sometime in 1974 that Xerox purchased DanRay as an ini-
tial entry into telecommunications. Abe Zarem made this acquisition as 
a venture investment. These ventures were only remotely connected with 
any existing businesses except that Abe was a confidant of Peter McCo-
lough and his directions were set independently of whatever was going on 
in Xerox. 
Abe called me up and suggested that I have a look at DanRay for 
possible use of this equipment in the Xerox intra-company network. By 
that time I had already hired from GE their top telecommunications ex-
pert, Bernard Overeynder, who turned out to be the single most valuable 
systems appointment I have ever made whether in Xerox or anywhere else. 
Bernard was a nationally recognized authority on telecommunications. I 
hired him just after his proposal for a private GE network was cancelled 
because of opposition from AT&T. 
Bernard came back from a review of DanRay with an unqualified 
enthusiasm. DanRay was ready to supply us with nine switches that could 
manage the entire Xerox US network at a fraction of the existing cost, 
while providing advance features that would allow us to reap major reduc-
tion in labor that supported customer calls. Since nobody at Xerox HQ 
knew anything about DanRay I gave Bernard a free hand to come up with 
a proposal how Xerox could detach itself from AT&T excessive charges.
The proposal delivered by Bernard showed spectacular savings and 
provided for a cautious approach to installation, starting with parallel pro-
totype testing. At this point I had to go to see my new boss, Jim O’Neill, 
now head of corporate staff. Jim was impressed with the expected savings 
but was not sure whether we would not alienate our largest customer for 
copying equipment, AT&T. As a way of sidetracking our proposal I was 
instructed to seek out AT&T management and solicit their agreement for 
proceeding with the installation of a private network. We would retain 
AT&T circuits and only install improved switching with advanced features 
they did not offer.
the computers nobody wanted 65
The proposal by Xerox to set up its own private network hit AT&T 
management worse than what I could have imagined. Except for some De-
partment of Defense networks AT&T has always managed to prevent any 
corporation from launching their own networks. Since AT&T controlled 
all switching through equipment provided by their Western Electric sub-
sidiary nobody has ever managed to organize the complex interactions 
between local, long distance and switching technologies. Bernard was pro-
posing to do exactly that by using equipment now owned by Xerox and 
used by AT&T’s nemesis, Bill McGowan of MCI. From a legal standpoint 
there was nothing AT&T could do to stop us.
Bernard and I were invited to come to AT&T Long Lines offices in 
New York and to explain what we were proposing to do. They were going 
to examine the viability of our plans, since in all prior cases corporations 
backed off from setting up networks because of the incredible complexity 
(deliberately arranged by AT&T and Bell Companies) how to do that. At 
the appointed time Bernard and I were ushered into a giant room, maybe 
100 ft long and 30 ft wide, with a giant table around which sat over fifty 
AT&T experts. Sitting in chairs next to the wall were another eighty staff-
ers representing various branches of AT&T, Bell Laboratories and Bell 
Companies. The whole set up reminded me of hostile Congressional hear-
ings that I suffered years later. 
Bernard, of Dutch extraction, gave a brilliant presentation in ac-
cented but measured technical terms. My accent also did not help. Here 
were a bunch of European refugees setting up a scheme how to deprive 
AT&T of its monopoly profits! None of the follow on questions would be 
relevant or material. The Bell Laboratories staffers were shocked by the de-
tails of our presentation that demonstrated that we had checked out every 
possible regulatory objection to our schema. 
A few days later I received a phone call from Archie McGill, now 
a key senior VP at AT&T HQ in Basking Ridge, N.J. His hiring from IBM 
had been widely commented in the press as a sign that AT&T was trying 
to reform itself. Could I meet with him and the number three in the AT&T 
hierarchy, Ken Whalen — the ExVP for Marketing — for lunch to discuss 
the DanRay proposal? I readily consented to a meeting that would be held 
in Paterson, N.J. in an Italian inn that reminded me of a movie setting for 
66 paul strassmann
a Mafia get together. I was expected to come without Bernard. There were 
only Archie, Ken and I hunched around a table in a dimly lit booth.
Whalen did not mince any words. They recognized the quality of 
our proposal and our capability to execute it. AT&T was in no position to 
compete with the prices or the features that we proposed because the gov-
ernment was blocking their efforts to market discounted services to major 
corporations. Would we consent to their using the proposed Xerox com-
munications design as a wedge for obtaining a special tariff that would 
classify our needs as requiring special regulatory “adjustments”? McGill 
explained that AT&T had been working on a similar proposal for some 
time but did not have a “pony to run for them.”
In due course, AT&T filed for a new tariff and offered to Xerox 
material discounts. Most importantly, they threw dozens of people into 
support teams to install the necessary connectivity, which made us per-
haps the first corporation that had a global directory for desk-to-desk dial-
ing of phone calls. This network made it possible to shift the workload of 
our service dispatch operators who were distributed geographically, thus 
achieving very large clerical savings. After three years we saved closed to 
$70 million per year in our telephone management, mostly in the form of 
labor costs. 
Meanwhile, DanRay worked with MCI to support their growth 
into a major communication carrier. Private networks were really not their 
strength. Within three years Xerox sold off DanRay to Nortel. That was 
another example how Xerox acquisitions came into disfavor if they did not 
produce enormous profits instantly. 
I should note that when Jim O’Neill sidetracked me to talk with 
AT&T, I already had on order for a small DanRay digital switch to do some 
testing. Without giving it much thought Jim instructed me to install it at 
corporate HQ in Stamford. I must have been feeble-minded that morning 
when I consented to do so. Technically, the switch worked perfectly, but 
nobody in the executive row was willing to change habits that were neces-
sary for using a feature-rich digital phone. After giving it only ten days, 
the DanRay switch was removed. From this experience I learned never 
to try first anything new that involves executives. There was no way how 
the computers nobody wanted 67
we could teach them to use numbers instead of buttons to select phone 
features.
It was during this period that I discovered that our executives 
could not even remove a paper jam from a copier (which happened often). 
The dozen executives who occupied a separate section of the building were, 
as a group, technology-illiterate as well as dyslexic because they could not 
depend on reading to obtain operating or technical instructions.
Brazilian Computer
In 1976 our Brazilian subsidiary finally received a permit to import 
an IBM360/40 computer. This was a big deal because the military govern-
ment of Brazil had a policy of stimulating the domestic computer industry 
and imports were under tight control. I was involved in securing of the 
requisite permit while visiting Brazil — Xerox’s largest international sub-
sidiary — several times before.
Elaborate festivities were arranged to celebrate the unveiling of 
the computer. A Jesuit priest presided over the entire affair including the 
sprinkling of the main computer console with holy water. I was moved by 
the events and on the spot composed a haiku that conveyed the idea that 
the computer machine would herald the introduction of a new cultural 
phase in the history of mankind. I pointed out that the computer was the 
machine of the future that will make through transportable thinking the 
sharing of knowledge for creating a global togetherness.
In the evening I was picked up in an armored Cadillac with a body-
guard and taken to a district where all the streets had high walls and no 
visibility of homes. We arrived at a steel gate, with TV cameras checking 
us out. The car drove into an enclosure that was blocked by another set 
of gates. Armed men showed up, checked us out and opened the second 
gates after the first set of gates closed. We drove into what looked like a 
park, with tennis courts and two swimming pools. It was the compound 
of the Governor of Rio de Janeiro with a house that was an imitation of 
a French chateau. In due course about 100 visitors showed up. They were 
all little squat men with double-breasted pinstriped suits accompanied by 
flashy young women. I gave a talk about the future of computers. It was re-
68 paul strassmann
ceived in complete silence and there were no questions. Afterwards every-
one paid attention to socializing, with the obligatory embraces and kisses. 
In the following years I was well received in Brazil where I now ap-
peared often. The largest publishing house in Brazil organized the transla-
tion of my Information Payoff book that sold in several editions. When the 
Brazilian Senate debated the restrictions and custom duties on import of 
computers I appeared before a committee, together with Charles Jonscher 
from Harvard, that favored the easing of import restrictions. During the 
meetings I met the proponent of Brazilian independence from the Ameri-
cans, the chief of Brazilian intelligence who controlled all computerization. 
All matters related to computers reported directly to the office of the Presi-
dent of Brazil though a national security directorate. The restrictions on 
computer imports prevailed for another seven years during which Brazil 
succeeded in copying microcomputers but never managed to create a vi-
able computer mainframe industry. 
COIN: An Attempt to Change the System
My make-or-break venture as the Chief Information Officers of Xe-
rox was the COIN (Computer-Aided Information Network) project. Ulti-
mately it broke me though only after three years of trying. The opposition 
to this project from start — from the regional financial comptrollers — was 
that they wanted no part of it because it would centralize administrative 
processes. Consolidation of data files into a central database would in-
terfere with their flexibility to enter local adjustments and corrections to 
billing and to commissions for a creaky system. The political support for 
COIN from the sales department, who would be the greatest beneficiaries, 
evaporated after my executive level sponsor — Ray Hay — precipitously 
left the company. Initially, the Manager of Customer Billing Operations, 
Sy Zivan, was a strong proponent of the entire effort. However, as the po-
litical support for the project crumbled he found it prudent to detach from 
the overhaul of the administrative system and settle for small crumbs that 
remained after the project was shut down. After that everybody preferred 
to leave the order entry, equipment management and maintenance servic-
es without a material change. Reorganizing the administrative workflows 
the computers nobody wanted 69
was just too much trouble and would take another two years. That was well 
beyond the planning horizon of the administrators.
The demise of the COIN project is an interesting example of how 
ambitious efforts get killed. The COIN development budget was running 
at more than five million dollars per year plus capital expenses for Xerox 
equipment for which prices were not as yet settled. During the 1975 budget 
preparation season the company needed to cut expenses. A sum of about 
$750,000 was removed from COIN by eliminating programming expense 
as the project was entering into a programming-intensive test phase. By 
removing programmers at this stage the entire project would have to slide 
for at least one year while the fixed installation expenses were going to 
continue. Tom Winter, now the CFO of sales operations must have known 
that the surgical removal of the heart of a project would kill the entire 
venture. After re-allocating additional funds from COIN to maintenance 
of existing regional computers the short term ROI of COIN disappeared 
and the project was disbanded. There was no review of what would be the 
long-term consequences of decentralizing of the administrative process-
es of Xerox into the hands of the branch offices. By killing COIN Xerox 
was left with a system where branch offices would be left with little or no 
autonomy to manage equipment, sales and billing. It is noteworthy that 
when Xerox brought in a new CEO (Richard Thoman) in 1998 he pro-
ceeded to reorganize sales operations. With a rigid administrative system 
(now run by EDS) the reorganization failed, invoicing stopped and sales 
commissions were unpaid. Shortly thereafter Thoman was fired — first Xe-
rox CEO ever to be dismissed. Meanwhile, Fuji-Xerox flourished and sur-
vived tough competition by relying on their low-cost and decentralized 
approach for handling of customer problems.
Unwinding ISD
The Information Services Division was my creation. I kept track 
of its wellbeing, especially as former employees called me for a reference 
when they were seeking jobs elsewhere. A number of my former associates 
rose to senior IT executive rank in other companies.
70 paul strassmann
As Xerox’s stock plunged starting in 2000 the search for easy sav-
ings was on. It was only a matter of time before most of the Xerox’s elite IT 
organization would be tagged as being dispensable and outside the firm’s 
core competencies. In 1994, Xerox entered into an outsourcing agreement 
with Electronic Data Systems. Initially, it transferred to EDS the entire 
ISD with about 2,000 people who were running demonstrably efficient 
operations, keeping only a staff of fewer than 400, mostly planners. The 
CIO, Patricia Wallington, hailed the deal, saying, “Xerox didn’t outsource 
to replace a failing IT department or simply to save money. The $3.2 billion 
deal with EDS enables IT to focus on new systems and strategies.” Thus, 
Xerox handed over to EDS the responsibility for running mainframe sys-
tems, legacy software (such as critical billing and sales-commission sys-
tems) and telecommunications and for supporting PCs.
It was a bad deal for Xerox. Trusted talent, necessary to innovate 
amid rapidly changing competitive conditions, left the company. EDS now 
owned the talent farm that had always nurtured star performers. The al-
location of the remaining staff to innovation projects never happened. The 
culture of the conservative and highly regulated EDS people conflicted 
with the liberal and improvising Xeroids who were pushed to reduce over-
head and improvise savings through workarounds that bypassed EDS.
It was also a bad deal for EDS. Taking over operations where there 
was little fat didn’t leave much room for profit gains. To deliver attrac-
tive financial results, EDS had to rely on standardization of technology 
and greater uniformity of services that fit the EDS environment. To attain 
economies of scale, EDS adopted a more rigid fixed-cost model to extract 
profits. The goal was to grow volume at little extra expense to produce 
superior profit margins. That didn’t happen. The Xeroids were adept at 
taking over the most lucrative sources of added profit for EDS. The stage 
was then set for the drama that was then reported as a technical and orga-
nizational snafu instead of a managerial failure.
In late 1998, Xerox stopped honoring bills from EDS. EDS had 
to write off $200 million — almost half of its 1998 corporate profits — at-
tributing it largely to billing disputes with Xerox. EDS then filed a multi-
hundred million lawsuit against Xerox. When Xerox reorganized its sales 
and marketing operations the billing system fell apart and the sales force’s 
the computers nobody wanted 71
efforts were diverted to administrative chores instead of selling at a time 
when Xerox market share was dropping precipitously. The EDS billing and 
commission system could not adapt to a major reorganization proposed 
by a new Xerox President, Richard Thoman. 
Copier Troubles
 While the various strategy task forces, which now included myself, 
were deliberating priorities for the computer business, the US government 
concluded — after extended investigations — that Xerox was monopoliz-
ing the copier trade and held a restrictive market share. Perhaps the least 
significant competitor, Smith-Corona who was manufacturing an inferi-
or copier, launched an anti-trust suit against Xerox for restraint of trade. 
They were asking for penalties that could possibly amount to half a billion 
dollars. Xerox top executives now got bogged down in litigation as well as 
in a potential anti-trust suit. Xerox top management was subpoenaed and 
spent much of their time in legal depositions. Finally, Xerox caved in and 
entered into a consent agreement to license its patents to all comers and to 
offer its copiers not only for rent, but also for sale. 
As results of all of such diversions, the executives’ attention became 
drawn to countering the potential entry of both IBM as well as Kodak into 
the copying business. Suddenly XDS became a second, then a third, and 
finally a fourth order of priority before dropping out altogether. Top man-
agement started addressing what countermeasures were needed against 
the potential entry of Kodak and IBM into the copier business. 
When IBM finally offered a copier, after many delays, their entry 
offered undifferentiated equipment that did not compete well with Xerox. 
IBM suffered from an exact reverse of Xerox’s own struggles. IBM market-
ers could earn much better commissions selling impact printers spitting 
out digitally controlled marks on paper in high volumes. Despite all of 
the apprehensions about IBM as a competitor in the copying business, it 
was a threat than never materialized. While watching IBM, the Japanese 
manufacturers were slowly creeping into the US market without much op-
position. It was the enemy that everybody was watching who proved to be 
72 paul strassmann
harmless. It was the adversary who advanced with stealth, who turned out 
to the mortal threat.
Kodak came up with a respectable entry into the copier business 
but had to divert its attention to the rapidly rising competition from Fuji 
photo that was devastating their premium priced photographic product. 
The Kodak threat did not damage Xerox in a material way except for 
putting pressure on our pricing. 
While paying attention to IBM and Kodak, little attention was paid 
to low copy-volume copiers that Japanese firms started landing on the 
West Coast as marketing probes. I was present during one of the presenta-
tions to the executive committee when a program manager from Webster 
engineering gave a report about the inferiority of the Japanese offerings. 
Their cheap photoreceptors could not match the precision-machined Xe-
rox selenium drums. Besides, Xerox profits were concentrated not at the 
low end but at the higher throughput machines. The market research find-
ings indicated a strong preference of existing Xerox customers for Xerox 
quality copies, though nobody bothered to find out why small businesses 
were satisfied with crummy copies. Only Jim O’Neill, now the corporate 
CFO and always the analyst with the sharpest pencil, kept wondering why 
the Japanese could be selling copiers outright at retail prices for less than 
Xerox could offer on an eighteen-month rental. Jim observed that even if 
Xerox had zero manufacturing cost the Japanese could still undersell Xe-
rox. I think that only Ray Hay, now the President of US copier operations, 
understood the full impact of what Jim was saying. On the way out of the 
boardroom Ray, in his usual caustic manner, remarked loudly that Archie 
should be running scared because Xerox was getting attacked where it had 
no defenses.
Xerox financial analysts used average manufacturing costs plus an 
overhead multiplier to come up with product pricing. That worked while 
Xerox maintained a dominant market share in copiers and duplicators. 
When marginal cost pricing, a method in which the Japanese excelled, was 
applied to copiers and duplicators the rapid erosion in profitability was 
inevitable. Years later the shifting of costs from average manufacturing 
costs to overhead accounts produced grotesque overhead multipliers. At 
that point the economics of the entire copier and duplicator product line 
the computers nobody wanted 73
was headed for a wreck. When the Japanese could finally deliver copiers 
to customers at prices that were lower than Xerox manufacturing costs the 
collapse of Xerox would be approaching. 
To counter the anticipated inroads from IBM and Kodak who were 
expected to launch mid-range equipment, Xerox decided to deal with such 
threats by funding a horrendously expensive program to build high vol-
ume duplicators based on belt photoreceptors where copy volumes would 
generate the highest profits. Xerox would now devote most of its capital as 
well as engineering resources to discourage competitors from a high-vol-
ume copier entry. Using reasoning dating from the days of Alfred P. Sloan 
at General Motors, Xerox was going to outspend IBM and Kodak while 
these firms were fighting encroachments from Japanese manufacturers. As 
these confrontations eventually played out, neither IBM nor Kodak were 
ever ready to extend their offerings to high volume duplications while they 
were struggling to enter into the copier business. While Xerox was shadow 
boxing with IBM and Kodak, we neglected to defend our low-end prod-
uct entry offerings. Calculations based on Ford-vintage Return-on-Asset 
(ROA) ratios convinced Archie McCardell and Jim O’Neill that there was 
no profit in defending the low ROA soft underbelly of Xerox that the Jap-
anese started shredding. Besides, Xerox executive bonuses were always 
based on ROA numbers. Nobody would favor offering ROA-depressing 
products.
Selling Copiers
The consent agreement with the government to offer copiers for 
purchase in addition to rental plans was not seen originally as a threat 
to Xerox. In fact, the bonus-earning executives saw in it an opportunity 
to unload some of their older and less profitable copying machines as a 
sure-fire way of boosting ROA. With the help of some accounting art-
istry the outright sale of the un-depreciated portion of a copier could be 
now booked as revenue, thus boosting the profit return number in the 
ROA ratio. Simultaneously, taking the un-depreciated worth of a copier 
off the corporate balance sheet would also lower the asset number of the 
ROA ratio. If you gave to the sales force the appropriate pricing and com-
74 paul strassmann
mission compensation incentives, the Xerox financial analysts could come 
up with whatever profit and whatever ROA number they would need to 
meet Wall Street expectations. By jiggling the numbers, executive bonuses 
could be managed as predictable outcomes. In 1973 Xerox had sufficient 
fat to afford such manipulations. Twenty years later the habit of managing 
reported earnings backfired and resulted in what is still alleged to be ir-
regular book keeping that violated government rules.3
Selling already installed copiers produced unintended conse-
quences, as is often the case with well-intentioned decisions. To steer the 
sales force to do what’s right for Xerox we provided each salesperson with 
a listing showing the inventory of a customer’s equipment, a history of the 
copy volume produced by each machine, revenues by machine, depreci-
ated book value and the list sale price. It was a matter of simple arithmetic 
to calculate which machines were extremely profitable because they were 
generating revenue far in excess of costs. Some of the most experienced 
Xerox salesmen used this information to enrich themselves by locating 
leasing companies that would finance the purchase of the most profitable 
copiers. A Xerox salesman could quit the company and return to a former 
customers with a proposition to lease the equipment on materially more 
favorable terms than continuing to pay to Xerox monthly copying charges. 
Xerox profitability now became eroded even though the most profitable 
machines were taken off the list as producing assets and showed up in-
stead as short terms profit gains.
The consequences of the shift from renting to sales were devastat-
ing. Customers, for the first time, found out that Xerox would be keeping 
at their site copiers that could have been replaced by more economical ma-
chines. What used to be a trusted relationship between customers and the 
sales force to offer the most cost/effective solution was now compromised 
as Xerox financial management pressured the sales force to keep the larg-
3 
In 2002, the Securities and Exchange Commission filed a complaint against Xerox. 
The complaint alleged Xerox deceived the public between 1997 and 2000 by employing 
several “accounting maneuvers,” the most significant of which was a change in when 
Xerox recorded revenue from copy machine leases — recognizing a “sale” in the period 
a lease contract was signed, instead of recognizing revenue over the entire length of the 
contract.
the computers nobody wanted 75
est profit producers in place regardless of efficiency. However, the greatest 
damage came from the demoralization of the sales force when they saw 
that a small, but boastful number of their erstwhile associates, enriching 
themselves by setting up independent dealerships in lease-financed equip-
ment. The new dealers were skimming off exceptional profits both from 
Xerox as well as from potential gains in commissions from the sale of de-
preciated equipment. 
Selling copiers machines instead of leasing them did not end the 
damage to Xerox profits. As soon as the most lucrative leasing deals were 
concluded the ex-Xerox independent dealers were now ready to seek new 
opportunities how to make money. If one bears in mind that the lease-
finance defectors from Xerox were among the most skillful salespeople, 
it did not take much time for the Japanese firms to discover that the best 
way of attacking the formidable Xerox sales organization was through an 
engagement of ex-Xerox mercenaries now available for hire as distributors. 
The Japanese invasion of the US market, now benefiting from the advice 
of some of the most experienced copier salespeople, picked up speed by 
depending on local dealerships for marketing Japanese office products. 
What Xerox previously believed to be an insurmountable obstacle to mar-
ket entry, now became a low cost wedge that made it possible for Japanese 
copiers to gain market share.
A Fatal Injury 
I went for lunch with Ray Hay shortly after the outright sale prices 
and the new sales commissions were set for selling copiers instead of leas-
ing them. It was early in 1975. We were supposed to discuss how to make 
rapid changes in an increasingly complicated sales compensation appli-
cation. Ray’s conversation kept drifting back to the decision to alter the 
philosophy of Xerox as a customer-care driven firm that could be used to 
sell any office products, regardless of technology. Previously, when copi-
ers were placed with customers who retained the right to cancel the in-
stall — no questions asked — the sales person and the support technicians 
devoted much effort to hand holding and worrying about customer sat-
isfaction. It did not matter what type of equipment was installed because 
76 paul strassmann
Xerox would earn revenues that would trickle in monthly on the basis of 
how many copies were made. 
When copiers would be sold outright the motivation of the sales 
force would now shift from the placement of copiers in ways that would 
be most convenient for customers, to maximizing company salespeople’s 
commissions from one-time purchases. Although the Federal government 
was blamed for dictating the departure from the monthly rent-only poli-
cies, Ray blamed Archie and his financial staff for implementing the copier 
outright selling plans in ways that would foster an alienation of customers. 
Once a customer was saddled with a copier, the incentive to rearrange 
locations or to upgrade to different models for sake of customer conve-
nience would vanish. 
Years later, when I was asked about the origins of the eventual de-
scent of Xerox from the pre-eminent position of profit leadership as a pro-
vider of copying-as-a-service to that of a battered reseller of commodity-
priced and Japanese made equipment, I backdated the start of our decline 
to the memorable lunch with Ray Hay. Shortly after that the customer-
focused Ray left Xerox to become the CEO of the Dallas-based giant LTV 
Corporation.
Strategic Planning
P
eter McColough tended to buy companies without much analysis 
about possible consequences. I guess that his reasoning grew from 
a generally accepted Xerox legend that the Haloid Corporation had 
to reach to an external invention to make progress. The inability to inno-
vate was also reflected in the myth that no inside corporate analyst would 
have ever endorsed what Chester Carlson was offering. Over the years I 
heard the often-repeated tale how corporate staffers from IBM and Kodak 
rejected a chance of paying a relatively puny amount of money for an ex-
clusive license to electro photography. Such rationalizations did not ac-
count for the fact that Chester Carlson was proposing the substitution of 
dry copying for silver-based wet copying, which were related methods and 
had identical customers. Whether the history of the Carlson invention 
also applied to the transformation from limited function copiers to the 
broadly diversified world of digital applications was never considered as a 
completely different solution. What Xerox was facing now was a far more 
demanding change in the customers’ fundamental habits how to operate 
in an office environment. In the case of Haloid/Xerox, customers could 
switch from wet copying to dry copying instantly and easily. In the migra-
tion to the digital world the customers would encounter a multi-decade 
long transformation in working habits. The Carlson analogy simply did 
not fit. 
I dwell on discussing these beliefs because they were reflected in 
speeches by McColough and by Stamford headquarters executives. The 
digital office workplace would be totally different challenge from offering 
only an optical copying service. The jump from copying to digital docu-
ment management would be a big leap. Glib assumptions about this jump 
circulated in Stamford and became transformed into myths that steered 
78 paul strassmann
how executives would be acting without a critical examination of the 
workplace. 
When I arrived at Xerox in 1969 it was conceptual thinking and 
daring visions that always prevailed as a way of winning any argument. 
The overhead foils had words and bulleted phrases, but hardly any statis-
tics and never any hard numbers except as products may be defined in 
terms of their manufacturing costs. The customer and customer habits 
were hardly ever mentioned. All discussions were in terms of supplying 
technology and hardly any in terms of demands for technology. With cash 
flowing in and the stock price zooming to new heights this approach was 
the generally accepted wisdom. A boisterous damn the limits attitude was 
prevalent that always referred back to a mistaken interpretation of what 
Chester Carlson invented. I do not recall much discussion about the pa-
tience and understanding shown by Joe Wilson over a decade of trials 
because much credit was heaped on the executives who created afterwards 
the formidable marketing machine to sell the Xerox 914.
After failing with diversifications into computers in 1973 and into 
education soon after the time had come for Xerox to take another long 
shot gamble. This found its proponent in the person of the ex-Ford VP of 
R&D, Jack Goldman, a dedicated poker player. Jack found a ready listener 
in Peter McColough who was always ready for another venture investment 
but never with patience to nursing it for more than three years. 
Goldman proposed to launch a diversification not based on costly 
acquisitions but on a company managed R&D development. Taking the 
shambles of XDS and converting that into something that would lend it-
self to building on it for the future was not an option. Jack was an op-
ponent of XDS anyway and recommended a long-term investment in a 
totally new R&D laboratory whose culture would differ completely from 
the ways research was conducted by Xerox in Rochester and El Segundo, 
or by IBM in Yorktown Heights. Goldman’s proposal was backed by Abe 
Zarem who was an entrepreneur used to high tech ventures. Abe had sold 
the Electro-Optical Systems business to Xerox and became a consigliore to 
Peter McColough. Abe was steeped in the style and in the innovative cul-
ture that had been nurtured by the Defense Department that was always 
seeking breakthrough technology innovations during the Cold War. It is 
the computers nobody wanted 79
also noteworthy that Zarem opposed the acquisition of XDS because he 
thought (correctly) that it was a bad deal.
In 1971 a new team of corporate staffers took over from the edu-
cation-focused strategic planners who had worked for years for Joe Wil-
son when the diversification into education looked attractive and carried 
a public service flavor. The mission of the new strategy team was to find 
ways of fulfilling Peter McColough’s visions of Xerox becoming an archi-
tect of information for the office of the future. The term architecture of 
information remained a mystery after the initial press conference except 
for conveying the idea that Xerox would guide organizations how struc-
ture their office technology investments. Even foggier was the term office 
of the future, which could be interpreted by anyone as they wished. When 
you stripped out all of these labels to bare facts you could net all the public 
relations hoopla to only one tangible mission for Xerox: how to compete 
with IBM. Xerox would now engage IBM not through mainframe com-
puters, such as XDS machines, but through devices that were yet to be 
invented. This had a great appeal. The new Xerox laboratory did not have 
to deliver much of anything for the next 5-7 years until such time when it 
would start delivering the next Carlson-like invention.
The idea of besting IBM became an obsession in executive con-
versations in the early 1970s. That was ultimately also shared by PARC 
researchers but only conceptually and on ideological grounds of a West 
Coast anti-establishment culture, and not in terms of battling for market 
share or delivering to the copier marketing organization volume products 
to sell. It became the big white whale hunt war cry that would be includ-
ed in every pronouncement made after the creation of PARC. Reducing 
IBM’s preeminent position was believed to be the destiny of Xerox, as ar-
ticulated by the Xerox EXVP of Marketing, Bill Souders, in an interview 
with Forbes magazine. It is ironic that the carrying out of this mission was 
actually accomplished after 1990 but not by Xerox but by other firms that 
reaped many of the benefits from the path-breaking technology innova-
tions conceived by Xerox researchers at the Palo Alto Research Laborato-
ries (PARC) from 1971 to 1980. IBM would lose its leadership position for 
almost a decade after an onslaught from Microsoft. In terms of profitabil-
ity, IBM never again recovered its customary margins.
80 paul strassmann
The Planning Job
As the prospects of a successful XDS venture were fading away Xe-
rox top executives started looking for another high-risk and high-payoff 
investment. There was an ample supply of cash available, if one includes 
opportunities to borrow money. Even though I held the position as the 
Chief Information Officer of Xerox from 1969 through 1976 I was simulta-
neously drawn during this time as one of the leading planners to partici-
pate in numerous tasks forces and committees. Perhaps as much as a third 
of my time was devoted to this effort though the involvement was sporadic 
and often occupied nights and weekends. Finally, in 1976 I was promoted 
from the CIO role to become the global Vice-President of Planning in the 
Information Products Group. IPG was responsible for all non-copier busi-
nesses, except for the Education Division.
The IPG included all acquisitions that were purchased, in rapid 
sequence, by Abe Zarem’s business development organization located in 
sumptuous quarters in Beverly Hills. This group consisting of high priced 
consultants with Wall Street background who somehow believed that buy-
ing unrelated office product component firms would add up ultimately 
and somehow to an office automation enterprise. I was always stuck by the 
show-business flair of these people. They were adept in making presenta-
tions, but somehow whatever they were doing never added up to Xerox 
growth. 
Over a period of less than eight years none of these component 
firms that were acquired managed to combine and to generate material 
profits for Xerox. Firms that started as profitable enterprises at the time of 
acquisition ended up as crippled organizations and were sold off after 1986, 
mostly at fraction of the original acquisition price. The companies collect-
ed into IPG were Redactron, Xerox Computer Services, Office Products 
Division, Diablo, Shugart, Versatec, Century Data Corporation, Western 
Union International, Optimem Disks and Kurzweil Computer Products. 
It also included whatever was left of XDS that was sold off to Honeywell 
Computers for a bargain price to unload already installed XDS assets, in-
cluding computers that I operated within Xerox. For a while it included 
the computer printing business. It was a patchwork of firms that were sup-
the computers nobody wanted 81
posed to combine for a synergy that would result in an office of the future 
enterprise but never achieved that objective.
As profits for Xerox declined IPG research funding was getting 
strangled while it was expected to deliver sustainable profits. With the 
original founders of the various acquisitions becoming rich after cashing 
generous buyout payments as well as stock options, they had little patience 
to remain a part of an organization that had no plans how to grow into a 
prosperous enterprise. Only Versatec management was an exception to 
this pattern because Xerox never interfered with its operations. Whatever 
remained were OEM (Other Equipment Manufacturers) firms that would 
be striving to remain profitable in a cutthroat business fighting aggressive 
competitors. Even while Zarem was buying companies, there was never a 
defined and persistent corporate strategy to aggregate such purchases into 
coherent growth for Xerox except for some vague hopes that ultimately 
it will all add up. The directions for acquisitions were set by phrases on 
PowerPoint slides de jour.
Planning for the Office of the Future
Into the strategic vacuum in the executive quarters in Stamford en-
tered a group of office-automation planners now headed by a newly hired 
corporate Vice President of Planning, Donald Pendery. Don, an ex-IBM 
computer scientist was always thoughtful, critical and carefully analytical. 
For the next ten years I must have spent more than a fifth of my time in 
meetings presided or organized by Don. Often these were wildly specula-
tive exchanges where only Don was able to sustain a sober perspective. To 
reflect the culture of the Xerox organization all planning ideas were a topic 
of loose group discussions either as a committee or as a designated task 
force. This involved a constantly changing cast of participants. Somehow I 
always ended up as one of the members in most of such meetings.
 The most persistent presence in these sessions was the enthusias-
tic George White who became the chief protagonist to favor digital print-
ing as the starting Xerox competency for the next seven years. George 
held to that position even as corporate directions kept changing and the 
memberships on the various tasks forces kept bringing in executives with 
82 paul strassmann
more expansive views. Meanwhile, the influential Bill Souders represented 
a point of view that digital printing was too small a market segment to 
warrant Xerox principal attention. 
I met George shortly after reporting to Xerox. I was asked to join 
a committee that would convene in a dingy motel near Stamford because 
the new corporate headquarters did not have suitable offices. The motel 
provided the only conference room that would be available while the new 
headquarters outside of Rochester was still getting organized and Peter 
McColough was engaged in overcoming objections from the Greenwich 
zoning authorities to approve construction of corporate headquarters near 
the White Plains airport. 
The purpose of the 1969 task force was to revisit current strategic 
thinking to reflect what to do with the recent purchase of Scientific Data 
Systems. George’s position was that Xerox is not a computer company and 
should not aspire to be like IBM, but should forge new directions that 
would be principally related to digital printing in the immediate future. It 
was remarkable that George held on to these views during sessions that 
occupied my time while I was working as the chief computer executive. 
George was dedicated to the idea that it would be through printing that Xe-
rox would find the most attractive immediate path for growth that would 
be based on digitally driven non-impact printing. It was George who ar-
ticulated the idea that Xerox could not hope to become a viable competitor 
of any mainframe manufacturer in the foreseeable future. The immediate 
opportunities for the company was in extending the Carlson’s innovation 
from the direct scanning of images to the printing of images from digitally 
encoded text. His views were not welcome by top executives who could 
not see how concentration on electronic printing could offer a sufficiently 
large market to deliver the expected revenue numbers. Though George’s 
views were well articulated as he explained a way of making a modest but 
profitable market entry that argument was never accepted. Loaded with 
cash and with high stock market valuation McColough continued to chase 
acquisitions that would somehow fulfill the need for an enormous addi-
tion to the portfolio of products to be sold by the Xerox sales force. As 
yet undefined, the architecture of information visions seemed to promise 
that there would be new equipment that could be marketed to customers 
the computers nobody wanted 83
by the copier salesmen. In reality this assumption turned out to be wrong. 
The domain of electronic systems was totally alien to the experience and 
capabilities of the Rochester-based copiers salesmen who were selling 
boxes that did not require any software to function and did not involve 
the complexities of hardware/software configuration management.
It is noteworthy that at the time of this writing, thirty-eight years 
later, the evidence is overwhelming that George was right all along and that 
the current shrunken product portfolio of what remains of Xerox remains 
rooted in printing, while the most lucrative portions of office laser print-
ing — which Xerox developed and totally owned for a brief period — drift-
ed into hands of more focused competitors, such as Hewlett-Packard.
PIMS Research Findings 
From an intellectual standpoint perhaps the greatest influence on 
my own thinking came from Sidney Schoeffler, the founder of the PIMS 
(Profit Impact of Market Strategies) research organization. I met Sidney 
in 1959 while he was working for the General Electric Company. After-
wards our contacts lapsed until I became a Xerox strategist. Sidney em-
ployed what was a cross-sectional analysis of corporate financial results. 
He examined if there were any correlations between corporate profitability 
and any other indicators of performance. This effort had its origins in the 
problems with the allocation of capital that arose when GE created 250 
business units, each with its own financial reports. Corporate HQ needed 
a way of sorting out budget demands that each business unit general man-
ager claimed as a profit-making opportunity. Sidney discovered that there 
were only a few variables, such as market share, product quality and cost 
structure that could be used as predictors of business success.
GE spun off Schoeffler’s project into an independent research 
organization with the aim of collecting data from a cross section of US 
and international firms. Originally, PIMS started as an academic project, 
but soon it converted into a non-profit research institute. The results that 
were generated over a period of twenty years were spectacular. For a time 
the PIMS findings were the basis of much management thinking among 
leading consultants in the US. Companies such as the Boston Consulting 
84 paul strassmann
group based much of their advice on what Sidney discovered. Doctorate 
dissertations mined PIMS data to come up with new insights. Much of 
my own thinking about the prospects of XDS and about the future of the 
STAR workstation was shaped by the PIMS emphasis to concentrate on 
the creation of a sustainable market share. 
Xerox management had no interest in using the PIMS method-
ologies to validate their plans. It was alleged that Xerox would not be an 
ordinary company and therefore it would not be subject to the economic 
rules that Schoeffler and others connected with GE were practicing. There 
was an element of arrogance, borne out of success, in this attitude. I think 
that Xerox management was too deeply steeped in the case study approach 
that favored solving problems by means of inductive reasoning that calls 
for starting with generalizations and only then developing anything that 
is specific. Such an approach has origins in Aristotelian thought. Strategy 
would be fashioned from anecdotes that Peter McColough and key Stam-
ford executives, such as the leading planning executive Bill Glavin, would 
find convenient to alter as rapidly as conditions changed. 
The other approach, the deductive approach, or what could be 
termed as the scientific method did not receive any acceptance from the 
Stamford executive group that did not include engineers as decision-mak-
ers. Deductive reasoning insisted on starting with observations and only 
after testing coming up with generalizations. A disregard of research find-
ings from Schoeffler, GE or the Boston Consulting Group explains one 
of the principal reasons why Xerox top management never developed an 
approach for developing a sustainable business after Joe Wilson succeeded 
with copying. Instead, the advice from the consulting firm McKinsey & 
Company prevailed at all times. That firm embodied the easy to apply in-
ductive reasoning that was practiced and promoted by the Harvard Busi-
ness School where clever and improvised arguments in a class would al-
ways prevail. McKinsey’s strength was in their ability to adapt to whatever 
they thought would be realistically acceptable to their clients.
the computers nobody wanted 85
The Pendery Papers
What became known as the Pendery Papers was delivered to PARC 
early in 1971, with draft copies circulating weeks before that. I was given 
the tasks of focusing on strategies how to improve the productivity of of-
fice workers by means of relatively inexpensive equipment. In those days 
the median total compensation for office workers in major corporations 
was $15,000. Any technology costing more than $1,500 per year, as a total 
cost of ownership, would require at least a 10% gain in productivity. With 
training and start-up costs, which was the subject of my expertise, this 
suggested that only a device with a capital cost of less than about $4,000, 
including software, start-up and support, would be acceptable to most 
customers. Even then, these numbers would hold true only for the leading 
users, not the average office population that was still immersed in paper-
intensive processes that were not integrated in any way. Improving office 
worker productivity by 10% for the general office workforce would be a 
stretch objective for ten years.4
I was asked to author two studies that would be included in guid-
ance to be forwarded to PARC. The first study was titled A View of the 
1980s. It would offer a forecast of the business and demographic condi-
tions into which any PARC products would have to be placed. I offered 
a detailed analysis supplemented by statistical tables. A follow on paper, 
The Office of the Future, was an executive level narrative that described the 
behavior of office personnel working with computer-aided support.
The planning horizon of the two papers was dictated by the need 
of the copier sales force to have viable products available by the end of the 
decade so that they could be sold as mass-produced office equipment to 
customers that could not be served by the IBM Office Products Group. 
After analyzing the steadily declining US productivity I concluded 
that future gains from office automation would have to come from im-
proving the productivity of the masses of office workers and not a selected 
few. Here are a few passages:
4 
Parts of this paper can be found in “The Office of the Future: Information Manage-
ment for the New Age,” Technology Review, December, 1980.
86 paul strassmann
“… Exhibit E.3 illustrates one of the principal factors we have 
identified in our questioning of continued and extrapolated eco-
nomic growth rates: the relatively unproductive “white collar” 
and “service” component of our total work force is becoming 
the most predominant mode in which people participate in the 
economy.
Even though the estimated 1968 “white collar” employment of 
35.5 million far exceeds the total estimated “blue collar” work 
force of 27.5 million workers, the unskilled “white collar” com-
ponent is estimated at 12.8 million and is expanding rapidly to 
an estimated number of 17.3 million clerical workers in 1980.
From a strategic standpoint, we at Xerox must devote significant 
amounts of attention to the needs of the unskilled, nonproduc-
tion office workers for productivity enhancement products since 
this area is especially suited to the mass economies in produc-
tion and in global service support which only very few compa-
nies are in a position to offer at this point.”
My position was that the Xerox sales force that was used to mov-
ing hundred thousands of office boxes into the marketplace would have to 
now target the secretarial and administrative workforce as customers be-
fore engaging the professional workforce that did not use a keyboard and 
did not consider office work with office equipment as socially acceptable. I 
then proceeded to levy on PARC the task to engage in studies that would 
increase their understanding of the office workforce so that they could 
channel their research into constructive directions:5
5 
My explorations about the future extended beyond the office environment, though 
I kept that outside of my staff work because of low tolerance in Stamford for far reach-
ing ideas.  I am particularly proud of a paper I prepared on “Information Systems and 
Literacy,” Bailey, R.W., and Fosheim, R.M. editors, in Literacy for Life, The Modern 
Language Association of America, 1983.,
the computers nobody wanted 87
“… personnel without authority over employees or without au-
thority to commit funds, largely to be found in the “clerical 
worker” category. Again, inadequate detailed research and in-
formation sources exist in this area. Since we are dealing essen-
tially with economic and behavioral problems of human beings 
operating in offices, schools, factories, etc., it is important that 
we at Xerox have a much better understanding of these trends 
so that we could translate economic forecasts into product con-
cepts by means of which our firm could make a productive im-
pact on this environment.”
This paragraph addressed the question of spending for any prod-
ucts that Xerox would be offering. Since the ultimate customers, the cleri-
cal and administrative personnel did not have any authority over funding 
PARC was admonished to pay particular attention the purchasing cycle 
and to the purchasing authority.
The PARC organization was deaf to such guidance. They paid no 
attention whatsoever to the clerical and administrative workforce. They 
conceived the follow-on product to the ALTO to be the improved Xerox 
STAR workstation that was an exorbitantly expensive, proprietary mini-
computer, using a proprietary operating systems and not at all suitable for 
general office use. PARC did not engage in the study of the inefficiencies of 
the white-collar workforce at all. Instead the STAR machine would become 
a tool for grinding out mostly research papers and occasional presentation 
slides. Ultimately PARC did hire a social anthropologist, Lucy Suchman, 
to study details of man-machine interactions, at the time-motion level of 
analysis, but certainly not dealing with anything that would address the 
economics and habits of the office workplace. There was no interest in 
understanding whatever inefficiencies existed in the work of secretaries 
and administrators that could be displaced by whatever PARC had to offer. 
Although many conceptual papers about the impact of office automation 
emerged from PARC, these were of academic interest and dealt mostly 
with problems encountered by the researchers and not by customers. 
My papers also defined the customer set who would have to be 
served by products ultimately emerging from PARC research:
88 paul strassmann
“… One of the pervasive characteristics, on a worldwide scale, 
underlying the growth of “white collar” labor is the systemiza-
tion of paper flows in large organizations whether governmental 
or in private industry. Although much research needs to be done 
in analyzing the frequency, distribution, and contents of docu-
ments, of forms, and of copies throughout the economy, based 
on available statistics it is becoming apparent that the large gov-
ernment bureau, the large insurance company, the bank, the 
credit card operation, or the large corporation are the prime 
sources for generating highly standardized and controlled pa-
per flows requiring large organized inputs of clerical labor for 
processing, manipulation and filing. The underlying economic 
force behind this trend is the increasing concentration of pro-
duction and services in a decreasing number of organizations. 
It is estimated that perhaps as few as 1,000 organizations may 
account for more than 75% of the world’s GNP.”
This passage was a warning flag that the products emerging from 
PARC would have to find their place at first in large corporate and gov-
ernment bureaucracies and not in specialized and small-scale operations 
where intellectuals and academics congregated. Xerox completely neglect-
ed to understand that IBM’s success in the 1970s and Microsoft’s success 
in the 1990’s was entirely dependent on the placement of equipment with 
large organizations.
PARC was allergic to a view where its products should be posi-
tioned. Their counterculture ideology, including extremely liberal politics, 
was that the big firms were the enemies that should not be supported. In-
stead of organizing the flow of paper for the benefit of Xerox customers, 
they would rather devote their efforts to create autonomous individuals 
who were individually empowered by powerful personal computers, or 
Dynabooks, if at all possible. Needless to say, the concept of autonomous 
contributors who could operate as individuals, without corporate connec-
tion or corporate allegiance, was in the early 1970s a leading ideology in 
places advocated in places like the University of California in Berkeley.
the computers nobody wanted 89
Meanwhile, PARC continued to press on with computers that 
would require considerable sophistication to be useful, while neglecting 
the reality that clerks and ordinary office workers would be acquiring sim-
ple devices that would allow them to perform elementary and individual 
office tasks that would be a part of the workflow of office transactions:
“… The trends in concentration of manufacturing capacity, capi-
tal investment, and employment are of strategic significance 
from a marketing standpoint and require further research to 
deal with information processing experiences where the “prod-
uct” is completely perishable and ever changing. Hence the cur-
rent notion of arraying clerks or machines along “work stations” 
and then “assembling” standard documents into standard out-
puts contains a fundamental fallacy that information processing 
or information consumption can be standardized in all of its 
aspects. It seems that the environment will be increasingly re-
ceptive to the consumption of high technology and high capital 
value devices for localized adaptations.”
The Pendery Papers, which formed official corporate guidance to 
PARC, also included details about the kind of technologies that would be 
desirable, from a Xerox point of view, for capturing information and stor-
age of information. In every respect the stated corporate guidance would 
fit the specification for the functions of a personal computer, as delivered 
twelve years later by IBM, with Microsoft software. Had PARC followed 
most of the guidance that was issued early in 1971, Xerox would have been 
in a far superior position than IBM to launch the personal computer era. 
The exceptional hardware design skills of the PARC researchers, their soft-
ware prowess and vision of computers as a communication device placed 
them in an advantageous position to accomplish that. Unfortunately, 
PARC people were marching to a different tune. Xerox corporate man-
agement had neither the understanding, nor the will nor the ability to get 
PARC to listen to music that would satisfy the PARC real agenda while 
also delivering to Xerox an overwhelming lead over the IBM and Micro-
soft latecomers to office automation.
90 paul strassmann
The Architecture of Information
Peter McColough had a speechwriter, George Marshall, whose job 
was to provide text that would be sufficiently inspirational so that it would 
mask some of the rumbling that was coming from the financial commu-
nity about the lack of Xerox directions in the computer business. 
At one of his next talks to financial analysts McColough slipped into 
the text the phrase Architecture of Information as the theme that somehow 
unified XDS and PARC even though in reality Xerox had already started 
the process of disengagement from the computer business and PARC was 
still a gleam in Goldman’s eye. Nevertheless, the phrase caught on and was 
acquired by PARC as a suitable cover for what is was trying to accomplish. 
It was the concept that Xerox was now dedicated to the architecture of 
information that would make it possible for human beings to communicate 
with one another electronically, without central computer intermediation.6 
When Marshall was asked what was the meaning of that phrase he referred 
everyone to Goldman for an answer, which varied depending on the time 
and the person who asked the question. In candid moments Goldman 
explained that documents of the world, now optically transferred to 
a selenium drum, would ultimately travel in the form of electronic bits 
directly from keystrokes to digital printers. I shared this view and so did 
Dr. George White, who over the next ten years became an associate in the 
numerous tasks forces contemplating the future of Xerox.
There were already many precedents in Xerox for viewing documents 
as a digital source instead of having an optical original. As early as 1968 
Xerox had running, in its Henrietta Laboratories near Rochester a drum 
copier where the image was transferred to it digitally by means of a series of 
light flash sources. In fact, it was the first generation of what subsequently 
became laser printers. When PARC was created the work of the Henrietta 
Laboratories, together with all researchers, would be transferred to Palo 
Alto. That removed from Rochester their last connection to an electronic 
future. Needless to say, as PARC started developing its own ideas the 
6 
I find an echo of this in the current pronouncements by Google. I consider Google 
an intellectual descendant of PARC.
the computers nobody wanted 91
gulf between Palo Alto and Rochester/Webster got deeper, never to be 
overcome. 
Many of the concepts credited as PARC inventions came from 
other organizations. For instance, the concept of the personal workstation 
gestated for years at the Stanford Research Institute (SRI International) 
by Douglas Engelbart. What became Ethernet was derived from the Alo-
haNet that was sponsored by ARPA. Much of the early graphics work as 
well as concepts that eventually became Postscript came from the firm of 
Evans & Sutherland from Utah. That should in no way detract from the 
pioneering contributions by PARC where a collegial assembly of spectacu-
lar talent, not hindered by a bureaucracy and amply funded was capable of 
producing what is still considered to be break-through innovations. 
The Information Products Group
With the demise of XDS the attention of Xerox management shift-
ed to office automation. The first product in this field would be from an 
acquisition, Redactron, which offered an effective word processing device. 
A decision was made to keep office products from Rochester and therefore 
a plant was set up in Dallas. Ray Hay hoped that independence from the 
central bureaucracy in Rochester would provide a good environment for 
the growth of start-up businesses. Engineers from Rochester were trans-
ferred to Dallas to manage these start-ups to be managed by Bob Pot-
ter, who believed into engineering perfection of feature-rich products that 
would match in robustness and capability what was characteristic of the 
copier monopoly business.
When I joined IPG my boss was David Culbertson who had just 
been moved form running the Education Group to heading the newly 
formed Office Products Group. David was a thoughtful, considerate and 
soft-spoken former IBM education executive, with controllership back-
ground. He certainly represented safe custodial hands but would not be 
able to control operating units that were acquisitions with entrepreneurial 
origins. Culbertson, his CFO Chuck Carey, his personnel executive Joe 
Charlton and myself spent most of our time on the road traveling from 
one plan and budget review to another. Since most of IPG assets were on 
92 paul strassmann
the West Coast I averaged about one Los Angeles or San Francisco trip 
every week. 
In the fall of 1978 we suddenly received a new boss, John Titsworth, 
who came from the Control Data Corporation where he headed their 
computer and peripherals business. John was a likeable, friendly engineer 
and I developed a close personal relationship with him to this day. His 
roots were from extremely modest circumstances on a Midwest farm. He 
was certainly unlike his tight shirt ex-IBM’s from Rochester or different 
from the wild Silicon Valley operators. Mr. Titsworth hit it off well with 
David Kearns who was looking for a computer executive to ride herd on 
the uncoordinated and the undisciplined IPG collection of firms. The only 
problem with John was his readiness to compromise and to avoid conflict 
with Bill Souders, the marketing EXVP and the leading representative of 
Rochester interests in Stamford. To give John a tight-fisted support, the 
corporation assigned the ineffective Tom Winter as his CFO.
The Xerox 860 Word Processor
As was the case that would be repeated many times over the next 
decade, after the acquisition of Redactron the transplanted Rochester engi-
neers embarked immediately on the development of an improved version 
of that device, which was then discontinued. Instead, Dallas now offered 
the Xerox 860, a high feature word processor that was then advertised and 
sold as a premium product. It was an expensive system for $14,000, with 
maintenance costs to match. The costs of marketing this machine were 
also high. After full accounting for development, training materials and 
overhead it was not profitable, especially after other firms, such as IBM’s 
text editor and the Wang Laboratories word processing systems entered 
the market with lower priced equipment. The Xerox 860 was actually a 
minicomputer that was based on the CP/M operating system. Soon every 
major office products firm competed in this market segment (even Exxon 
ventures had an offering) and the market share of Xerox word processors 
shrank rapidly. The Xerox 860 was a superbly engineered and over-featured 
product that offered the preparation of documents that could automati-
cally contain line numbers, generate a table of contents, format footnotes 
the computers nobody wanted 93
and type outlines. It had a spell check function with 88,000 words in its 
dictionary. The full-text monitor could display 70 lines of 102 characters. 
It stored working files on one of the two 8” floppy disks. Each disk catalog 
could store up to 560 documents.
The objective of IPG was to make its divisions profitable. Instead 
of pressing for further product improvements and cost reduction, IPG 
jumped to concentrate on producing an extremely low-cost electronic 
typewriter that would be based on the daisy wheel mechanism acquired 
from a Diablo. When Tom Winter became the CFO for the Information 
Product Group product development in the document-processing seg-
ment shrank while funds were getting diverted into the typewriter busi-
ness. The document processor business was quietly abandoned four years 
later while pursuing other directions. There never was a product that Tom 
Winter could not choke. Titsworth let the Xerox 860 die slowly as a new 
executive emerged as the President of the Office Products Division in Dal-
las, Don Massaro, formerly President of Shugart. Massaro had a different 
agenda than the pursuit of a small but stable document processing busi-
ness.
 Xerox 820 Microcomputer
For its time the Xerox 820 eight bits microcomputer was a reason-
ably competent machine that was an also run, without any distinct compet-
itive advantages. It was rushed into production by Massaro and positioned 
as the initial Xerox entry into the distributed computing business. The 
Xerox 820 was driven by CP/M and was equipped with competent Shugart 
floppy disk drives. The CRT itself was a 24-line, 80-character white-on-
black monochrome display that was quickly surpassed by competition. Its 
main feature was the MicroPro WordStar as well as Microsoft BASIC-80 
but little else that would make it attractive though its price of $3,000 was 
moderately under IBM’s offering. When software developers shifted their 
attention to writing hundreds of applications for the IBM/Microsoft offer-
ing the Xerox 820 became an irrecoverable failure. Whether an upgrading 
of this microcomputer could have salvaged this product line is debatable 
because Xerox management was now spending time dithering about ad-
94 paul strassmann
ministrative costs and how to sell computers to national accounts. Instead 
of upgrading the Xerox 820 some scarce funds were diverted to develop-
ment of a battery powered hand-held microcomputer with only a two-line 
LCD screen. Without much funding and without a capable technology the 
Xerox 820 as well as the two-line device would be abandoned.
Digital Equipment Corporation’s Personal Computer
The IBM Personal Computer, commonly known as the IBM PC, 
was introduced on August 1981 and shortly thereafter received general 
acceptance as the industry standard. Meanwhile, the Xerox 820, with its 
slow CPM operating system and with limited application software was no 
match for what IBM plus Microsoft were offering. As was usually the case 
in corporate thinking, Xerox was going to buy into a competitive technol-
ogy and hope to offer a product that would exceed in quality what IBM 
was offering. 
There was only one option that matched the quality requirements. 
It was the Digital Equipment Corporation’s Professional 325 (PRO-325) 
and the Professional 350 (PRO-350) that offered software that was com-
pletely different from the Microsoft/IBM combination. DEC offered de-
vices that were essentially PDP-11 compatible microcomputers that used 
minicomputer peripherals. 
Win Hindle was DEC’s Senior VP and a classmate from MIT. All 
it took was a phone call in January 1982 to receive an invitation to come 
to see what DEC had to offer. What I saw was impressive from an engi-
neering standpoint. Circuit boards were slotted in a cage, with gold-plat-
ed contacts as if it were a minicomputer. The boards were fastened with 
knurled connectors that were for all practical purposes shockproof. The 
power supplies had excess capacity. The display screen was mounted in 
a reinforced chassis. What I saw was a jewel of a microcomputer, with a 
price to match. The software could draw on a library of scientific programs, 
but only on a limited collection of business applications.
So that I could demonstrate to Xerox management the unique 
qualities of what DEC had to offer, I ordered for immediate delivery a 
PRO-350. I was assured that it would be in my hands by the end of the 
the computers nobody wanted 95
week. After two weeks passed, I called DEC. When Hindle intervened, a 
truck was dispatched and delivered to my office a PRO-350. It came in over 
ten carefully packed containers. Keyboards, floppy disks, circuit boards, 
manuals and cables were each in separate boxes. The disk drives have to 
be field installed and the printer had to be assembled. The CRT came in 
two individual cartons. Everything was ready in heavy-duty cartons that 
obviously met export requirements. What we received was a shrunk mini-
computer that required technical labor for assembly and for expert testing 
before anything would work. 
As compared with the IBM PC the DEC PRO-350 was over-featured, 
costly and certainly not suitable for general office use. I recommended 
against its adoption as a follow-up to the Xerox 820, which meanwhile 
started experimenting with upgrades that were starved for funding. Four 
months later Xerox decided that it would not pursue the microcomputer 
business.
DEC never gained a foothold in the low cost PC market. That sig-
naled the decline of the computer industry in New England as nearly all 
computer manufacturers located there were focused on minicomputers, 
from DEC to Data General, Wang, Prime and Honeywell.
Diablo Data Systems
Diablo Data Systems was acquired in 1972. The principal reason for 
the inclusion of Diablo in Xerox was its daisy-wheel impact printer that 
was faster and more flexible than the dominant IBM’s “golf ball” impact 
devices. Though the Office Product Division was already buying Diablo 
Data Systems printers for its Redactron text editors the corporate acquisi-
tion staff thought that Diablo was a good match for Xerox and bought it 
after which the original founders of the firm departed. As would be the 
habit in other IPG acquisitions in due course some worthy engineer from 
Rochester or El Segundo would be promoted to take over as General Man-
ager of the acquired firm and proceed to change its directions.
After trying for seven years to make Diablo profitable this Division 
finally focused on the development and selling of the Diablo 630, which 
was mostly sold to other firms such as DEC (Digital Equipment Corpo-
96 paul strassmann
ration). The Diablo 630 was capable of letter-quality printing that was 
equivalent to the quality of an IBM Selectric typewriter or Selectric-based 
printer, but at a lower cost. The printer could run at 30 characters per sec-
ond that was roughly twice the speed of the Selectric. It had many features 
that could not be matched by any competitor, including its capacity to 
quickly change printer fonts. 
Xerox interfered with the running of Diablo and distracted its at-
tention from its prime strength, which was competence in impact printing 
and selling through OEM channels. Diablo then decided to diversify into 
making minicomputers, which would set them up in direct competition 
with their customers. After spending a great deal of money, the minicom-
puter project was abandoned. 
When Massaro was looking for additional winning products for 
the Office Products Division, a dormant but attractive daisy wheel technol-
ogy improvement was found in Diablo. The prospect of converting Diablo 
into a typewriter supplier instead of just supporting the word processing 
computers looked very attractive. One of Massaro’s key lieutenants, Bill 
Jackson was then detached to get OPD into a mass produced typewriter 
business that would be selling well below $500 and be at least twice as 
flexible as comparable IBM offerings. To obtain such a low price would 
require mass production, standardization of components as well as a large 
reduction in the number of parts to make a typewriter. 
In an unbelievably short time Bill Jackson organized the construc-
tion of a highly automated factory near Dallas to produce Xerox daisy 
wheel typewriters. It took less than half an hour of labor to assemble a 
Xerox typewriter because it was made of only a minimum number of parts. 
Copier sales people could now sell typewriters. These machines would be 
marketed to secretaries who were using the machines to create original pa-
per copies and edit drafts from a limited memory that was also provided. 
The advantage of the new typewriter was that it could be marketed in ways 
that were similar to the methods of selling copiers. For a while the Xerox 
typewriter was well received though it never achieved its projected vol-
umes. The advent of the personal computer shifted the work of secretaries 
from the production of paper copies to creating text on a screen. Once 
the text was captured in this manner, computer printers could then gen-
the computers nobody wanted 97
erate the printed pages automatically. Though the Xerox typewriter was 
modified to be compatible with personal computers that did not work out 
because the engineering to make a low cost device reduced the flexibility 
of the mechanism to adapt to a variety of commands now dictated by Mi-
crosoft. 
When the attention of Xerox management turned to computer 
printing connected to large mainframes, Diablo was left to lapse into an 
unimportant Xerox subsidiary. It never picked up the challenge of innova-
tion that has now migrated to Hewlett-Packard who picked up laser print-
ing from not having any research or product in this market to a dominant 
market share in a matter of few years.
Shugart Floppy Disks 
Of all of Zarem’s acquisitions Shugart held the greatest promise be-
cause it pioneered the aggressive development of floppy disks. These were 
originally an IBM invention but it took Al Shugart to lower the costs and 
to improve the performance of floppy disks to make them a widely used 
storage medium for use in the exploding microcomputer business. Much 
of the success of the original Apple II computer can be attributed its offer-
ing of attached Shugart floppy drives. 
When Al Shugart, rich with Xerox stock left, Don Massaro became 
President. Don was a representative of a Silicon Valley braggadocio, exu-
berance and ambition. He had a fast wit and could be very funny and en-
tertaining. For a short while Shugart flourished with rapid expansion and 
new product introductions that were fueled by Xerox capital. The problem 
was that Don’s ambitions grew with every month as he discovered that 
there was a complete leadership vacuum in Xerox to exploit its non-copier 
business. I spent a great deal of time at Don’s home talking about strat-
egy and PIMS except that Don’s drive was focused on power and position, 
possibly aspiring someday to become the CEO of Xerox. 
When Culbertson and then Titsworth started putting a squeeze 
on Massaro to start delivering profits his solution was to outsource the 
most labor-intensive part of Shugart operations to Taiwan. Massaro out-
sourced the disk arms that contained the microscopic disk read/write 
98 paul strassmann
heads. Shugart realized instant labor cost savings of a few dollars per head 
with the predictable outcome that they put the Taiwanese into the business 
of making low cost floppy disks. When Shugart was rapidly losing market 
share to Taiwanese firms, Massaro was gone to become President of Dallas 
Operations where he developed into a vocal and abrasive candidate with 
known aspirations for rapid promotions in Xerox. 
Titsworth and I were with Massaro on a private jet flying over the 
Channel from London to Paris to attend a show when Don started fidget-
ing about his need for some sort of a symbol or mascot that would char-
acterize the aggressive position he was taking in promoting his leadership 
of the office of the future. I pointed out that the Road Runner would be 
an ideal mascot for the Office Product Division. I knew the creator of the 
Road Runner, Chuck Jones. For a fee we could obtain the necessary copy-
rights. Massaro was titillated by this idea and asked me to proceed. As the 
relationship between Rochester and Dallas inevitably deteriorated he ad-
opted Wile E. Coyote as an icon. It did not take too long for Road Runner 
flags getting hoisted throughout the Office Product Division offices, with 
the Coyote chasing a paranoiac bird that looked a bit like Massaro. Mas-
saro went out of his way to use his caustic tongue to alienate most of the 
Stamford executives who would have to support him even though we was 
immensely popular in Dallas. He did not hide his ambitions though he 
was right in viewing the management in Stamford as incapable bumblers.
While he held the position as President of the Office Product, Mas-
saro launched in rapid succession a series of products that were never com-
pletely engineered. Instead of pursuing a patient and focused development 
process he jumped from one product to another until Xerox was left with 
only shards of technology without a future. 
Century Data Corporation 
Shortly after acquiring Shugart Abe Zarem’s acquisition staff was 
ready to spread Xerox investments to acquire a hard disk manufacturer, 
Century Data Corporation. This was a relatively small but profitable pro-
ducer of removable disks cartridges that had a higher capacity than any-
thing that Shugart could satisfy. Both the ALTO as well as the prospec-
the computers nobody wanted 99
tive Xerox STAR would make good use of removable disk drive cartridges. 
Why it was necessary to include a small disk manufacturer with a marginal 
market share in Xerox holdings so that we could include it in support of 
a limited number of office workstations is a mystery. Our quarterly visit 
to Century showed that the original investors as well as original founders 
were long gone. The company was profitable, but far below the usual Xe-
rox returns on investment because it was located in the Los Angeles basin 
with high labor costs. In the highly competitive disk drive business there 
was no apparent reason why any future needs for hard drives could not be 
satisfied by OEM purchases.
Xerox management in Rochester had a long history of accommo-
dating to labor unions, which was justifiable in the early days by extraordi-
nary profits as well by a heavy reliance on outsourced components. When 
union leaders connected to Rochester discovered that the Century Data 
Corporation was not unionized, they intervened with Peter McColough, 
who promptly ordered John Titsworth to fire the General Manager of Cen-
tury who was resisting unionization because the entire disk drive industry 
on the West Coast was non-unionized. With a new General Manger and 
a reorganized management it did not take long for the unionized Century 
to pass into oblivion. 
When it came to unionization and to promoting equal opportunity 
appointments the position of Peter McColough was uncompromising. He 
operated on rules adopted and practiced during the heyday of Xerox in 
the 1970s. Applying such rules to IPG was not only disruptive but also 
destructive. In due course Xerox promoted a large number of equal op-
portunity employees into senior positions while the company was starting 
to shrink. That created a disgruntled group of people with former seniority 
whose advancement was now managed with a bias. In the ensuing con-
flicts the equal opportunity personnel created interest groups (caucuses) 
that started defending their interests in a collective manner. I have no way 
of knowing to what extent this influenced morale or employee loyalty ex-
cept that it could not have been favorable to the fortunes of the company.
100 paul strassmann
Versatec Electrostatic Printing 
Versatec, acquired in 1975 and added to the portfolio of the Infor-
mation Products Group was by far the most fun Division, almost entirely 
on account of its president, Renn Zaphiropoulos. Renn was perhaps the 
best storyteller around and gained a reputation as a raconteur as well as 
a person who enjoyed good food, classical music and good life. Versatec 
perfected a method of printing on plain paper, utilizing a solid-state write 
head to electrostatically release a pattern of dry toner particles from a 
toner carrier. The pattern of released toner particles would be accelerated 
across an air gap to affix to specially treated paper.
Versatec was a relatively happy acquisition because it did not fit into 
IPG at all. Its technology was limited to the engineering markets, which 
was unrelated to the office equipment market. Versatec’s technology was 
specialized to generate drawings and was too slow to be of use as a print-
ing device for computer printing, word processing or a text workstation. 
Why Xerox acquired Versatec was a puzzle except that it was in the print-
ing business and somehow Xerox wished to own printing assets. A goodly 
sum of money was paid to Versatec shareholders, Versatec employees and 
made Renn a rich person who could then indulge in a luxurious home 
(with an expensive Bossendorf piano). Xerox visitors from IPG were glo-
riously entertained in Renn’s home with panache and good taste. On my 
50th birthday Renn gave a party that included a gift of a bottle of 1929 (my 
birth date) Courvoisier that must have cost a fortune.
Xerox did not mess with Renn who was a superb diplomat and gra-
ciously paid respect to the people from Stamford as long as they left him 
alone. There was never a question about replacing Renn as the General 
Manager. He continued to preside over Versatec affairs in great style (rid-
ing an elephant to a company party) while also getting some benefit from 
corporate research. While operating as a Xerox subsidiary Renn enlarged 
the Versatec business, continued its profitability and was viewed as one of 
the few happy acquisitions except that his synergy and contributions to 
Xerox were negligible other than in the case of engineering drawings that 
were used and promoted effectively by Fuji-Xerox. 
the computers nobody wanted 101
The standing debate with Renn was his vociferous critique of ink-
jet printing which ultimately turned out to replace most of electrostatic 
printing in offices. We could never stop Renn from pursuing a long dis-
sertation why the physics of ink-jet printing was infeasible. To this day I 
happen to marvel how high-resolution ink-jet printing, in color, can func-
tion at all. 
Kurzweil Computer Products 
Kurzweil was a late acquisition, in 1980. They pioneered innova-
tions in the fields of optical character recognition (OCR), text-to-speech 
synthesis and speech recognition technology. Their products were hand 
crafted and had very limited sales but attracted enormous amount of pub-
licity, especially with their reading machine for the blind. Ray Kurzweil was 
a researcher and tinkerer who flitted from one invention to another. When 
Kurzweil was dropped into the lap of IPG Titsworth and I went to look 
at the operation, which produced only a limited number of handcrafted 
devices. The technology was impressive and the applications were unique. 
I simply could not figure how we could possibly leverage its research en-
vironment into anything useful. Ray cashed his large Xerox check and im-
mediately proceeded on the next venture because he enjoyed development 
of innovative products that attracted publicity. It did not take too long 
afterwards for Xerox to sell off almost all of Kurzweil for a fraction of the 
original purchase price though a small part of the technology still remains 
in use in a partially owned Xerox subsidiary.
Western Union International
Though WUI was formally assigned to IPG, it was always run by 
the Xerox Development organization funded, operated and separately 
managed out of Beverly Hills. 
The acquisition of WUI came to me as a complete surprise even 
though I was aware that one of the exceptionally bright and capable Zarem 
staffers, Paul Lykins, had been working on a microwave-based local area 
network for some time. The idea was that Xerox would offer document 
102 paul strassmann
delivery services using a private low cost network that would rely on lim-
ited range transmitters in each metropolitan area. WUI (renamed XTEN 
inside Xerox) was bought as a vehicle for obtaining radio spectrum licens-
es through an established telecommunications carrier. This entire opera-
tion was clothed in tight secrecy though I learned that Lykins and Zarem’s 
people were buying up radio spectrum throughout the US. It appears that 
there was sufficient bandwidth available at reasonable prices to support as 
yet unmet needs. I have no idea how much money was spent. By the time 
Lykins was done Xerox owned substantial spectrum positions in major 
metropolitan markets in the US, which was everywhere that mattered. 
When Xerox decided to enter into financial services and had to 
start incurring debt to finance acquisitions of insurance and credit firms, 
corporate management decided to cut off further diversification into tele-
communications. The spectrum that was owned was sold off. It took Xerox 
less than three years to go in and to get out of the local area transmission 
business. Twenty-five years later others would auction off the bandwidth 
owned by Xerox for billions of dollars. 
Xerox Computer Services
All was not well with the ethics of SDS. Immediately after the ac-
quisition by Xerox in 1969 corporate HQ dispatched an Assistant Control-
ler, Leon Berg, to have a better look at some of the financial aspects of 
SDS book keeping. Why such an examination was not done prior to the 
acquisition was not clear. The agreement to purchase SDS was a closely 
held matter in the hands of Peter McColough and a few close confidants.
As was often the case in the computer business, signed (but can-
celable) orders were booked as sales. Commissions were paid on orders. 
That encouraged overstating customer commitments. Some of the idle 
computer inventory was also transferred to a new subsidiary, Xerox Com-
puter Services, who entered into an on-line services business. That was 
also booked as an outright sale even though XCS managed its assets as 
short-term rentals. The orders I placed for installation inside Xerox for an 
unspecified future delivery depended on whether a software-as-a-service 
business would ever materialize. The net result of all of this was Berg’s 
the computers nobody wanted 103
discovery that much if what Xerox thought they bought as SDS assets was 
an accounting figment.
As was often the case with many other Xerox ventures, the idea of 
using XCS as a way for delivering manufacturing systems for a reason-
able monthly rental per terminal would make it possible for small firms 
to acquire sophisticated applications at a reasonable cost. The time shar-
ing technologies of the Sigma 6 and 7 were well suited for this purpose 
and could support a limited number of terminals better and cheaper than 
whatever IBM could offer. XCS operated a hybrid system. On-line Tele-
type terminals entered data inputs and could extract answers to simple 
inquiries. Messengers would then deliver voluminous output printouts to 
customers by truck. XCS also managed to acquire licenses to innovative 
software solutions that applied to specialized markets. For its time XCS 
offered a solution that would meet the needs of a few small firms that did 
not wish to hire a staff to manage on-site minicomputers.
The imaginative XCS people, headed by Jim Campbell, were now 
seen as business pioneers. The problem with all this was that Xerox top 
management were pressed by Wall Street critics and needed to demon-
strate rapidly rising revenues and profits from its computer services busi-
ness. That was not possible because XCS was a start-up venture in a market 
place that found it difficult to rely on the dependability of services over 
telephone wires. Here again was a case where Xerox viewed itself as an 
innovative competitor and as a creator of a completely new business seg-
ment. XCS was a great idea, but economically not viable on a scale or time 
horizon that Xerox was willing to invest in. It would take another thirty 
years before on line computer services would become at least marginally 
viable. Without subsidized computing power from XDS as well as without 
corporate support XCS operations were not sustainable. After some ma-
nipulations of the depreciation numbers to pretty up the reported finan-
cial results XCS was quietly allowed to disappear. 
Though XCS reported through IPG and I attended all of the obliga-
tory quarterly financial reviews, there was nothing one could do to influ-
ence the XCS destiny. Especially after the demise of XDS our on-demand-
computing business was yet another isolated and unrelated venture that 
did not contribute to Xerox growth. A thorough strategic review could 
104 paul strassmann
have revealed that this start-up in a new market segment could never 
amount to much, especially since it continued to be underfunded.
Computer Laser Printers
It is noteworthy that the laser printing research that would support 
printing from IBM mainframe computers had to be taken out of the hands 
of the PARC researchers who had no interest in developing high volume 
computer peripherals that would be fed by IBM print protocols. PARC 
would have nothing to do with that and would favor only the develop-
ment of local convenience laser printing that could be shared by worksta-
tions connected via local area Ethernet. To make any headway with the 
laser printing technologies, the engineering and implementation had to be 
transferred to the data-center experts still remaining from whatever was 
left of XDS initially in El Segundo. The tough jobs of finding solutions to 
technical problems such as laser defects, laser failures, scanning synchro-
nization, customer support and software compatibility with IBM comput-
ers were solved by experienced computer professionals of the main-frame 
heritage. 
The claims made in the succeeding years that it was PARC that in-
vented and developed laser printers simply does not hold up. Laser print-
ing ideas were imported to Palo Alto from Rochester. Laser printing, as 
a commercial product, was brought to the market by the people from El 
Segundo, with very little help except perhaps for the contribution in per-
fecting laser reliability, which was made by the Electro-Optical division 
in Pasadena. The integration of laser imaging to fit on top of the existing 
high volume copiers came from Rochester. How Xerox could finally bring 
to the market a product, as result of several years of often unsuccessful at-
tempts, using the resources of the entire corporation, could have served as 
a useful lesson how to extract innovation out of PARC and to deliver it to 
customers by experienced Xerox management who had both the techno-
logical as well as market understanding. Such extraction never took place. 
The research and single-minded view of PARC to preserve its control over 
the office of the future technologies blocked the practical translation of 
laser printing into data center printing.
the computers nobody wanted 105
I was present at the key 1977 meeting to decide whether to proceed 
with the production of the Xerox 9700, which would be our first non-XDS 
product for the data processing community. This product has been in de-
velopment for more than five years and represented the third or fourth en-
gineering version because it was a complex device. The business case was 
poor, with excessive maintenance costs due to very short laser life. Print 
volume was estimated optimistically at not more than 400,000 pages per 
month. The capital cost for this machine was also very high, engineering 
was immature and the acceptance of a single Xerox product in the data 
center uncertain because it required special software to interface with IBM 
mainframes. Finance, always holding a veto power, opposed the project 
and asked Bob Adams, president of Computer Printing, to go back and see 
what can be done to improve laser life expectancy.
To everybody’s surprise Adams received an immediate go ahead 
to proceed with the 9700. After spending a fortune Xerox was now under 
pressure to have something to show in the computer business. Manage-
ment was willing to commit to a computer printer despite dubious pros-
pects. Xerox also needed a product that could be promoted as originat-
ing from PARC. The laser computer printer turned out to be a success, 
even though it did not fit the PARC architecture. Except for housing Gary 
Starkweather, PARC would have nothing to do with anything that touched 
a data center. Monthly copy volume soon exceeded a million copies per 
machine. Engineering improvements from El Segundo made the 9700 
a modestly profitable offering, but without the potential of becoming a 
major contributor to Xerox revenue growth. The Xerox 9700 Electronic 
Printing System was a 300dpi duplex Xerographic (Laser) printer operat-
ing at 2 pages per second with raster font selection and forms capabilities. 
Since it was introduced in 1977 and for many years afterwards it was the 
premier high volume page printer unmatched by competition. It used a 
modified DEC PDP-11/34 as its engine which proved that much of what 
Xerox was aspiring to do with acquisition could have been accommodated 
by OEM suppliers.
As long as the Xerox 9700 was able to leverage the technology 
of high-speed duplicators — something competitors could not easily 
achieve — the laser computer business remained a nice but strategically 
106 paul strassmann
isolated business that was treated by corporate finance as a cash cow. Bob 
Adams somehow managed to keep the computer business out of the hands 
of the Rochester bureaucracy. He deployed his own salespeople and his 
own maintenance force. This was relatively easy because the total popula-
tion of Xerox 9700 machines was never large and always remained con-
centrated in large data centers. I must give Bob Adams credit for managing 
the only computer related business over a long period that maintained 
independence, integrity, technological innovation and profitability.
Starkweather did see the handwriting on the wall at Xerox. He left 
the company in 1987 after 24 years of service. Following a ten-year stint 
at Apple Computer, Starkweather joined Microsoft Research in 1997. I am 
mentioning this migration as an example of what happened to the one-
time stars of PARC. There is a long list of alumni that ended up in com-
panies that continued to push forward with the visions once nurtured at 
Xerox.
Xerox failure to successfully launch an office laser printer would 
represent anther major failure to take advantage of an invention conceived 
entirely by Xerox. PARC cared about laser printing only as an output de-
vice for its Ethernet connected workstations, which had a limited applica-
bility. The idea of developing an office laser printer as a competitive prod-
uct, something done successfully and profitably by Hewlett-Packard, never 
came up on the PARC agenda. The Xerox laser printers used at PARC were 
modifications of existing copier equipment based on selenium drums. That 
made such printers very expensive to purchase and even more expensive 
to maintain.7
When PARC needed non-impact printing, they were still talking 
in terms of hundreds of devices that would be shared by many worksta-
tions. Though the costs of such devices and low reliability was a problem, 
in the arithmetic of PARC that did not matter because in the research 
environment they never had to deal with mission-critical outputs. PARC 
was concentrating on proofs of concept and was satisfied with a “Press” 
software protocol that would provide a slow interface between worksta-
7 
My own interest in non-impact printing is reflected in an article jointly authored 
with Charles Willard from Bob Adams’ shop on “The Evolution of the Page Printer,” 
Datamation, May 1978.
the computers nobody wanted 107
tions and printers. That was followed with a proprietary InterPress that 
was supposed to safeguard that only Xerox laser printers would be able to 
connect to a network. 
Meanwhile Hewlett-Packard proceeded late in 1979 with offering 
of a low cost laser printer that was based on disposable cartridges and ulti-
mately on the open software protocol “PostScript”. They would make their 
money on the supplies — the toner cartridge and ink for the ink-jet print 
technology. As a result, Xerox was beaten to market by Hewlett-Packard, 
which introduced the first low cost personal laser printer in 1980. While 
Xerox planners were thinking about office printing in terms for hundreds 
of units, H-P was soon selling millions of printers, which for a number of 
years accounted for almost half of the profits for the entire firm.
Splitting Marketing 
The visit by top Xerox executives to PARC to get an appreciation 
of progress can be seen as a failure because no follow-up actions existed. 
Though several task forces were assembled to contemplate how an ALTO-
like product could be launched in the market place within two to three 
years, how to do that was never resolved as intra-corporate conflicts how 
to manage such a transition to the market remained unresolved. 
I believe that the mortal wounds to any prospects of ever staging 
an orderly transition from research to an initial market introduction were 
inflicted in what, at the time, looked like viable compromise arrange-
ments. The most serious errors was a negotiation between the new Execu-
tive Vice President, John Titsworth, who has now assumed the role as the 
person would be responsible for bringing all non-copier systems products 
into the market place. John, a most amiable and well intentioned novice 
to Xerox politics, succumbed to the arguments of the well seasoned Bill 
Souders — the corporate EXVP of marketing, but really the representative 
of the Rochester marketing establishment. During a lunch, and without 
any prior discussion or staff work, Titsworth accepted Souder’s argument 
that all office laser printers (except for computer printers, which was an 
El Segundo turf) would be henceforth a product that would be planned, 
developed and marketed by the Rochester copier bureaucracy. I suppose, 
108 paul strassmann
that Souders could prevail because Titsworth’s empire was consuming too 
much cash and had been throttled for development funds. It was also ex-
periencing a rapid turnover in management and in organization structure. 
When Souders offered to take office laser printing out of Titsworth’s hands 
it looked like a good compromise except that Rochester could never see a 
way to sell office lasers as a profitable stand-alone product that would meet 
their customary gross margin and sales commission objectives. Technical-
ly, you needed a workstation to drive an office laser printer. The problem 
was that the workstation business was now drifting out of control of PARC 
into a hastily assembled new business unit in Dallas (OPD) that would 
control only engineering and would not be able to do marketing.
When Titsworth came back from the lunch with Souders and told 
me of having divested himself of product responsibilities for office laser 
printing, I was devastated. It was one of the few times in my career when 
I raised my ire and declared that a decisive blow has been imparted to the 
hopes of Xerox ever extracting out of PARC a successor to the ALTO as a 
viable commercial product. 
 From my administrative productivity studies, and harking back to 
the Pendery Papers, the immediate high payoff opportunity from a succes-
sor to the ALTO would be to deliver a high-end workstation that would of-
fer a premium customer exceptional value added from what I then called 
instant publishing, or what became ultimately known as desktop publish-
ing. Although the capacity to produce business graphics and a variety of 
fonts would be certainly useful, the greatest economic value from such as 
system would be extracted from a capacity to instantly deliver high qual-
ity and high-value business documents. For that an office laser printer 
would be essential, but only if it could be designed as a system product that 
would be directly linked with the workstation producing the original text. 
Though PARC was very much interested in such integration, as they dem-
onstrated by attaching laser image generators on top of a modified Xerox 
copier, the prospects of Rochester developers working closely with PARC 
were not realistic. PARC would be glad to receive additional funding to 
do such work but held to its own agenda of a research-based workstation 
and would not sway from that. Rochester developers immediately blocked 
the transfer of any funding to PARC because they did not trust them. The 
the computers nobody wanted 109
Titsworth-Souders accommodation served no purpose except to further 
deepen the chasm between competing corporate factions.
The second damage to the future of Xerox future as a systems com-
pany was inflicted without much executive discussion, but nevertheless 
with almost deadly consequences. John Titsworth proceeded with the 
plans to leverage the existing resources in Dallas as a core of an organiza-
tion that would have the capacity to guide product development, market-
ing and support office printing products that would generate text from 
computer originated instructions. In due course this would include the 
management of newly acquired text editing machines and electronic type-
writers that would adapt the daisy wheel printing technologies that was 
acquired by the Diablo company, now a Xerox subsidiary. Though engi-
neering, product planning and marketing for these underfunded and lim-
ited production products was completely decentralized, when time came 
to leverage the Xerox sales force, most of the administration — which in-
cluded billing — remained as an add-on to the copier business. That did 
not work at all. Rising overhead costs ultimately killed all of the efforts 
to add non-copier products as add-ons to the products sold by the copier 
sales force. The salespeople were now struggling with a rapidly dropping 
market share in copiers and from the demoralization related to the selling 
off the installed copier equipment.
PARC
G
oldman and Zarem sold McColough on funding a new laboratory 
in Palo Alto that would be devoted to the creation of the office of 
the future. The idea was to replicate what Carlson has done as an 
inventor. If the laboratory was successful one could repeat past achieve-
ments by buying companies that would then complement what would 
be developed in Palo Alto. That explained why Xerox was buying Diablo, 
Shugart, Century Data, Versatec and others in anticipation of what Palo 
Alto may need someday.
The theory was that after research delivered results one could then 
turn over the invention to an organization that could then develop a com-
mercial product to be ready for sales as was the case with the Battelle Insti-
tute and then by Haloid. Initially I accepted that was a plausible scenario. 
Unfortunately, none of this turned out to be true. Palo Alto research deliv-
ered concepts that did not fit the marketplace. There was no nursing place 
that could make PARC products adaptable for customer use. There would 
be no marketing organization to influence how the Palo Alto invention 
could imitate the path of xerography. 
Palo Alto was chosen to place Xerox in the just emerging Silicon 
Valley. The objective was to get the laboratory as far as possible from Roch-
ester and Stamford. There was an understanding that for more than five 
years corporate staffers would be kept out of Palo Alto. Corporate finance 
would have to be satisfied with a minimum of reports about progress for 
at least six years. There was a special injunction against any marketing 
people showing up until PARC was ready with whatever they invented. 
Though XDS wished to get the new R&D facility close to them so 
that they could shift research expense for the next generation of comput-
ers to the corporate till, Goldman would have none of that. The new lab, 
112 paul strassmann
now known as PARC (Palo Alto Research Laboratory) would be operating 
without any restrictions. It would have a charter to pursue the exploration 
of office technologies that nobody has ever seen before. The ghost of re-
incarnating Chester Carlson into the digital world was never far from the 
heady speculations about PARC directions in those days. 
Assembling the Staff
Goldman was well connected with the academia that surrounded 
the work done for the Department of Defense. He was on the DoD Sci-
ence Board and knew George Pake, the Provost of Washington Univer-
sity. Pake was a quiet, unassuming scientist-administrator who worked 
with the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), which was 
nursing ideas about the use of images and of text into the world of numeri-
cal computing. Pake left academia and joined Xerox as the head of PARC 
because the new laboratory offered unrestricted opportunities to exploit 
concepts that meanwhile started languishing, as budget cuts constrained 
ARPA. Xerox was now offering generous funding to continue ARPA work 
in a quasi-academic environment.
It did not take long for Pake to assemble a group of stellar research-
ers. In 1972/73 Congressional legislation limited funding for defense re-
search and many researchers were now without a contract income. All that 
took was to get a list of the most promising doctorate or post-doctorate 
students who worked on ARPA projects in the field that PARC would be 
interested to pursue. A key in this hiring process was Bob Taylor, who 
had been distributing ARPA funding for work which was already well on 
its way when budget cuts limited the amount of money available. Taylor 
was not a scientist himself, nor a Ph.D. but a skillful administrator with a 
master’s degree in experimental psychology. The graduate students eking 
our a meager stipend doing advanced work were now enticed to move to 
a collegial environment where the salaries were exceptional, the food was 
superior, the accommodations were spectacular and the purse was suf-
ficiently loose to afford the purchase of whatever equipment they needed. 
The PARC laboratory would be creating an opportunity to build not only 
for Xerox but also for the entire world computer systems that were differ-
the computers nobody wanted 113
ent from anything that XDS or IBM have conceived. I can characterize 
the PARC researchers as people filled with messiah zeal. Their loyalty was 
never to Xerox but to the intellectual challenge of taking information tech-
nology research out of the stranglehold of mainframe computing charac-
terized by the dominance of IBM. From the inception, PARC researchers 
detested everything that was represented by XDS or IBM and would have 
no part of engaging in any shared work with El Segundo. Xerox would 
be used to fund what the PARC researchers were trying to deliver as a 
follow-up to work started in ARPA. It was a marriage of convenience that 
would last only as long as money was coming in from the corporate till. I 
talked with Bob Taylor often and it was apparent that he a deep contempt 
for all persons from Rochester and Stamford. Since I was the keeper of 
mainframe computers in Xerox, I was always viewed with special suspi-
cion though Taylor recognized that I understood his game, which was ma-
nipulating the work of PARC out of the reach of Xerox.
The myth of a Chester Carlson reincarnation through PARC was 
now embedded in the minds of some of the leading lights in Stamford and 
in Palo Alto. All it took is a few phone calls from Taylor and the chosen 
researchers signed up. The interviews for employment were conducted by 
PARC peers and not by supervisors. That put into motion unprecedented 
ways how to create an innovative environment. To this date PARC has the 
reputation as the incubator of much that subsequently became the source 
of many software technologies. The alumni of PARC went to founder a 
long list of companies. To this day, the originators of firms such as Adobe 
and Google are proud to identify their origins during their years at Xe-
rox. For a period of about six years PARC has developed from a start-up 
to become one of the most respected shining examples of Silicon Valley 
know-how. For a short interval PARC researchers generated more pub-
lished papers than IBM’s Yorktown Laboratories that employed a multiple 
of research staffers.
First Encounter with PARC
The primary objective of my November 1970 visit to PARC with 
Don Pendery and George White was to engage in conversations how cor-
114 paul strassmann
porate management from Stamford could provide guidance for PARC re-
search directions. George Pake would welcome receiving a brief that could 
become the basis for further corporate reviews of PARC progress. Pendery 
doubted whether that would do any good, since written presentation mate-
rial from leading PARC researchers made it clear that they were following 
a path that had been already outlined six years before by ARPA. As PARC 
researchers saw it, they would proceed to implement visions that had been 
maturing since 1966 how to transform computers from centrally managed 
arithmetic engines to autonomous and universal communication medium 
for cooperation and personal interactions. These were lofty statements, 
punctuated with philosophical pronouncements how personally managed 
computers, without oversight by executives like myself, would become a 
liberation force from what was then seen as the totalitarian Big Brother 
IBM. We were dealing here not with anarchists but with extremely capa-
ble computer scientists whose technological insights were peppered with 
phrases that I would recognize as originating from then popular campus 
activists such as Abbie Hoffman. The technology was surely that of the 
Department of Defense, which was primarily concerned with the surviv-
ability of computer-based command networks under condition of a nucle-
ar attack from ballistic missiles. However, the rhetoric reflected the ideas 
of the German philosopher Herbert Marcuse, the widely quoted critic of 
capitalist society. These ideas permeated California university campuses 
and were adopted by the leftist student movement in the 1960s as a road-
map for reforming the US.
What I was hearing was a badly disguised ideology to take comput-
ers out of the hands of the bureaucracies and to hand them over to self-suf-
ficient people whose livelihood dispensed with organized forms. The most 
vocal person in the presentations was Alan Kay who over the years culti-
vated his anti-organizational positions even though he frequently changed 
employment to serve large firms looking for unconventional ideas. 
Pendery’s and my problem with all this was a total lack of an out-
line how such ideas would propel Xerox towards its desired goals in the 
foreseeable future. It was clear that what the PARC people talked about 
was a revolutionary new way how to restructure information systems. The 
PARC approach passed the test of advocating completely new ways for 
the computers nobody wanted 115
organizing computer architectures. It offered ways for bypassing IBM’s 
entrenched positions though the question remained how this would be 
accomplished and when. 
Conceptually, and without probing into potential customer utility, 
the declarations that came back from our visit to PARC held enormous 
appeal to Peter McColough and to Jack Goldman. In the early 1970s Xerox 
was still swimming in cash and spending about $60 million per year on 
PARC seemed as good a gamble to the poker addicted Xerox top execu-
tives as any other acquisition. 
 What was missing was a connection between invention and practi-
cal use. Though PARC was clothing itself in a Carlson-like image of achiev-
ing a breakthrough by means of innovative technologies, such a claim was 
either a misunderstanding of history or a deliberately misleading propa-
ganda. What we know about Carlson’s thinking is well documented. Before 
he even started his search for a non-photographic solution to copying he 
clearly articulated what could be the economic benefits of a direct imaging 
process using plain paper. In fact, I can summarize Carlson’s, as well as Joe 
Wilson’s thinking as placing economics ahead of technology. PARC had 
this sequence exactly in reverse. They would build a working instantiation 
of the ARPA visions regardless of economic utility. The world would then 
come to embrace this invention with enthusiasm. Chester Carlson and Joe 
Wilson were focused on delivering customer benefits through reasonable 
improvements in what already existed. PARC would offer a new way how 
to perform work in ways never done before, regardless of affordability.
During our visit we were also told that the first product from PARC 
would be a personal workstation offering unique graphic capabilities. Later, 
this workstation would become known as the ALTO computer. It would 
be delivered, using a Data General computer, within two years. How such 
a computer would be tested and evaluated would depend on how well it 
would perform internally within the PARC environment. Every researcher 
would start using their networked ALTO to improve their delivery of re-
search results. At that time I did not realize the consequences of this ap-
proach to technology assessment. What PARC was proposing was to build 
an expensive computer network that would be evaluated strictly in terms 
how it satisfied the needs of a research elite that was operating at the ex-
116 paul strassmann
treme of computer science. Such an introspective approach to designing 
the office of the future would become one of the many reasons why what-
ever would be delivered from PARC would never meet Xerox marketing 
needs. 
Copiers had been conceived as result of original research. After a 
long gestation period, Xerox finally delivered something that eased the 
workload of office workers, economically and simply. During this long 
journey Xerox had introduced two products using selenium imaging that 
did not succeed commercially, even though they did not lose money. Nev-
ertheless, even those unprofitable ventures generated valuable insights 
from customer engagements. What PARC proposed now was not even re-
motely comparable to whatever represented the Xerox heritage. Whereas 
Xerox was in the dry copying business for decades prior to the introduc-
tion of the first successful product, what PARC offered was without a prec-
edent. Whereas Xerox marketing delivered several xerographic products 
to paying customers prior to getting its third offerings right, PARC had no 
such plans. The ALTO was an expensive and subsidized tool that would 
be subjected to critique only from the standpoint of computer scientists, 
not from paying customers. When PARC was pressed to show how this 
equipment could work elsewhere, fifty ALTOs were donated to Stanford 
University, Carnegie-Mellon and M.I.T computer science departments to 
demonstrate its utility.
How customers would benefit from whatever PARC would deliver 
always remained murky. Carlson and Wilson reflected the approach ex-
emplified by the pragmatic philosophy of John Dewey, which was deeply 
embedded in the way Americans have learned how to think and act. The 
thinking of PARC leaders was ideological and deductive. It reflected not 
only the philosophy of Marcuse, but also of other European professors. 
No wonder that some of the leading intellectuals from the increasingly 
radicalized universities flocked to PARC in search of academic fame and 
social fulfillment, enticed by intellectual ferment, brilliant personalities as 
well as very good money.
the computers nobody wanted 117
PARC and XDS
The Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC) was opened in July 
1970 with the intent of finding ways how to fill the growing research gaps 
in XDS. The assumption that PARC would ever work with XDS or make 
up for its deficiencies was one of the many major errors in judgment by 
Xerox executives how to attain their expansionary ambitions. In every 
conceivable respect, PARC represented the counter-culture of the tradi-
tion–breaking 1960s. The leaders in Palo Alto had a gut-level aversion for 
the technologies and the personalities in El Segundo. It was a gap that only 
widened as XDS fortunes declined. The opinion-formers at PARC had also 
no respect for Xerox ex-IBM executives, even though it was the Rochester 
people who generated the cash that paid for the large increases in the com-
pensation of researchers who until then eked out meager sustenance from 
research grants. It would take a cultural anthropologist to describe the 
dynamics of the dysfunctional relationships that prevailed between PARC 
and the rest of Xerox and ultimately led to its negligible contributions to 
the Xerox bottom line profits. It was the deliberate isolation of PARC from 
the rest of the corporation, during its most creative period, that was one 
of the many flaws that would inevitably lead to the failure of PARC to lead 
Xerox into the future. 
I visited PARC in November of 1970, together with Don Pendery 
and George White, in their temporary quarters Porter Drive in Palo Alto. 
My purpose was to review a capital appropriation request from PARC to 
purchase a Digital Equipment (DECSYSTEM-20) time-sharing machine. 
In my capacity, as the chief information executive, I had to sign off on 
such requests on the basis of economic justification. The situation was ag-
gravated further by the fact that I was in charge of getting XDS equip-
ment installed throughout the company as quickly as possible. XDS was 
losing sales, most often to equipment made by DEC. Therefore, approv-
ing the purchase of a multi-million DEC installation for PARC while our 
warehouses were full of high capacity XDS time-sharing machines, would 
surely come to the attention of the computer industry and I would have 
to answer for that. Under ordinary circumstances, I would take such a re-
quest and disapprove it, unless there were extenuating reasons to purchase 
118 paul strassmann
a DEC computer. Where Xerox held only a minority interest, such as in 
Rank-Xerox and in Fuji-Xerox it would take a visit and some arm-twisting 
to have such a request withdrawn. 
In the case of PARC I was advised to tread carefully and to offer to 
the PARC staff one of the corporate Sigma 7 machines that could be made 
available for very little expense. At PARC there were no takers for an al-
most free Xerox time-sharing computer. The reasons for the rejection did 
not seem to me to be well documented except for the insistence that the 
PARC staff could now tap into a number of programs they had previously 
used while working under a research contract paid for by the Department 
of Defense. This argument was not credible and bordered on capricious 
dislike of anything that XDS had to offer. For the huge difference in the 
cost between the DEC and the XDS alternatives, spending money and time 
on making some applications interoperable could have been easy to justify. 
Besides, that could yield to XDS access to innovative software that could 
give access to a community of scientists now associated with Defense De-
partment’s Arpanet project. At the time I was not aware of the antipathy of 
ARPA scientists towards XDS. 
As this matter could not be resolved locally, I refused to sign off on 
purchasing request. After my return to Stamford, I was told that the key 
PARC staffers offered to resign because they would not be able to continue 
carrying on with their work. George Pake, the patient and diplomatic Di-
rector of PARC offered, as a compromise, an opportunity to construct a 
one of a kind computer which could emulate DEC, but would also allow 
the development of unique software and hardware what the researchers 
wished to do anyway. From the standpoint of Xerox this would not make 
much sense because it would involve additional spending and a diversion 
of researchers to develop a brand new computer. As seen by PARC, the 
opportunity to invent unique computer architectures and a new operating 
system would add to their credentials of exceptional professional achieve-
ment. In fact, that is exactly what they accomplished. 
In an incredible short time the PARC built a brand new computer, 
named MAX, which was basically a copy of the DEC-10, using DEC com-
ponents plus a number of original features the scientists were eager to have 
anyway. Naming this computer MAX was considered an in-your-face pun 
the computers nobody wanted 119
that reflected on the independence of PARC to operate without the sup-
port from Max Palevsky, the CEO of XDS. The MAX turned out to be the 
first confrontation between Xerox and PARC and Xerox yielded without 
a whimper. This small incident set the tone for everything that would be 
coming in the future. PARC was allowed to operate in complete isolation 
and to build technologies that were designed to demonstrate the brilliance 
of PARC researchers without any consideration of how this could possibly 
relate to the future of Xerox. 
PARC and the Internet
The Internet progenitor was the Advanced Research Projects 
Agency Network (ARPANET) of the US Department of Defense. This is 
an important fact to remember, because the support and style of manage-
ment as conducted by ARPA was crucial to the success of ARPANET and 
became reflected in PARC’s behavior. After all, the leading lights in Palo 
Alto were all formerly paid from ARPA funds. As the Internet developed 
and the struggle over the role the Internet in business communications 
unfolded, its influence on PARC must be remembered in how the network 
developed and how the culture that it was connected with evolved.
J.C.R. Licklider was chosen to head this effort. Licklider came to 
ARPA from Bolt, Beranek and Newman, (BBN) in Cambridge, MA in Oc-
tober 1962. The spirit of a closely-knit community that developed among 
the researchers working on ARPA project was related to Licklider’s interest 
in having computers help people communicate with other people. Lick-
lider’s vision of a network connecting people represented an important 
conceptual shift in computer science. This vision was also an important 
beginning to the ARPANET. After the ARPANET was up and running, 
the computer scientists using it realized that assisting human communica-
tion was the most fundamental advance that the ARPANET made pos-
sible. The ARPA theme was that the promise offered by the computer as 
a communication medium between people dwarfs the historical begin-
nings of the computer as an arithmetic engine. Starting in the spring of 
1967 at the University of Michigan, ARPA held its yearly meeting of the 
principal investigators from each of its universities and other contractors. 
120 paul strassmann
A community of like-minded researchers was getting formed. Peer group 
commentators quickly sorted out the leaders who would start sharing the 
vision of communication-based computing which would be based on dis-
tributed computing, without central control.
At UCLA SDS and then XDS scrambled to build a host-IMP inter-
face for ARPANET. XDS wanted many months and many dollars to do the 
job since Internet was not on top of its priorities. A grad student at UCLA 
stepped in and offered to get the interface built in six weeks for a few thou-
sand dollars using DEC equipment. If the relationships between XDS and 
PARC would have been cooperative, a PARC led effort could have opened 
for XDS an opportunity to participate in the explosive growth of Internet. 
That did not happen and most of the Internet hardware was supplied by 
DEC.
With the creation of PARC a well-funded center was created for 
the pursuit of Internet development using DEC hardware. PARC research-
ers, with help from an extended network of similarly expired researchers, 
were now able to place themselves into an easily identified key position 
that would engage in the construction of a new way how to build an in-
formation based society. None of that would be done in a way that would 
benefit Xerox.
The Xerox ALTO
The ALTO was the first personal computer or workstation that 
used bit-mapped graphics, a mouse, pull-down menus, icons representing 
documents and other features that would become the basic technologies 
of today’s PCs. The designers also created the Ethernet local area network-
ing protocol to link ALTOs within the PARC research community and 
with Internet (then Arpanet).
ALTO was a dedicated Data General minicomputer with a pre-
mium priced high-resolution screen, with a huge magnetic hard disk, a 
mouse and custom-made proprietary software. Even after discounting for 
the rapidly dropping costs in electronics it was clear that only a highly 
compensated scientific elite in research departments could afford such 
machines. The PARC researchers had no clue how much a mass-produced 
the computers nobody wanted 121
ALTO would cost, though I estimated that number to be roughly equal to 
the average base salary of PARC personnel. If that was so, only a device 
that could double (that is a 100% gain) the productivity of a sufficiently 
large number of knowledge workers could meet Xerox marketing require-
ments. For ALTO that did not matter because it was a research prototype 
to demonstrate the feasibility of integrating a range of features that previ-
ously were found only in isolation, in specialized devices.
I believe that it was sometime early in 1975 that the PARC research-
ers completed the installation of Ethernet linked ALTO computers. The 
scientists’ self-contained personal computers were now linked and could 
share printing and perform document filing. To celebrate this accomplish-
ment and to demonstrate the capabilities of a totally innovative approach 
to organizing office automation the entire senior staff, including McCo-
lough, were invited to a carefully orchestrated show of what was accom-
plished. 
When the large delegation from Stamford finally showed up at Palo 
Alto to see what the researchers had delivered the various demonstrations 
were seen from the standpoint of what Ford or IBM executives would judge 
as something that was promising and commercially viable. I was a part of 
the delegation of about twenty Stamford executives and heard every pre-
sentation. What finally broke PARC credibility was a flamboyant presen-
tation by Alan Kay, the most publicity-conscious of all PARC researchers. 
Alan talked about the future of personal computing which could deliver a 
wide range of graphic capabilities. Alan’s demonstration covered rudimen-
tary displays, such a the capacity to draw squares, circles and connected 
lines on what was an admittedly very expensive graphic computer. The 
product-focused officers from Stamford were not impressed. Jim O’Neill, 
the acerbic and influential chief of staff, wrapped up Alan’s show by com-
menting that this was hell-of-a of an expensive etch-a-sketch toy for his 
grandchildren.
Alan was also carrying around a cardboard mock-up of a laptop 
not bigger than a sheet of office paper and as thick as a textbook. Alan 
called this a Dynabook. It would offer an easy to use graphical user inter-
face he called windows. Alan maintained that with rapidly falling prices 
of semiconductors a commercial version of Dynabooks could become af-
122 paul strassmann
fordable soon, especially if produced in enormous quantities. I did not be-
lieve that a laptop — what was then described by Allan as the future tech-
nology — was economically feasible by 1980 that was as far a horizon that 
Xerox executives could think about. In fact, it was not until sometime after 
1996 that Alan’s projected semiconductor costs based on the well known 
Moore’s Law would make laptops economically attractive. When the paper 
mock-up was waved in front of the skeptical Xerox viewers it was viewed 
as yet another unrealistic speculation.
I think that Alan quickly figured that he was losing his audience 
and decided to editorialize on the significance of what he was demonstrat-
ing. As a way of finally getting attention, Alan sallied forth with a com-
mentary that the devices that will be emerging from the work at PARC 
are harbinger of the paperless office. He certainly touched a sore point. 
Embedded in the Xerox mythologies was an awareness how plain paper 
xerography made obsolete photographic copies. One of the topics that al-
ways appeared on the agenda of corporate strategic planning sessions was 
the question whether xerography itself could become technologically ob-
solete. Such apprehensions were not alleviated by the fact that IBM, always 
viewed as the primary adversary, had been engaged in the prior five years 
in a concerted advertising campaign about the advent of the paperless of-
fice. Though IBM supported its claims with only a handful of examples 
from banking, the evidence was overwhelming that the pieces of paper 
that were optically scanned on Xerox copiers were hardly ever originated 
from IBM computing. Nevertheless, the talk about an office where there 
were no paper originals to copied, was a sufficiently popular topic to spook 
Xerox executives. Follow-on conversation at dinner kept drifting back to 
the question whether PARC technologies were not only speculative, but 
also potentially subversive to future Xerox profitability. That is why on the 
second day of the corporate visit to PARC much of the attention focused 
on the implications of laser printing technologies and led to the decision 
to start investing in non-impact computer printing that would make a 
dent in IBM’s lucrative impact printing revenues. 
The result of the group visit to Palo Alto was the decision to order 
PARC to proceed with market probes that would verify the suitability of 
a follow-on version of ALTO to enter into market. I consider the decision 
the computers nobody wanted 123
to charter Palo Alto with the job of conducting a market probe as one of 
the many deadly errors in the history of Xerox entry into the office au-
tomation business. By now Xerox top management forgot that when Joe 
Wilson nursed the Chester Carlson invention from a laboratory prototype 
another decade were spent in experimentation that was closely guided by 
a Joe Wilson who had an intimate understanding of the copying business. 
In the lean years that started with a working laboratory model to some-
thing that could be sold in the market there were three failures that were 
nevertheless used as a learning experience. Joe Wilson would never trust 
Chester Carlson or the Battelle Laboratories to be qualified to conduct a 
market study for xerography.
Elkind Probes
Joe Wilson, despite several reverses, always retained a long-term 
focus on developing a product that would meet well-understood customer 
needs. Xerox would now engage in a market probe with a short fuse. When 
Joe Wilson tested the market that was always done in close participation 
with his marketing people. Xerox would now engaged in a probe did not 
have any marketing involvement because the entire responsibility was 
now placed in the hands of Jerry Elkind, one of the PARC researchers not 
directly participating in the development of the ALTO. Elkind was from 
MIT and was considered by the PARC establishment as an outsider. As it 
developed, the purpose of the Elkind market probe was not the gathering 
of insights about customer needs. The objective was certainly not to learn 
something about customer economics. This probe violated everything that 
was stated in the promptly forgotten Pendery Papers because there was no 
way how one could justify giving to a secretary or to a typist a workstations 
that cost substantially more than their salaries. As the probe progressed, it 
became a three-year effort to demonstrate that improved versions of the 
ALTO could function in an environment that was very much like PARC 
and where services and functions were delivered to users who were oper-
ating like researchers working in computer science. The Elkind probe was 
not a probe at all but an engineering validation exercise. The testing of the 
ALTO product was initially well funded and resulted in the distribution of 
124 paul strassmann
computers to quasi-academic institutions such as ARPA (the Defense De-
partment Advanced Research Projects Agency) as well as friendly research 
sites such as Carnegie-Mellon and SRI International. The only major com-
mercial installation was at Boeing but was not a business test at all because 
it was used in the Aerospace Division to prepare proposals for the Air 
Force where costs were not a consideration. 
What Elkind was doing would not pass muster as market valida-
tion test. It was primarily a means for gaining time for completion of engi-
neering for the forthcoming Xerox 8010. The testing was almost exclusive-
ly with customers who had similar characteristics as PARC. These were 
technologically advanced and knowledgeable computer experts working 
in loosely structured organizations and working primarily as individual 
contributors. At the test locations costs were part of R&D and not reflect-
ed in Sales, General & Administrative expense which originally had been 
the objective articulated in the Pendery Papers. Elkind’s thinking, like the 
beliefs held by the PARC leadership, was concentrated on the supply-side 
of technology. No attention was given to the demand-side that would find 
out what customers would be willing to pay for a Xerox product purchased 
in large quantities. The Elkind market probe, as the opener into the Xerox 
of the future, was entrusted to promoting the technologies, conceived by 
the technologists and readied for the technologists. There was no test for 
a device that could offer a reasonable prospect for a copier-like revenue-
creating proposition that was what the Stamford executives were hoping 
to realize. 
The praise and admiration for the technology that were voiced by 
Elkind’s customers for a chance to play with an advanced technology at 
practically no expense were projected by the PARC denizens as a predic-
tion that they would deliver another xerography to Stamford. The books 
that have been written subsequently about the STAR computer echo this 
theme. That is a distortion of what really happened. Xerox, on the urging 
of PARC and always eager to score a publicity victory, proceeded to launch 
the Xerox 8010 Workstation that never had a chance of succeeding. It had 
poor technology and it was premature. It was unaffordable for just about 
every administrative office use and did not display the care and patience 
of Joe Wilson to bring to the world a path-beating product. 
the computers nobody wanted 125
Why the disconnect between the design of the STAR, as it evolved 
from the ALTO, was not discovered in the product gestation period from 
1976 to 1980 is not a mystery. It is one of the untold stories that would 
remain hidden in everything that has been written about the origins of 
Xerox STAR.8
From ALTO to a Product 
Late in 1978 PARC leaders who emphasized the importance of in-
novative computer science, believed that they have delivered to Xerox a 
research product that would be ready to be handed over to engineering 
and marketing. At corporate headquarters nobody had anticipated the 
speed of PARC innovation. Marketing people were specifically blocked 
from having anything to do with Palo Alto. The logical vehicle for steer-
ing PARC innovations into the marketplace would have been the Office 
Product Division in Dallas under Bob Potter, who was fully engaged with 
text processing and did not have a clue what an Ethernet based office en-
vironment would look like. Potter reported to David Culbertson, whose 
role was largely custodial in keeping the many component diversifications 
of the Information Products Group profitable. John Titsworth has not as 
yet appeared on the scene to take over IPG and therefore there was a com-
plete leadership vacuum for taking the ALTO out of PARC and making a 
business out of it. 
When Massaro ditched the Xerox 820 he directed all of his attention 
to a completely new market segment that was represented by a high-end 
workstation. A transplant from PARC, David Liddle, now joined Massaro. 
Their objective was to take a product version of the experimental ALTO 
computer and make it available to customers. Liddle dominated what 
came out of this effort. Massaro in the absence of other options delivered 
a workstation conceived to meet PARC-like needs, operating in a PARC 
like environment, using PARC-like applications, applying PARC special-
8 
Johnson, J., Roberts, T.L., Verplank, Smith, D.C., W., Irby, C., Beard, M., Mackey, K., 
“The Xerox Star: A Retrospective,” IEEE Computer, September 1989 .
126 paul strassmann
ized software that was not used by anybody else in the world (MESA) and 
operating with a microprocessor that was of a unique PARC design. 
The Xerox STAR 8010 offered one of the most significant demon-
strations of an innovative computer system. It was by PARC, for PARC 
and not suitable for office customers where only the cutting edge pros-
pects would spend the cash to buy a unique and overpriced workstation. 
The Xerox 8010 represented the first most complete implementation of 
the Desktop Metaphor of any systems until the advent of mature desk-
top graphical interfaces later on the Macintosh.9 It was a full fifteen years 
ahead of its time with sophisticated WYSIWYG document composition, 
built in Ethernet, email, networked laser printing, an object development 
environments including Smalltalk, and much more. The Xerox STAR came 
standard with a 29MB Shugart hard drive.
The STAR workstation, introduced in 1981 for the list price of 
$16,595 per workstation (plus the cost of printers and servers it ran over 
$28,000) has gone down in computer lore as a remarkable piece of soft-
ware engineering whose commercial prospects were crippled by its high 
price tag and a total lack of suitability as generally used office equipment.10 
The software designers’ ambition outstripped the hardware’s power to 
support it. The maintenance costs for the STAR were extremely high and 
service technicians were not available which resulted in a poor quality of 
service. STAR was what one could call barely an Alpha version of usable 
office equipment since it was unique in every respect with regard to hard-
ware and software. The machine would not be interoperable or compatible 
with anything that was offered by anyone in the market. PARC people 
supporting Liddel saw to it that no other software company could sup-
port the STAR, which would be entirely a Xerox proprietary creation ex-
cept in cases where Xerox purchased licenses to be resold at a part of the 
9 
After Liddle and Massaro left Xerox in 1982 they formed a STAR look-alike firm 
named Metaphor. When Xerox claimed royalties from the use of STAR technologies, 
Liddle and Massaro countersued, claiming that did not use Xerox proprietary know-
how.
10 The actual costs of the STAR workstation would be never known.  The market ac-
ceptance projections were completely overstated.  Though large R&D costs were never 
charged against the STAR, it lost money if one takes into account only variable produc-
tion costs. 
the computers nobody wanted 127
purchase price. STAR turned out to be a monument to imagination and 
a demonstration of great innovativeness. It was therefore hailed as a great 
research accomplishment that set forth the directions of micro computing 
for years to come. Nevertheless, Xerox should have never allowed STAR to 
be launched as a viable business offering. It was a failed product that was 
doomed to failure from its inception.
The design, market positioning and the engineering of the STAR 
was fundamentally flawed and could not be corrected when the system 
was finally launched with a great fanfare and accolades from the computer 
science community. The device appealed to the computer scientists since it 
was designed to fit the unique environment in a research center where the 
principal product was a research paper. This defect in an understanding of 
an office productivity product was carried forth by David Liddel into the 
launch, where the STAR would be now advertised as a professional work-
station. The fact that just about every business professional would have 
only extremely limited uses for such machine was overlooked and papered 
over by the initial publicity. American technical and professional workers 
did not operate text-editing devices. That job was delegated to typists and 
secretaries who required substantial training to work with any Xerox ad-
vanced equipment. It was only in PARC and in a few similar laboratories 
where the researchers keyed in their own text because that is how it was 
done in an academic setting from where PARC researchers came from.
I was one of the early recipients of the STAR 8010 and had it installed 
in my home with an impact printer that was later upgraded to one of the 
first small laser printers. It took sixteen eight-inch floppy disks, loaded in a 
complex and tightly prescribed sequence, to get the STAR workstation op-
erational. There was only a limited catalogue of applications. STAR was a 
superb machine for producing graphic originals for overhead foils and was 
useful in making frequent revisions in presentations. Its Bravo text editor 
was attractive, innovative and easy to use but only after substantial train-
ing. STAR offered a completely proprietary solution that used a completely 
proprietary, Xerox-designed operating system. From the standpoint of cost 
of ownership it would require the presence of large amounts of high-cost 
graphics to justify purchasing this machine provided that the STAR would 
offer some sort of a migration path for a customer who bought it. In fact, 
128 paul strassmann
I found only one completely documented case where the STAR worksta-
tion was cost effective. That was in the case of proposal preparation for the 
Department of Defense by the Boeing Company where urgency and fre-
quent revisions of high-value documents could deliver savings by offering 
a quick turnaround to revisions of extremely voluminous proposals. In the 
case of Boeing that was a one time deal, after which Boeing proceeded to 
buy other equipment and never expanded its STAR population. Xerox did 
not offer a software or application upgrade path for STAR. 
The PARC denizens never had any interest in helping to bail out 
anything that could be classified as having commercial uses. After the Xerox 
8010 launch they redirected their efforts to the construction of advanced 
computer hardware that addressed scientific needs in artificial intelligence 
by building a series of LISP computers such as the Xerox 1100, aka “Dol-
phin” (1979); the Xerox 1132, aka “Dorado”; the Xerox 1108, aka “Dandeli-
on” (1981); the Xerox 1109, aka “Dandetiger”; and the Xerox 1186/6085, aka 
“Daybreak”. To produce these machines PARC ran a bootleg manufactur-
ing operation, which could afford selling unique equipment at low prices 
while Xerox was subsidizing the research center at Coyote Hills and there 
was nobody who could sort out the costs anyway. A few of the LISP ma-
chines were sold to universities where graduate students were delighted to 
produce PhD dissertations using Dorado equipment. As a business, the 
LISP machines were a complete failure to be quickly overtaken by com-
mercial firms. From the standpoint of PARC the LISP venture advanced 
computer science and that was all they were interested in.
The Nixdorf Visit
Though the STAR workstation was seen by PARC as a proof of 
miraculous creation and received universal accolades for that (from its 
peers), in fact STAR was incomplete from an engineering standpoint and 
should have never been allowed to parade before the world as the Xerox 
answer to the office of the future. This insight was finally brought to my 
understanding when I was asked to accompany Heinz Nixdorf on a visit to 
Palo Alto for a pre-announcement review of the Xerox STAR. Heinz was 
an engineer’s engineer, who grew perhaps the most successful computer 
the computers nobody wanted 129
company, Nixdorf Computers, ever launched in Europe by delivering ro-
bust, cost effective and highly serviceable mini-computers to small and 
mid-size businesses. When we arrived, Heinz refused to sit through the 
customary presentation and insisted seeing the heralded STAR machine 
immediately. The specifications of STAR had been leaked out for several 
weeks. After a cursory examination of the STAR applications, they were 
only a handful and remarkably clunky, Heinz asked to see the innards of 
the box that housed the electronic engine. 
The computer housing was opened without hesitation, which I 
found remarkable because I would have objected on the grounds that a 
yet-to-be launched revolutionary technology should be protected, espe-
cially when shown to a knowledgeable CEO of a potential competitor. So 
far as I know, Heinz did not even have to sign a non-disclosure agreement, 
which was a meaningless piece of paper, but at least a pretense about pro-
prietary protection. The PARC people had been previously instructed to 
show Heinz everything to accommodate our German Rank-Xerox unit 
that had been cooking up some sort of copier deal with the Nixdorf firm. 
I cannot tell how much of the STAR had already become a widely held 
property except that judging by the openness with Nixdorf I became con-
vinced that copycat versions of the STAR could be appearing soon and any 
competitive advantage would quickly vanish.
Mr. Nixdorf altered such apprehensions. When he saw how the cir-
cuit boards were engineered and placed in the STAR enclosure, how some 
of the connectors were obviously improvised and patched, how jumper 
cables were clipped on and how the critical components were placed, he 
announced that STAR was not at all finished to be suitable for office uses 
as a low-cost and maintainable machine. After dismissing the engineering 
of the hardware, he started asking questions about the processor, the op-
erating systems, diagnostics and support utilities. Mumbling in German, 
which I understood, it was obvious that the Xerox STAR was no threat 
to either existing Nixdorf products and certainly not a model what the 
future would look like, despite what he had been told. Heinz was particu-
larly unhappy with the home-brewed and improvised characteristics of 
the operating systems software. With considerable grace he then thanked 
130 paul strassmann
us profusely and cut his visit short, obviously relieved that his business 
plans would not have to be altered. 
Xerox 6085 Professional Computer System
In 1985 Xerox built a second generation of the Xerox STAR hard-
ware and new versions of the STAR software. The new hardware was called 
the Xerox 6085, and the software was completely revamped though its op-
erating system, microprocessor and software were still proprietary. It was 
significantly faster and more polished. It allowed the user to do multiple 
things at once, something that Macintosh couldn’t do until mid-1987, and 
Windows even later. The 6085 product came with an unprecedented nine-
teen inches monitor. There was only a limited production of the 6085. It 
was too expensive, it was not adequately supported and the Xerox cor-
porate subsidies dried up. If it could not deliver profits, it will have to be 
abandoned. Without patience, or a willingness to commit to serving a lim-
ited market in high-end document production, the entire product line was 
dropped. The pattern that started with the casting off the Education Divi-
sions when they instantly did not produce profits, with the abandonment 
of Xerox Data Systems when it did not become a huge success and with the 
scuttling of innumerable small enterprises that would not somehow grow 
into copier-size opportunities, the pattern of first buy, then tamper with it, 
and then abandon it was now firmly entrenched in the Stamford executive 
psyche, as represented by Peter McColough and his staff. 
In 1983 Xerox acquired Crum and Forster as diversification into 
financial services. In 1984 the Xerox Financial Services subsidiary was 
formed. Xerox now turned its attention to becoming a financial services 
company and incurred debt to pursue this completely alien direction. Mel 
Howard, the CFO ultimately became the Vice-Chairman of the firm. 
When Xerox bid good-bye to the office equipment and the office 
productivity business my days in working for this company that I loved 
and that I could support were numbered. As a postscript I would like to 
add that the diversification into the financial services business failed a few 
years later with enormous losses, questionable financial accounting prac-
tices and a precipitous drop in the price of Xerox shares. 
The Decline of Xerox
W
hen a corporation rots, the disintegration starts from within. An 
attack from an outsider succeeds only after the inside rot had 
already corroded internal defenses. For a corporation to reform 
that must begin from within. That cannot be achieved through an alien 
transplant, such as through acquisition. Those insights are not mine. They 
were extracted from the works of the historian Arnold Toynbee. He taught 
me how to understand what appeared to be unforgivable misdirection 
perpetrated by a vacillating leadership. 
The failure of Xerox to fulfill its promises has produced a large 
number of critical analyses that were looking for the causes of its ultimate 
decline. I cannot possibly enumerate all of the hypotheses except to iden-
tify some of the most influential sources.
Professor Gary Hamel is perhaps one of the most influential pro-
ponents of innovative corporations. He has argued that the capacity to 
continually evolve is necessary to maintain a competitive advantage. 
Hamel has identified four principal evolutionary risk factors that inhibit 
growth.11
Hamel defined the first risk factor as a narrow business definition 
that limits the scope of innovation. Did that apply to Xerox? I do not think 
so. If anything, Xerox business definitions were excessively diverse, never 
managing to concentrate on anything beyond electro photography. Xerox 
kept hopping from education to computers, to office equipment, to work-
stations, to telecommunications to financial services, to mention only a 
few examples. Did Xerox pursue a narrow business definition? Decidedly 
not, it could be characterized perhaps as practicing business promiscuity. 
11 
Hamel, G., “Management a la Google,” The Wall Street Journal, April 26, 2006
132 paul strassmann
The second risk factor was a hierarchical organization that over-
weighs the views of those who had a stake in perpetuating the status quo. 
Did that apply to Xerox? Decidedly not. If anything, the conduct of busi-
ness in its educational, office equipment, peripherals and international 
operations did not have much of a bureaucratic hierarchy, except for quar-
terly financial reviews conducted by a slim corporate staff. In the case of 
PARC, corporate staff was for all practical purposes unable to influence 
whatever was done there. In the various technological and geographic di-
versifications you could not find much of a hierarchy anywhere. 
Hamel’s third risk factor is a tendency to over-invest in the “what 
is” at the expense of “what could be.” Again, in the case of Xerox that was 
not the case. Numerous acquisitions were made with high priced stock, di-
luting shareholder equity. That was followed by several years of generous 
subsidies until management gave up. Underinvestment in innovation was 
not one of many Xerox faults.
Whether Xerox can be characterized by the fourth risk factor, 
namely creeping mediocrity in which bozos replace good people is cer-
tainly not the case. Acquisitions brought in a huge influx of brilliant peo-
ple. As demonstrated in its diverse operations, for a while Xerox was the 
place to where brilliant people migrated. The problem with Xerox was not 
hiring incompetents, but not being able to keep the brilliant people as 
management kept changing directions and leaving the inevitable power 
struggles unresolved.
Xerox did not suffer from one of Hamel’s four sins. It suffered form 
a marketing arrogance.
The habit of barging into a new business and then abandoning it 
after it did not succeed in less than five years was to repeat itself in the laser 
printing, education, telecommunications, facsimile, electric typewriters, 
disk memory, laser sensors, demand printing, office software, graphics ap-
plications and many other high-technology ventures. In each case highly 
valued Xerox stock would be traded for an acquisition with expectation 
that it become a promising addition to the business growth portfolio. There 
were only a few homegrown ventures in businesses unrelated to copying, 
despite huge R&D expenditures. These never matched the profit expecta-
tions that were implicit in the exceptionally high stock multiple that was a 
the computers nobody wanted 133
reflection of expected enormous future gains. In due course, most of what 
Xerox divested turned out to be successful, but only after many years of 
gestation and certainly not as Xerox gains. The ultimate beneficiaries were 
new firms such as Apple, Adobe, Microsoft (such as the Word text editing 
software included in the enormously profitable Office suite) and Hewlett 
Packard (for office laser printing).
Five years later, after observing such repetitious behavior, I devel-
oped a hypothesis that could explain the rationale for what a student of 
psychology could identify as manic-depressive management. That insight 
dawned on me after getting appointed to a committee charged with the 
divestiture of XDS. This included David Kearns, VP of Marketing, Jim 
Campbell, the CEO of XCS, Don Pendery, the corporate VP of strategic 
planning and myself, representing XDS’s largest installed base with 140 
XDS computers. Acquiring SDS by means of an overpriced purchase and 
then discarding it before it could succeed formed a pattern that could not 
be explained as capricious behavior. 
Xerox paid a billion dollars for SDS because it fitted a model of 
technological breakthroughs enshrined by mistaken re-interpretations of 
what had been achieved by Chester Carlson. Top Xerox executives were 
overwhelmed by the wealth that became unleashed by xerography. Ini-
tially, the cash flow and the stock appreciation were legendary. Overnight 
people acquired wealth beyond all aspirations. A pervasive myth, echoed 
by the eager media, became an article of faith that somehow xerography 
was a miraculous invention that was instantly brought to life by Xerox 
management and particularly by Xerox marketing people despite every-
body’s opposition and rejection. Professors and consultants perpetuated 
this myth because it suited the intellectuals’ sweat-less conceptualizations 
that if you have a sufficiently radical new way of doing things, the world 
will beat a path to your door and pay a premium price for such an of-
fering. Even if you miss a few revolutionary inventions, the one that will 
deliver results will compensate for all losses as long as you gamble on a 
venture that nobody else would support. It was a high-risk kind of a view 
of technology that depended not on organic growth from internally gen-
erated discoveries, but on discovery and acquisition of an otherwise ne-
glected opportunity developed by others. It was marketing arrogance that 
134 paul strassmann
destroyed Xerox because top management, and particularly McColough, 
was convinced that good marketing could create tremendous opportuni-
ties from under-rated technologies.
It is hard for me to talk about my experiences in the Xerox years 
without mentioning personal characteristics of the many un-named peo-
ple who devoted their lives to delivering something that was, at the time, 
seen as a notable contribution to improving the life of the office workforce. 
When I joined Xerox, it was a much admired and respected firm, ranking 
among the top few examples of American technological and business ac-
complishments. As the condition of Xerox rapidly deteriorated as one of 
the foremost American enterprises, collateral changes were taking place in 
the lives of many of its employees.
Don Pendery
Donald Pendery, the VP of Corporate Planning, was a thoughtful 
but dour New Englander who did not tolerate much of the nonsense that 
increasingly dominated corporate conversations. I admired him a great 
deal. By 1982 he diverted his attention from the office of the future because 
it was now a lost cause. He saw how Xerox was hemorrhaging cash and 
rapidly losing market position in the heartland copier business. He started 
advocating a major shift of resources from losses in the Information Sys-
tems Group to the languishing copier business. 
It was in 1983 when I had lunch with Pendery. He had just returned 
from a meeting with David Kearns, now the CEO. Pendery’s verdict was 
that Kearns was a wonderful person but with the short-term outlook of an 
IBM Branch Manager. Apparently Kearns advocated superior execution 
and improved quality of marketing programs while Pendery was plead-
ing to fix what was now a slowly sinking ship. Shortly thereafter Pendery 
went to see Kearns to restate his case again. I do not know what happened 
but Pendery resigned on the spot. He did not even return to his office but 
walked out of the HQ building never to return even to pick up his belong-
ings. Shortly thereafter died under unusual circumstances.
the computers nobody wanted 135
Retrieval of Information
As I browse through my strategic planning papers dated in early 
1971 I continue to be amazed by insights that anticipated many of the de-
velopments in years and even decades to come. I do not believe that I was 
endowed by a gift of technological prophecy. Concepts about the direc-
tions in which information technology was headed were floating around 
in bits and pieces that could be extracted from leading papers from ACM 
and IEEE. It seems that at Xerox I had the ability to summarize the most 
likely directions and pass them around as strategy papers to Pendery, for 
further distribution as guidance, or as the case would be, inconclusive de-
bates. My 1971 paper on A View of the 1980s contained a section about the 
retrieval of information that was addressed to the importance of Xerox en-
tering into the computer storage business. Indeed, shortly thereafter Xerox 
acquired and then ruined Shugart and Century Data:
“… The economics of retrieval of information today is entirely 
dictated by its storage technology, even though we are just now 
at the threshold of file-independent information systems in cer-
tain advanced computer databases. The basic problem of infor-
mation retrieval in large organizations is being solved today by 
a combination of schemes, the most prevalent being informa-
tion broadcasting by means of the copying/reproducing process 
which is basically deficient in its inability to contribute to the 
subsequent ease of retrieval or search except by providing for 
more convenient filing.
Since information retrieval has the highest ‘value added’ from 
all of the various information manipulation processes and from 
the standpoint of its automation is most difficult to achieve 
(since it requires the execution of complex and non-standard 
functions), its human operator value as in terms of work experi-
ence is of the highest order.
136 paul strassmann
The strategic implication for Xerox is then to ‘architect’ work sta-
tion products in a manner which facilitates the highest possible 
degree of human operator intervention and participation in 
the retrieval processes — essentially endowing the work station 
with characteristics of a device suitable for ‘learning’ — rather 
than imposing a hierarchical or structured query sequence as is 
currently the case in many primitive inquiry systems.
Incidentally, this strategy gives relief from the extremely costly 
and ineffective need for heavy software investments, which so 
far have been essential to equip any computer system with a 
capability to retrieve information from files. This strategy also 
implies: a need for decentralized file manipulation processors, 
the availability of communication accesses to multiple files, and 
the absolute prerequisite for ‘systems sales’ wherein information 
capture, information storage, and information retrieval tech-
nologies can become installed in a modular, evolutionary, and 
technologically adaptive sequence.
The workstation of the 1980s will then act as a communications 
terminal between people engaged in solving the complex prob-
lems of coordinating the logistics of the service industries. This 
would be made possible by the lowering of the costs of informa-
tion capture and information storage, thus providing the tech-
nological basis for the high payoff interactive retrieval functions. 
Such workstations will also permit production industries to 
carry out existing administrative and clerical functions without 
a need to increase the costs of such staffs, as was not the case 
during the late 60s. The increased productivity of the remaining 
staffs will thus aid in the maintenance of profit margins which 
otherwise would become eroded even further than indicated by 
current trends.
The net result of such processes will lead to the gradual altering 
of the function of the non-skilled clerical worker as well as of 
the computers nobody wanted 137
certain non-skilled service workers from performing standard-
ized and specialized ‘assembly line’ functions to becoming ac-
tive and individual participants in the information processing 
functions themselves. In this fashion, we will be able to provide 
for our new (and differently motivated generation) workers 
with a work environment where it is technically possible — and 
indeed desirable — for each worker to seek an enlargement of 
his work contents. This is made feasible by the perfectly flexible 
and asynchronous nature of his workstation wherein the worker 
can, subject to certain agreements with management, instantly 
enlarge the scope of functions executed, or, instantly extend the 
range of his tasks. Such an environment had previously existed 
only during the handicraft era and had to be eliminated when 
the discipline of synchronized manufacturing physical process-
es dictated the establishment of a rigidly controlled work envi-
ronment.”
The central theme of this part of corporate guidance concerned the 
need to place in the hands of the clerical workforce the means for the en-
largement of the scope of their work, involving an engagement of person-
al judgment with data presented by a computer. PARC disregarded that. 
They did not study the needs of the Xerox customers. The limited number 
of expensive pilot studies that were launched under the direction of Jerry 
Elkind to verify the suitability of ALTO to perform office functions were 
managed to check out the functionality of a limping and unreliable tech-
nology that was still in a prototype configuration. There was no data col-
lection or testing of the efficiency and effectiveness of office administrative 
personnel. None of the PARC pilot studies were ever engaged in measur-
ing verifiable productivity gains.
Document and File Control
My experience in managing computers taught me the importance 
of controlling the reliability and accuracy of the sources of information. 
Unclean data is a form of pollution. Once polluted data is allowed to enter 
138 paul strassmann
into an automated data processing stream, the computer-generated results 
will never be trusted. Correcting faulty information entries further down-
stream is not only horribly expensive but also never completely assured. 
A section of my strategic guidelines to PARC attempted to attract the at-
tention of PARC people to the needs to assure the integrity of informa-
tion that would be unleashed through a network. That would be absolutely 
necessary for information management in commercial installations. In the 
case of communications in the research environment, that was irrelevant 
and most likely a deterrent. What PARC ultimately delivered reflected the 
habits and the culture of a self-disciplining research community through 
voluntary peer reviews. The utter disregard of even a semblance of audit-
ing methods and authentication of locally made entries doomed anything 
coming out of PARC from becoming accepted by corporate executives 
who were accountable for information processing. The following narra-
tive was never considered worthy of discussion in subsequent meetings 
at PARC:
“… While aggregate clerical turnover figures are extremely high 
(by ‘blue collar’ standards), they still do not convey the full story 
in terms of performance reliability at each workstation. In addi-
tion to the basic turnover probability, there are vacations, absen-
teeism, workstation shifts, and relief operators. Depending on 
the nature of the information processing function performed, 
the probability of having the same workstation occupied by the 
identical worker to process a set of functions requested by one 
person (such as a given customer) becomes very small indeed. 
Consequently large organizations find it essential to extend 
control over all files, documents, correspondence, etc. entering 
the system since each element of paper becomes increasingly 
relevant in achieving predetermined service reliability once we 
assume a given level of maintenance. The reliability of an infor-
mation processing system is much more perishable; it depends 
on human performance at any instance of time. 
the computers nobody wanted 139
In projecting needs ten to twenty years ahead, we have to in-
creasingly visualize a hierarchy of information, data and docu-
ment storage devices that lend themselves to a high degree of 
centralized procedural control and decentralized inquiry (and 
manipulation) capability. These devices and high technology 
equipment components will offer a variety of options to effect 
a compromise between cost, controlled accessibility, response 
time to inquiry, operational complexity, and general ease with 
which the machine will communicate with the human operator 
in a ‘tutorial’ mode. To illustrate the last point: One of the factors 
that militate against job enlargement, lead to position special-
ization and result in cumbersome procedural manuals — all of 
which are resulting in low productivity — arises from the need 
to construct jobs that can be learned by an average candidate 
in a reasonable time. Hence individuals become ‘pigeonholed’ 
in jobs, develop vested job interests and a builtin resistance to 
change. The work station we are projecting into the 1980s must 
have the important attribute of being operable either in an auto-
matic ‘tutorial mode’ or, in an optional supervisory ‘assist mode’ 
wherein a supervisor can connect directly into a work station 
to share, in a teacher-pupil relationship, in the solution of a 
nonstandard situation. The implications of such workstation ar-
rangements go far beyond the economical, efficiency or produc-
tivity factors discussed so far. Live experimental installations 
will be needed before we fully understand the real performance 
character of these technologies.”
The papers I authored as strategic guidance for PARC early in 1971 
contain a long list of additional requirements of what would be expected 
to make PARC originated products commercially viable. Though the pa-
pers were received with courtesy and mostly with respect, in reality the net 
result was like throwing pebbles against a wall. PARC had committed itself 
to directions that had practically nothing in common with the interests of 
Xerox to launch in directions that would outflank the established IBM way 
of how to manage computerization. 
140 paul strassmann
Search for the Carlson Legacy
To probe the into the depth of the mentality of Xerox top manage-
ment I became fascinated with the origins of xerography and how it could 
suddenly blossom into an unprecedented bonanza whereas everything 
else we touched was turning into mud. By the mid 1970s the role of Ches-
ter Carlson in laying the foundations to Xerox prosperity had receded into 
a historical fog. His brilliance and persistence in pursuing electro photog-
raphy remained a legend and was always acknowledged. What was hardly 
ever mentioned was Carlson’s career not as a research scientist, but as a 
highly skilled patent attorney. Shortly after graduation from the Califor-
nia Institute of Technology he started working in the patent department 
of Bell Telephone Laboratories. After that he worked as a patent attorney, 
rising to the position as head of the patent department of P.R. Mallory, an 
electronic firm. In 1936 he began studying law and received his law degree 
in 1939. The foundation of Xerox wealth were Carlson’s patents for electro 
photography that were exhaustively complete and not penetrable, even by 
imitators. Electro photography was a single-minded obsession with Carl-
son. There is no evidence that he ever pursued any other patents. Carlson’s 
strength was creating patent protection for a concept that was only re-
motely feasible. Carlson never participated in the development or in the 
engineering of copiers.
Carlson, a quirky person, had converted to Buddhism and spent 
much of his new and substantial fortune on supporting spiritualist and 
world peace causes, including the construction of a Buddhist retreat in 
the Adirondack Mountains. Such roles were not a suitable occupation for 
the founding father of a fabulously rich company. Stories were circulated 
that Chester did not care about money at all. The formidable Xerox public 
relations machinery now emphasized the roles of Peter McColough as the 
marketing leader who translated Carlson’s hard-to-use invention into a 
profitable office machinery business, with credit given to Joe Wilson. It 
then dawned on me that the success of Xerox was based on the acquisition 
of licenses that turned out to be successful beyond anybody’s expectations. 
It was not Carlson who invented the xerography-based copier. All he did 
was to write an extremely tight patent in 1938 to protect the application of 
the computers nobody wanted 141
well known light-sensitivity of photoreceptors. It was ten years later that 
the non-profit Battelle Institute — a research venture incubator — would 
convert Carlson’s patent in something that could be seen as an early proto-
type of a copier. It would then take Joe Wilson, the president of the Haloid 
Company, desperately looking for a new product, to take xerography out 
of the Battelle laboratories and manufacture two versions of xerographic 
copying machines — not yet the legendary Xerox 914 — drawing on de-
cades of prior engineering and manufacturing experience in making wet 
process copiers. 
The original Haloid, founded in 1906, used photographic (silver-
halide surfaces) paper to make copies. It was Haloid marketing that would 
recognize and then swiftly take advantage of the increasingly centralized 
corporate and government bureaucracies that would develop an unlimited 
appetite for copies of every conceivable document. After the dry process 
(xerography) became available it was from the roots of a good understand-
ing of customers that the marketing skills could now flourish to deliver an 
overwhelming success. The figment of the Carlson myth was that by 1972 
all it would take now was to discover yet another unexploited opportunity 
that was ready to be delivered to the waiting customers without much de-
lay through a formidable Xerox marketing organization. 
The truth was that the Xerox copier was not an instant success. It 
took a long gestation period and a fortunate coincidence of many devel-
opments for that to happen. In 1935, Haloid purchased the Rectigraph 
Company, an early pioneer of wet-process photocopying techniques, and 
acquired the know how to produce rapid turnaround copies. Rectigraph 
was unique because it produced un-reversed prints, thus overcoming the 
inconvenience of photocopiers that used to produce first a negative image 
before it could be re-copied to produce a true copy image, Haloid then ac-
quired the license for a new kind of technology, called electro photography, 
in 1947, from the Battelle institute. That happened nine years after Carlson 
filed for his patent!
Electrophotography would later be renamed xerography after the 
Greek words for “dry” and “writing.” Haloid’s first commercial copier, the 
Model A, went on sale in 1949. It used a flat plate selenium photorecep-
tor. It was marginally successful and received limited acceptance because 
142 paul strassmann
it was used to make masters for photo-offset printing. There was also an 
unsuccessful Xerox Model D machine that nobody ever mentioned when 
the importance a long period of learning and experimentation became 
unfashionable as a model for Xerox to follow. 
A second-generation model called the XeroX followed six years 
later, in 1955. This machine now had a selenium rotating drum, which 
turned out to be a technology breakthrough, but without much accep-
tance in the marketplace because it was a complex and too expensive piece 
of specialized equipment. Finally, in 1959 the company revolutionized of-
fice technology when it introduced the first fully automated office copier, 
the Xerox 914. It is only after the introduction of the Xerox 914 that this 
machine received widespread acceptance as a preferred means for office 
copying. 
It took thirty-two years to learn about copying. It took nine years 
from patent to the demonstration of a prototype copier. It then took an-
other twelve years of sacrifice and unswerving commitment by Joe Wilson 
to deliver a marketing success that was as surprising to Joe as to everybody 
else. It is only after that when Peter McColough entered into the picture 
and propelled a startling discovery towards its great marketing achieve-
ment.
As a student of the history of xerography, having actually read Carl-
son’s original notebooks and some early correspondence, I have formed a 
different interpretation of the transformation of the Haloid Company to 
the Xerox Corporation than what was the generally accepted view prevail-
ing at corporate headquarters executive meetings. It is true that Chester 
Carlson, of Swedish descent, was a lone inventor, whose experiences as a 
patent attorney using many copies, led him to totally focus on seeking a 
breakthrough application of properties of materials that would avoid us-
ing expensive photographic (silver halide) paper. Such properties were 
originally discovered in 1817 by the Swedish chemist Jons Jakob Berzelius 
and came to the attention of Carlson as result of persistent bibliographic 
researches at the New York public library. To verify the feasibility of elec-
tro photography, Carlson hired Otto Kornei, an impoverished immigrant 
physicist who had fled the Nazi regime in Germany. 
the computers nobody wanted 143
They set up their laboratory in a back room of a house in Astoria, 
Queens. Following much experimentation, on October 22, 1938 they fi-
nally had their historic breakthrough. It was Kornei who wrote the now 
famous words “10.-22.-38 ASTORIA” using ink on a glass microscope slide. 
It was Kornei, not Carlson — contrary to popular lore — who prepared a 
zinc plate with a sulfur coating, darkened the room, rubbed the sulfur 
surface with a handkerchief to apply an electrostatic charge, then laid the 
glass slide on the zinc plate, exposing it to a bright, incandescent light. It 
was this demonstration using a sulfur layer on zinc, not selenium as was 
generally believed by Xerox people, that gave rise to a view that all that was 
required for success was somebody else’s discovery, finding it, patenting it 
and then protecting it with marketing power. 
Such sequence of events was further reinforced by the story how 
John Dessauer, another refugee physicist, discovered an abstruse reference 
to Carlson’s patent in a scientific publication and brought it to the attention 
of Joe Wilson, now desperately seeking ways how to keep Haloid financial-
ly viable.12 It was not Haloid, but the Battelle Memorial Institute — what 
we call these days a technology incubator — who demonstrated the practi-
cality of using a selenium photoreceptor to reflect an image illuminated by 
a light source. Whether Chester Carlson can be identified as a professional 
inventor is arguable since there is no record of him having invented any-
thing prior to “10.-22.-38 ASTORIA” or anything after that. He did not par-
ticipate in further development of his patent at Haloid and subsequently 
avoided contacts with Xerox altogether. 
I must give here credit to the engineers in the Haloid Company, 
and especially to Joe Wilson, for an understanding what the Battelle Insti-
tute had to offer while everyone who was given first choice to use it turned 
it down. It was the customer-specific understanding, plus the realization 
of likely failure unless coming up with an innovation that made Haloid re-
ceptive to a revolutionary new idea. Most importantly, it was Joe Wilson’s 
commitment to pursue electro photography, even by taking out a mort-
gage on his home that made the difference in bringing xerography to the 
12 
Dessauer, J.H., My Years with Xerox: The Billions Nobody Wanted, Doubleday, 1971.
144 paul strassmann
world. In my view the hero of Xerox was the conservative and cautiously 
experimental Joe Wilson and not those who succeeded him. 
Myth Making and Myth Exploitation
Haloid was a supplier of photographic paper and of devices for 
making photostatic copies in a niche market. Its sales force was marketing 
a sophisticated and costly Rectigraph product, which was a labor-intensive 
conventional optical lens camera device. The Haloid sales force had an un-
derstanding of the behavior of court stenographers, patent attorneys, and 
court-related bureaucracies who needed quality copies that would stand 
up as an authentic archival record. The Haloid Company and particularly 
Joe Wilson, cultivated an in-depth customer understanding of the utility 
of copying while competing against their Rochester giant, Kodak, who 
could produce photographic supplies more economically than Haloid, but 
paid little attention to developing equipment that would be comparable to 
the Rectigraph. The highly specialized Haloid understood the preferences 
and the desired equipment features of the premium-priced copying busi-
ness. They had an ingrained understanding what kind of a machine and 
what kind of marketing it would take to offer an acceptable machine that 
would minimize operating labor costs and maximize the original-to-copy 
process.
 Kodak looked at Carlson’s patent just as another photographic pro-
cess that would cannibalize its lucrative photographic paper supplies busi-
ness. Kodak was always looking at selling inexpensive copying machines 
(even if they produced awfully smelly low quality copies), with profits 
generated from the supplies business. Haloid, now marketing a very ex-
pensive Rectigraph copier, would be far more attuned to getting revenues 
from equipment rentals producing quality copies on plain paper. 
IBM, another firm that had a look at the Carlson patent, viewed 
the world through digitally driven dot-matrix impact printers. Transfer-
ring images to a semiconductor for quality printing did not make any 
sense when seen from the standpoint of their business model. IBM was 
focused on extracting premium profits from electromechanical printers 
in data centers, which had been an IBM core competency. Besides, the 
the computers nobody wanted 145
feasibility of producing an efficient non-impact computer printer was yet 
more than twenty years away. 
Though I have never managed to get to see what was alleged to be a 
report commissioned by IBM sometimes in the early 1950s by the consult-
ing firm of A.D. Little, I was told by a reputable source that the consultant 
concluded that: A. electro photography could not ever keep up with the 
speed of electromechanical impact printers; B. Copying would not offer 
an economic advantage when IBM would enter into the office equipment 
business; C. Copying, without integration with sources creating digital 
originals, was a dead-end business. 
It is ironic, that IBM’s three major reasons for rejecting electro 
photography in the 1950s, would be eventually proven to be wrong. When 
Xerox set out, twenty years later, to prove that IBM was indeed wrong, it 
did not succeed except in computer printing. Xerox never managed to cul-
tivate an in-depth understanding of customer needs in the digital world 
as possessed by the Haloid people when they first heard about xerography. 
Meanwhile, Xerox executives derived considerable satisfaction from tell-
ing that IBM turned down xerography before it was offered to Haloid. This 
became another legend spun by Xerox as a proof of IBM’s shortsighted 
approach to information management that would be now overcome by 
Xerox superior insights.
Xerography was successful because Haloid had a cadre of sales 
people who understood the customer needs and were able to identify with 
customer preferences. After three marginal attempts to introduce xero-
graphic copiers over a period of twelve years they finally got it right with 
the Xerox 914. It was not just the Xerox 914 that was able to succeed, but 
it was also correct pricing as well as a workable equipment configuration 
that delivered acceptable tradeoffs between pricing, features, speed and 
quality. That was a marvelous accomplishment! 
As seen in retrospect, the probability of hitting an optimum com-
bination of capabilities and features, with a brand new technology, with in-
novative pricing and a change in customer habits — moving copying from 
central services to the proximity of the office water fountain — was an ex-
ceptional innovation. A little luck also helped, as the Xerox 914 coincided 
with increased centralization of corporate bureaucracies that were hungry 
146 paul strassmann
for making copies. I give much credit to a generation of accumulated ex-
periences in marketing copiers which made the Xerox 914 machine not a 
miracle suddenly appearing from nowhere, as it became represented as a 
sort of immaculate revelation, but as an experience-nurtured evolutionary 
advancement.
The executives who launched the Xerox 914 became the interpret-
ers of the history of Xerox. They found it convenient to perpetuate a view 
of the firm as a miracle that reflected a defensive rationalization for coping 
with the increasing attacks on Xerox’s patent monopoly and on exception-
al profits. The emphasis of the firm’s uniqueness in taking enormous risks 
with Carlson’s patents would be used to justify marketing methods that 
would compensate for the risks of innovation. The dramatization of Ha-
loid’s daring exploits in the press and in business school case studies, now 
became useful because anti-trust lawyers, the Federal Trade Commission 
staff and class action plaintiffs began sniffing for violations of legitimate 
business practices. Upholding Carlson-related myths also offered a vin-
dication to Xerox employees who now became multimillionaires. Years 
of deprivation, while Haloid was struggling for survival, now became an 
entitlement. 
The story of the fabulous success of the Xerox 914 would be ex-
plained as great marketing achievement. I believe that one of its decisive 
advantages was a most imaginative approach to product pricing. It was a 
lower-ranking market staffer who understood that the Xerox 914 would 
not be acceptable if it were sold outright. The price of a machine, now 
weighting close to 1,000 pounds and requiring a great deal of maintenance, 
would surely inhibit its acceptance. Joe Wilson made the decisive bet in of-
fering the 914 not for sale, but for monthly rent based entirely on the num-
ber of copies made. He took the risk of absorbing any maintenance costs.
There were precedents for that because Haloid profits were derived 
primarily from the sale of photosensitive supplies. With plain paper con-
sumption on the Xerox 914, the only way for extracting profits would be 
by selling reproduction of originals as a service. A simple counter would 
accumulate the copy volume. A service man and subsequently the copier 
operator would fill out a pre-punched tabulating card and note the date 
and the copy count. The card would be then returned, in a self-addressed 
the computers nobody wanted 147
envelope, to Xerox in Rochester to be processed for billing. This innova-
tion, which solved the problem of installing expensive and high-mainte-
nance support for capital equipment was truly revolutionary. 
Looking back on its record, one could characterize the Xerox man-
agement’s strategic thinking in the 1970s as seeking to recreate past success 
to perpetuate explosive growth. The magic formula for that would be to 
follow a four-step process: First, to discover an unexploited niche technol-
ogy. Second, to buy it with overvalued Xerox stock. Third, to fix it up so 
that it could be handed over to Xerox marketing that could sell any office 
equipment. Fourth, to use every means to gain a dominant market share 
and keep competitors out. 
That was the formula for XDS to compete with IBM. Although the 
time line for accomplishing all four steps to success was never spelled out, 
the expectations were to deliver demonstrable gains in short order. Such 
persistence in seeking instant realization of a huge success disregarded 
what should have been obvious to anyone who would care to study the 
history of technological innovation. For the understanding of the market 
place it took Xerox at least twenty-five years — from Rectigraph to the 914. 
From the time of the invention it took twenty-years to deliver a useful 
product. From the first commercial product based on selenium it took ten 
years of continued experimentation and learning, from Xerox Model A 
to the 914. It then took another four years of understanding the customer 
to finally deliver a record-breaking offering. All of that required patience, 
painful learning from failures and organizational maturity. 
It seems that Xerox management starting in the 1970s forgot ev-
erything that their own history could have taught them. Breaking into a 
new business, such as into business data processing, would be much more 
difficult and would take much longer than what the now mythical Xerox 
miracle. Entrenched competitors would be blocking Xerox in the com-
puter business with technologies and market positions that only excep-
tional innovation could overcome. The huge, arrogant with success and 
the over-compensated Rochester bureaucracy could not possibly imitate 
the characteristics of the nimble, small and tightly knit team surrounding 
Joe Wilson while scrambling for survival with very little money to spare. 
Relying on what remained from the aggressive SDS marketing organiza-
148 paul strassmann
tion to a switch from scientific computing to commercial data processing 
was completely unrealistic. 
The assumption underlying the persistent belief that an otherwise 
unappreciated innovation could be transformed into gold was now deeply 
imprinted by Harvard Business School professors in the outlook of Xe-
rox leaders. According to then prevailing HBS thinking, what matters as 
a condition for any success was superiority in marketing. If an organiza-
tion could operate a marketing machine, they could then leverage that 
capacity to sell products that were invented by others. The future corpo-
rate captains, who were passing into leadership positions during this era, 
were nursed in such beliefs at the Harvard Business School, followed by a 
tour of duty as marketing strategists in one of the leading consulting firms, 
such as McKinsey. Case studies glorifying firms such as IBM, Coca-Cola 
and Procter & Gamble and Xerox. Cases were used to prepare a whole 
generation of future corporate CEOs to concentrate on marketing in pref-
erence to all other corporate functions, with the exception of finance, for 
the less exuberant types. 
To reinforce the marketing mystique Xerox management sent every 
year two shifts of about thirty most promising executives for an in-depth 
exposure to Harvard professors. These executive courses were usually held 
at one of the elite New England schools, such as Exeter. It was the sign of 
my being either a misfit in an organization of marketing and finance types, 
or a gamble that I was being groomed for a higher position. I was sent to 
executive courses three times during my first ten years at Xerox. The im-
print of Harvard was reinforced further by making sure that one seat on 
the Xerox board of directors was always held by either a senior Harvard 
professor or by an ex-Harvard Business School partner of McKinsey & 
Company. I met with these fine gentlemen often. They were erudite and 
impressive in their gravitas. None of them had a clue what business data 
processing was all about. Their opinions could be easily traced to whatever 
articles had appeared in the most recent issues of the Harvard Business 
Review.
In no way do I wish to diminish the importance of superb market-
ing in the fortunes of any firm. Unfortunately, in the case of Xerox the 
emphasis on marketing became a obsession that explains while only short 
the computers nobody wanted 149
term attention and care were given to acquisitions or innovations that 
would not lend themselves readily to feeding the Xerox selling machinery 
that needed growing opportunities to earn commissions and to support 
the high stock market multiples. 
In the case of XDS and the STAR none of these beliefs could ap-
ply. The stark reality was that by no stretch of imagination was it reason-
able to expect that the copier sales force could be somehow converted to 
marketing sophisticated XDS scientific computers or advanced STAR of-
fice workstations. Feeble efforts were made to send some of the ex-IBM 
sales people to take accelerated courses in computer literacy, but that was 
a sheer waste of time because a successful IBM salesperson had only con-
versational knowledge about the technical aspects of computing. This mis-
understanding was to be repeated many times, culminating by the total 
mismatch between the skills, habits, compensation practices of the Roch-
ester headquartered copier equipment sales people and the Dallas-based 
organization that was chartered to introduce office automation machinery 
to Xerox customers. 
The Paperless Office
After the 1977 review of PARC by the Xerox top executives I walked, 
disappointed with the lack of resolution about computer printing, into the 
parking lot. On the way out I was passing the stock room. On the spur of 
the moment I asked the man in charge of office supplies to start reporting 
to me, monthly, about the consumption of Xerox paper. It was gnawing on 
me that the executive review was debating the question of the paperless 
office without any facts. By this time, every researcher in PARC had an 
ALTO workstation. The Ethernet network connect these workstation to 
strategically located laser printers, which were Xerox 2700 copiers modi-
fied to act as laser printers at a horrendous cost. Without paper intermedi-
ates here would be a clear opportunity to collect data about paper usage in 
an environment where everything was digitized. 
In the months that followed I kept receiving reports about the 
number of boxes of Xerox paper that were consumed by PARC. The num-
bers were amazing. Instead of the average of less than 10,000 sheets per 
150 paul strassmann
capital consumed in offices of paper intensive banking firms, PARC was 
now using 25,000 sheets of paper person and that number was climbing 
steadily. I reported that high capacity laser printers connected to work sta-
tions gobbled up paper at unprecedented rates. 
The cause was not in the increased printing speed but in the elimi-
nation of labor standing at a copier plus the tremendous ease with which 
researchers were able to create page originals. The ALTO workstation 
made it attractive to generate a huge number of versions of drafts of re-
search papers that could be then produced on demand. Much of the copy 
volume that was consumed was subsequently discarded or reissued as 
drafts of work in progress.13
Paper Merchants 
It was late in 1977 that I received an urgent call from Xerox market-
ing that a speaker was urgently needed to address a meeting of the Ameri-
can Paper Manufacturers Association in New York on the subject of the 
paperless office. At that time the bond ratings of the APMA firms were in 
a severe recession as environmental regulations imposed huge added costs 
on paper firms to treat their pollution such as dioxins, hydrogen sulfide 
and sulfur dioxide that would be then dumped untreated into local rivers. 
Adding to the troubles of the paper manufacturers was the steady publicity, 
largely fomented by IBM, of the coming of the paperless office that would 
reduce the demand of cut-sheet paper, which was by far the most prof-
itable product. The manufacturers would be able to cope with the envi-
ronmental regulations, because every firm would be incurring such costs 
equally. However, the threat of the paperless office was hanging over the 
prospects of future profitability because it would cut demand. 
My news that an office equipped with laser printers and driven by 
text processing machines would increase the consumption of cut sheet 
paper was received with jubilation. I had hard facts about paper con-
13 
Much of what I learned is reflected in my testimony before the Joint Committee 
on Printing of the United States Congress (98th Congress, 2nd Session, October 1983). 
I delivered a presentation on “The Future of Electronic Printing” that anticipated the 
widespread use of office laser printers.
the computers nobody wanted 151
sumption trends and the labor savings in the production of documents by 
means of Ethernet delivery of originals to printers. I illustrated the com-
pulsion to create multiple drafts of text when that would become easy. The 
word about my presentation quickly spread through the industry. I started 
receiving numerous invitations to speak at meetings of paper industry as-
sociations.
My only notable memory about such talk was a brief to be pre-
sented at a meeting of paper merchants representing the Union Camp 
Company in December of 1978. The event would be held near Savannah, 
Georgia. When I arrived at the airport I found a group of merchants ar-
riving by private plane. They were all dressed up in leather clothing with 
knee-high boots and with bags with one or two large bore automatic rifles. 
This would not be a meeting at all but a hunting party to hunt wild boar 
into the enormous woods owned by Union Camp. My presentation would 
make the entire event tax deductible as education. I was not prepared for 
this at all. I was dressed in a business coat and jacket and had only a jog-
ging suit with sneakers in my bag. 
After dinner in a log cabin deep in the woods, the group started 
organizing into two-man hunting parties who would go out to their sta-
tions at 4 AM. I was not expected to participate because I did not have the 
rough clothing and did not bring a gun. I protested against the exclusion 
on account of my World War experiences, while making mention about 
shooting German sentries. As a consolation I was assigned to go alone 
to an outpost that was at the farthest end of the Union Camp reserva-
tion. As a weapon I picked a World War I Springfield bolt-action rifle that 
had been always favored as a sniper weapon. At the appointed time I was 
driven to my post in my jogging outfit and a borrowed sheepskin. It just 
happens that I had sniper training and knew that slowly rotating my head 
back and forth would improve my vision in almost complete December 
darkness. It must have been shortly before 5AM when a saw a silhouette 
of a boar slowly walking by at about 50 yards. Aiming a few inches back 
from the snout I shot it. The silhouette disappeared and I stayed behind 
my tree because I was warned that a wounded boar was very dangerous. 
At 6AM I heard a few shots in the distance, but waited for our guides to 
show up. At sunrise, about 7:30 they came to pick me up, but I insisted to 
152 paul strassmann
go into the field to see if I could find a trace of what I shot. To my surprise, 
in a ditch was lying a three hundred pound ugly boar with big tusks, with 
a single shot right through the heart! Needless to say, the Union Camp 
people were very unhappy. The hunting party wounded two boars that 
were never caught. Union Camp offered to take the boar’s head to a taxi-
dermist so that I could mount it at home. I politely declined having any 
part of the boar and donated the meat to the locals. It seems that by not 
waiting for the sunrise my shot spoiled the excitement of others who did 
not know how to shoot in the dark. 
Swedish Royal Academy
It did not take too long for my reputation as the spokesman for the 
office of the future and the paperless office to spread worldwide. From 1977 
until my retirement from Xerox in 1985 I must have given 200-300 formal 
presentations on these topics. My talks were in Canada, Brazil, Mexico, 
England, Ireland, France, Sweden, Finland, Portugal, Norway, Switzerland, 
New Zealand, Malaysia, Communist China, Singapore, South Africa, Hol-
land, Belgium, Spain, Mexico, Italy, Germany, Australia and Japan. Local 
Xerox managers would arrange such talks because they would be always 
looking to gain customer attention. Except for one or two instances, my 
visits were always very brief. There are a few occasions where I was away 
for only one working day, including trips to Europe. I did not take an op-
portunity to use such travel for a vacation that would always belong to my 
family. 
The most noteworthy of these trips were my increasingly frequent 
visits to Sweden where the topic of a paperless environment was a key 
to their thinking about the future of the Swedish economy. Though Swe-
den had developed as an industrial power, the largest share of their export 
earnings came from paper and paper products. The Swedish government 
also set aside a large part of research funds for eliminating pollution from 
the paper and pulp processes. They were now grappling with the question 
whether to continue making such investments. 
The setting for two or three meetings of the Swedish Royal Acad-
emy and the Swedish Royal Engineering Society were stimulating and 
the computers nobody wanted 153
well arranged. My presentation was usually one of the keynotes. Although 
there were other American presenters who were talking about the future 
in terms of exclusively electronic communications, my views seemed to 
have prevailed because after five years the Swedes did not back off from 
their emphasis on the paper-making sector of their economy. When I be-
came better acquainted with some of the industrial representatives there 
were follow-on visits to meetings organized by Swedish and Finnish paper 
firms. Many of the ideas that I developed for my presentations in Stock-
holm ultimately found their way into chapter ten my 1985 book Informa-
tion Payoff.14 
Lobby Exhibit
McColough’s wishes to obtain zoning permits to build a new 
corporate headquarters in Greenwich were not successful. The temporary 
quarters in a Stamford office park were too small and inconvenient. To 
demonstrate the company’s priority the top executives gave to marketing, 
capital investments were now concentrated to complete a mammoth sales 
training complex in Leesburg, Virginia. When that was finally completed 
in 1974, the decision was finally made to purchase a new site for the Xerox 
World HQ in Stamford, to be completed in 1979. 
A prominent architect was hired. In due course, sometime early in 
1976, the architect delivered a table size model of what the new building 
would look like. The showing of the model took place in the temporary 
Xerox boardroom. As one of the leading executives I was invited to the 
showing of what looked to me as a conventional office edifice. By this time 
I had acquired in New Canaan one of the fifty-four notable homes listed 
as representing the best of the Bauhaus architectural traditions. I expected 
that Xerox, always priding itself on innovative art (the company owned a 
14 Information Payoff, The Free Press, 1985. A well-designed version was published 
in Italy as Organizzare Informazione E Lavoro nell’era Electronica, 1991, translated by 
my good friend Franco Guazzoni. The Brazilian version was titled Os Frutos da Infor-
matica and appeared in 1986. The Russian version appeared in 1987 as Informacia v Vek 
Electroniky. The Japanese version came out in 1987, Bletchley Park, but I cannot translate 
even the title.
154 paul strassmann
Picasso drawing and used it in advertising) would reflect such aspirations 
in the architecture of its headquarters. The hierarchical arrangement of 
the inner space reflected conventional thinking and must have mirrored 
Archie McCardell’s ideas of automotive utility. 
While viewing the model spread out across the boardroom table, I 
did my best to conceal my disappointment. When the architect lifted the 
roof cover of the model to offer to a glimpse of the three story high lobby, 
much attention was devoted to the description how the lobby would be 
housing exhibits of Xerox equipment, starting with the original model 914 
and extending to whatever was currently offered to visiting customers. At 
this point I could not contain myself and remarked that the lobby would 
look more like a warehouse than a reflection of the heritage of a company 
with exceptional aspirations. McColough, so far rather quiet, spun around 
and asked, “Strassmann, if you do not like the lobby as a product exhibit, 
what would you put in instead?” The entire executive group now faced 
their computer expert and expected that I would receive my comeuppance. 
Caught totally unprepared, I improvised by pointing out that Xerography 
is one of mankind’s great achievement by making it easy to distribute writ-
ten communications. I would place in the lobby one hundred objects to 
represent the evolution in mankind’s quest to preserve knowledge. Xerog-
raphy would be therefore shown as a milestone in human progress, leaving 
room in the exhibit for an empty space of what would follow xerography. 
Peter appeared to be intrigued with the idea of placing a historical exhibit 
in the lobby. How would I acquire the objects to fill the displays? I re-
sponded that as a hobby my wife and I have been collecting ancient manu-
scripts. I was aware what were the prices such objects would fetch. Archie 
now chimed in, obviously displeased with the drift of the conversation. 
How much would it cost to accumulate such a collection? Sensing that my 
audience was now captivated by the idea of a historical display I watched 
what appeared as fencing between Peter and Archie. I responded with a 
totally reckless repartee: “Archie, whatever is in the budget for the lobby 
I will take it and will deliver hundred historical objects that the company 
could be proud of.” At that time I did not have the slightest idea about the 
budget except that I was aware that the architect would be commission-
ing non-representational abstract artifacts, as was the corporate fashion 
the computers nobody wanted 155
in those days. Such objects, produced by artists such as Calder, adorned 
several recent corporate headquarters including the one recently build 
for IBM. The artists’ commissions for such artifacts were enormous, often 
running in hundred thousands of dollars in addition to exorbitant fees 
paid to dealers and agents. I considered most of this non-representational 
art, usually welded hunks of steel, as offending what I considered as centu-
ries of artistic skill that emphasized workmanship, content and ideas. 
Peter now turned around to Archie and made a pronouncement 
that would influence much of what I would be doing for years in addition 
to the work I was actually paid for. Peter said, give Strassmann a checkbook 
to spend whatever has been budgeted for the lobby. Afterwards, Ray Hay, 
my future boss, who was delighted by the entire byplay, warned me that 
I was risking my career since it would be Archie who would be deciding 
how much money would be available. Indeed, Ray was right. The money 
allocated to what would be now the 10,000 Years of Writing collection was 
an amazingly small amount. In addition, Archie insisted that all decisions 
about purchases should be made jointly with Bill Senter, a good business-
man and president of a Xerox educational division. As an added safeguard, 
I was told that the management as well as the collection of exhibit items 
would be outsourced to a University or to a museum.
Following such guidance Bill Senter made arrangements to visit the 
director of the Morgan Library, one of the foremost collections of ancient 
books that were the result of years of accumulation by J.P. Morgan. The 
visit was a disaster. Prior to the visit I acquired a UNESCO book celebrat-
ing the 500th anniversary of Gutenberg. It listed works that were deemed 
to be milestones in the progress in printing. I supplemented this with an 
enumeration of artifacts that were more ancient, such as those showing 
hieroglyphics, cuneiform tablets, Coptic papyri and Roman scripts. When 
we handed our list of one hundred milestone artifacts to the Director of 
Morgan we were congratulated on our excellent taste. Xerox management 
was praised for respecting cultural heritage. Now, how much money would 
we be willing to donate to the Morgan Library so that they could take over 
the installation of an exhibit? Of course, a corporate lobby was not a suit-
able place to hold valuable historical artifacts. Morgan would provide us 
with copies of the desired objects in return for a tax-deductible donation of 
156 paul strassmann
at least a million dollars. Such terms ruled out Morgan completely. We did 
not have a million dollars. The idea of placing copies in the lobby would 
devalue comprehension of the difficulties encountered in making progress 
in how written communications would be produced. Mona insisted that 
only originals would convey my intended message.
Senter and I then visited H.P. Kraus, perhaps the best-known US 
dealer in ancient books. When we showed him our list we were given a 
copy of his most recent catalogue showing the asking pre-auction prices. 
Kraus’s prices would have allowed us to buy perhaps five items. A follow-
on visit with Maggs Brothers, in London, showed slightly lower prices but 
still totally out of our reach.
My insistence to proceed with a do-it-yourself approach was not 
completely insane, though Bill Senter thought so and detached himself 
from the project except to remain as an amused observer. Over the years 
I had been accumulating a collection of ancient manuscripts and books 
(incunabula) dated shortly after the invention of printing towards the end 
of the 15th century. The prime works created in that period were priced 
sky-high by collectors who bought books as an investment. In the case of 
the Xerox exhibit we would have to display only the form and the tech-
nology used over ten centuries in written communications without the 
requirement to demonstrate historically valuable content. Visit to deal-
ers in ancient books and artifacts taught me to look for items filed in the 
back-rooms of stores and to disregard what was offered in auction cata-
logues. For instance, a large and illustrated sheepskin document from the 
era of Charlemagne (about 800 AD) would be offered for sale starting 
at $100,000 provided that it had been cited in a scholarly text. A small 
sheepskin, with identical Latin script, could be had for $100 without fear 
that it would be a forgery. From the standpoint of offering objects repre-
senting the evolution in the writing technologies and of the progression in 
the representations of messages an inexpensive sheepskin would serve us 
equally well. 
Seeking out bargain-priced items to fill the list of one hundred ob-
jects had thus changed into a treasure-hunt which provided me with wel-
come diversions from the otherwise stressing experiences in maneuvering 
through corporate political minefields as the corporate global director of 
the computers nobody wanted 157
information systems. In this process I learned that the value of anything 
is not intrinsic in any object by itself. Value is created by organizing what 
may not account for much if taken in isolation but could gain enormous-
ly by combining what had been fragments into something that could be 
viewed as a functioning whole. What mattered in my case was the learning, 
pleasure and shared experiences that ultimately rewarded me beyond all 
expectations. Mona and I spent three years traveling worldwide as an add-
on assignment to my job as the most senior information systems executive. 
The Xerox exhibit became an enriching gift to my life experiences. Similar 
sentiments were echoed by many Xerox people who interpreted the 10,000 
Years of Recorded Information in the lobby of their global headquarters as 
a symbol that the company’s roots were still in the written message and 
not in computers, telecommunications, finance, insurance, education and 
many of the other fads that the firm tended to cultivate for a short time 
only to drop them a few years later.
Chester Carlson’s Notebook
From the standpoint of Xerox, the single most significant item on 
display was the original laboratory notebook kept by Chester Carlson in 
Astoria, Long Island, on October 22, 1938. Page four of the notebook was 
open showing the day’s entry starting with the memorable phrase “Today 
Kornei and I made the attached parchment prints by the fooling method…” 
Attached, with ordinary Scotch tape, was the world’s first xerographically 
reproduced message. It was this entry, and the attached scrap of ordinary 
wrapping paper, 1.75” x 1.25”, on which one of the most profitable patents 
ever granted would be based.
It must have been sometime in 1990 when I was asked to guide a 
group of visitors around the Xerox lobby. It appears that there was nobody 
left in the building that could offer a satisfactory description about what 
was in the illuminated cases. As I approached the Carlson’s notebook, I 
rattled off my usual description about the visitors now having a chance 
to see a scrap of ordinary parchment paper such as was used to wrap fish, 
but leading to hundred millions of profits. The now famous icon 10.-22.-38 
ASTORIA was missing! I rapidly concluded the guided tour and called the 
158 paul strassmann
building manager. Where was the notebook attachment? He did not have 
a clue. When was the case opened last time? It took a while to drag out the 
answer as several management layers relapsed into denial. Xerox, to reduce 
costs, had outsourced the cleaning and maintenance of the headquarters 
building. Though the exhibit cases were sealed somebody has decided that 
time had come to dust off the inside of the cases. The keys were issued 
to the cleaners who then proceeded, without supervision and contrary to 
written procedures, to brush off the content. When a small scrap of paper 
fell off, the cleaners swept it into trash.
I picked up the phone and insisted to be connected to Dave Kearns, 
then the CEO. When I told him about what happened, he instructed me 
to generate another copy of the famous ASTORIA original and have ev-
ery item, then on loan, returned to their lenders to be replaced by photo-
graphic copies.
I am certainly not a superstitious person. But the Carlson jinx 
must have materialized. Shortly after the disappearance of the origin of 
all Xerox profits the price of the Xerox stock plunged to an all time low of 
around $4. That was far below the $175 per share for some of the stock op-
tions I was holding to fund my retirement. 
The Carlson Jinx
When I discovered that Chester Carlson’s widow was still living in 
Rochester, I decided to pay her a visit. I needed to find out why and how 
xerography could be brought to a stage of development where the cur-
rent generation of Xerox executives could make it a fabulously successful 
product. 
The visit turned out to be an otherworldly experience. I was wait-
ing in Mrs. Doris Carlson’s living room surrounded by rare oriental sculp-
ture and artifacts one could identify as Buddhist religious objects. The air 
was fragrant with incense. Finally, Mrs. Carlson descended from upstairs. 
She was a beautiful silver-haired lady, extremely pale in an unearthly sort 
of way. She looked to me more as an apparition, in floor-length black frock 
lined with delicate white embroidery. In a singing voice she welcomed me 
and said that my visit was announced many weeks ago by her spiritual 
the computers nobody wanted 159
connections. I was welcome because I came to honor the spirit of her late 
husband with whom she was still in communication. After such a startling 
welcome her tone changed, and over a cup of fragrant tea, she told me that 
I was the first person from Xerox who had visited her in many years. What 
was my purpose?
I explained that while collecting objects to be displayed in the lob-
by of the planned new Xerox global headquarters, I gained access to the 
collection of Chester Carlson papers that had been stored in the archives 
of the New York City Library on 42nd Street. While perusing Carlson’s 
notebook, including the pages in which he pasted in the “10.-22.-38 AS-
TORIA” original of the first xerographic image, I was overwhelmed by the 
depth of Carlson’s thoroughness in the three days following the invention 
of the xerographic process. The notebook contained a detailed description 
of how facsimile equipment would function, without any indication that 
Carlson could knew anything about the electronics to accomplish that. 
The notebook also contained a description of high-speed xerographic ma-
chines that would use a flexible belt instead of a drum. It would then take 
almost forty years later, and hundreds of Xerox scientists and engineers, to 
develop a reliable belt-based copier. I also mentioned that in the physicist’s 
John Dessauer’s book there was an observation that the way xerography 
worked could not have been predicted by anything that was physical sci-
ence. Another way of looking at Carlson’s accomplishment was to view it 
merely as a patent attorney’s expansive effort to extend the scope of a small 
experimental demonstration in the physics of a light-sensitive material to 
cover every conceivable possible application in the future.
Mrs. Carlson smiled and explained that xerography was an inspira-
tion originating from spiritual forces. She felt that it was a gift to humanity 
for sharing ideas and truth. Chester Carlson was only a medium to carry 
the message. She felt that the current management of Xerox had betrayed 
what Carlson has created and therefore would have to suffer consequences. 
This message was conveyed in a prophetic tone and without any acrimony. 
I responded that all would not be lost. The technologies of Xerox were 
now shared with Fuji-Xerox. A member of the board of directors of Fuji-
Xerox, a retired banker and Buddhist scholar, Mr. Toneo Noda, has started 
a discussion about the future of Xerox, which would be somehow hidden 
160 paul strassmann
in the essence (Zen) of the firm. Mr. Noda believed that every successful 
enterprise possesses a “soul”, which must be cultivated by employees as 
well as recognized by customers. Would Mrs. Carlson consent if I make 
arrangements for Mr. Noda to visit her next time he comes to Rochester? 
Mrs. Carlson agreed, commenting that my telling her about the prospec-
tive visit from a Buddhist scholar from Xerox confirmed signs she has 
been receiving for some time.
It was the conversations with inspired people like Mr. Noda, Mrs. 
Carlson and Sid Schoeffler, whose research showed that it takes anywhere 
from five to seven years before one could tell if a completely innovative 
venture would have a chance of succeeding, that convinced me that the 
persistent impatience by those who followed Joe Wilson had a misunder-
standing about the long time elapsed between Carlson’s original inspira-
tion in 1938 and its gradual realization years later. Xerox top executives 
were apparently working with a clock that started running after outsiders 
proved the feasibility of xerography and after delivering at least two poorly 
functioning models of selenium-based xerography. Accordingly, all that 
it would take in the 1970s for Xerox to replicate the past success would be 
to latch on to an already proven emergent technology, by acquisition, and 
then expand it using ample cash and the marketing power now in place 
in the copier business. If entering into a new market did not work out in 
short order it would be sent into oblivion because it was somehow flawed 
in that it could not match the financial profile of the Xerox 914. The Xerox 
mentality was that they have won by committing to a “bet your farm” risky 
xerography. They managed to win despite the odds. They could now keep 
repeating such high-risk bets, without taking precautions how to protect 
against the downside perils. Unfortunately, that set them up for failure in 
every successive venture. Peter McColough must have believed that he de-
fied doubters and taken a huge risks before. While betting on Haloid was 
clearly a winner beyond all imagination it ultimately blinded him and the 
board of directors to the possibility of abysmal failures.
The Carlson jinx was further compounded by the rising influence 
of financial executives who were hired from the already declining fortunes 
of the Ford motor company. Archie McCardell, a financial man who be-
came the president of a Ford subsidiary, was hired by George Peck to be-
the computers nobody wanted 161
come the Chief Operating executive of Xerox. Jim O’Neill, a brilliant and 
highly disciplined former chief financial executive of Ford Europe, became 
the chief staff officer. Donald Lennox, became the head of manufactur-
ing. Mel Howard, a smart and manipulative operator, was a former Ford 
financial analyst. If a venture could not make profit in a hurry, or missed 
financial targets, the financial establishment weighed in using the usual 
Ford method to increase profits through mandated cost reductions that 
in due course squeezed out the potential out of whatever was originally 
conceived to be a promising addition to creation of new wealth.
During my sixteen years at the corporate headquarters and over 
eleven years of sitting in many of the key deliberations about various in-
vestments, a repetitious pattern emerged. First, a company was acquired. 
Second, it was then optimistically launched as a major contribution to 
corporate growth. Third, it was subjected to financial controls that met 
the conservative criteria of the Ford-bred financial executives who were 
immediately seeking operating profits. Fourth, when the operating profit 
criteria were not met, it would become insufficiently funded and treated 
not as a long-term venture investment. Invariably, this sequence led to 
crippled organizations while their original owners walked away rich, be-
yond all expectations, with Xerox stock that was quickly sold off while its 
prices were still high. 
The Xerox pattern of uncreative destruction (to borrow a term 
from Joseph Schumpeter) would be imitating the behavior of a farmer 
who purchased a rare cherry tree sapling only to discover that after the 
first two years the crop would not meet his expectations. When the ever-
present consultants called for a re-examination, the farmer would pull out 
the struggling sapling, examine its roots and replant it. Next year, when 
no cherries showed up, the procedure would be repeated. After few rep-
etitions like that the cherry tree would be ripped out and replaced with 
pear tree saplings. Again, the pears would never get a chance to grow for a 
farmer who expected too much, too soon.
It is true that Chester Carlson, as a lone inventor and holder of 
what he believed to be valuable patent rights, persisted despite all naysay-
ers. What finally made the difference was the readiness of the Haloid Com-
pany to understand what Chester Carlson had to offer. What differentiated 
162 paul strassmann
Haloid from the firms that turned down Carlson was customer-centered 
understanding of the utility of copying? Only a firm that understood cus-
tomers’ habits and preferences could bet on Carlson’s theoretical discovery. 
I cannot emphasize sufficiently the critical importance of synergy between 
the marketing know-how about customers and the engineering of tech-
nological innovation. Whereas Xerox management wished to reincarnate 
the experience how xerography was brought to the market, in the cases of 
XDS or the STAR workstation (to mention only a few), they proceeded to 
do so only as a technological breakthrough. There was always an absence 
of a corresponding market understanding, at all levels of management, of 
what the customer would be ready to purchase. Neglecting the history of 
copying, which spanned many decades of learning from mistakes while 
practicing frugal financing of short-term acquisitions turned out to be a 
fatal flaw. 
Xerography was successful because the firm had a rare combina-
tion of visionary leadership in Joe Wilson, in making global alliances un-
der the guidance of Sol Linowitz, and in a number of marketing people, 
such as John Glavin, who understood customer needs. This team was able 
to empathize with customer values and to come in with correct pricing 
and correct configuration that would sweep the marketplace into an un-
precedented success. The original “xeroids” deserve all the credit and ac-
colades they received because, in retrospect, the probability of an innova-
tion hitting the marketplace with an optimum configuration, with a brand 
new technology was rare indeed. I attribute much credit to the twenty-five 
years of experience in placing Rectigraph machines with customers. When 
viewed from this point of view the Xerox machine cannot be branded as a 
revolution, in ways it has become represented through the years. It was not 
an ab initio creation arising out of nowhere, but a large but nevertheless 
evolutionary step. 
The Mirage of a Miracle
Xerox always cultivated an image that what it has accomplished 
and what they aspired to was nothing but a miracle. John Dessauer, the 
German physicist who found a reference to Chester Carlson’s patent in 
the computers nobody wanted 163
a journal said that the discovery of xerography was miraculous. The to-
tally unexpected gusher of Xerox wealth, salesperson commissions and 
the totally unpredictable customer acceptance of copiers were not predict-
able using conventional business methods. Xerox marketing reinforced 
its views about the miraculous origins of their products by launching an 
eminently successful “Brother Dominic” advertising campaign. The sixty 
second TV spot always ended up with a plump Jewish actor, attired as a 
Dominican monk, raising his sight to the heaven and pronouncing that 
“it’s a miracle” after obtaining a Xerox copy. Brother Dominic made a ca-
reer out of appearances at Xerox sales meetings for more than a decade.
Despite a long and non-miraculous history of hard work and failed 
experimentation the persistence of the myth of “out of this world” origins of 
Xerox found acceptance among Xerox marketing management. Bringing a 
miracle to the world could certainly justify extraordinary prices. Miracu-
lous origins could be then peddled as a priceless revelation. Unfortunately, 
waiting for miracles to happen after the success of xerography entangled 
Xerox in a series of ventures that were not and could not be successful 
because the accepted mythology did not fit the reality. The contradictions 
between beliefs in miracles and the actuality of what customers were ready 
to buy were demonstrated in the ways the innovations from Xerox PARC 
became doomed to failure. It was not the failure of Xerox management to 
leverage the breakthrough technologies from Palo Alto after the launch of 
the STAR computer, as has been steadfastly asserted by the PARC alumni. 
The hoped for miraculous architecture of information that was advocated 
by PARC and expected by Stamford was never destined to happen at all. 
Transforming technology miracles into quick commercial success does not 
occur in that way. My position is that the PARC venture was genetically 
flawed in that both the mother (PARC researchers) and the father (Xerox 
Corporate) entered into a union with incompatible genomes. Perhaps you 
can get a mule by mating a horse and an ass, but affinity was not the case 
here, despite contrary claims. The mating was rather like between birds 
and livestock.
PARC failed because it was managed to product launch by tech-
nologists and not by businessmen. The brilliant PARC researchers pri-
mary interest was in advancing with the coolest possible technology that 
164 paul strassmann
had been gestating, under-funded, in ARPA sponsored university labs for 
years. Their game was to come up with as many wow-effect features as pos-
sible that would thrill their academic colleagues. The greatest satisfaction 
was from getting published in ACM or IEEE proceedings. The PARC peo-
ple were thrilled with the idea of radical change, as seen by the research-
ers and certainly not how that would be seen as improvements by paying 
customers. The PARC engineers did not have the slightest understand-
ing about the resistance to change in office routines unless that would be 
enormously attractive and without much disturbance in the existing social 
relationships. The PARC technologies were conceived to fit the world of 
PARC-like peers, where neither costs nor technical inconvenience would 
matter. Their product engineering was always improvised and never took 
into consideration customer costs, support effort, ease of installation or 
training inconvenience.
A number of books have been produced which reflect the West 
Coast bias and interpretations of why the output of PARC never delivered 
the expected profits to Xerox.15 16
Fumbling the Future blames the large corporate structure without 
providing insights into the corrosive influence of the PARC researchers 
who diverted generous research funding into developments that could not 
possibly be of benefit to the business needs of Xerox. This book represents 
anti-establishment thinking and finds that Xerox management must bear 
the full responsibility for the failure of PARC innovations. I consider this 
book a complete misrepresentation of what really happened.
Dealers in Lightning contains a long list of fictional accounts, largely 
reflecting interviews with PARC people who started cultivating a growth 
in self-aggrandizing importance with the demise of the STAR worksta-
tion. They diminish the importance of what Xerox has done for them (e.g. 
almost unlimited funding and the false claim that they occupied a ram-
shackle building adjacent to Stanford University). They keep emphasizing 
that “… PARC’s occupants would prove to be the greatest gathering of 
15 
Hiltzik, M., Dealers in Lightning: XEROX PARC and the Dawn of the Computer Age, 
Harper Business, 1999.
16 Smith, D.K., and Alexander, R.C., How Xerox Invented, Then Ignored, the First Per-
sonal Computer, iUniverse, 1999.
the computers nobody wanted 165
computer talent ever assembled.” The book reiterates “…PARC conceptu-
alized the desktop computer before IBM launched its PC, and it laid the 
foundation for Microsoft Windows.” Even though that is true it skips over 
the issue why the new inventions could not be used. The accusation that “… 
Xerox failed ever to grasp the financial potential of such achievements” is 
misleading since whatever PARC produced could not be transformed into 
a financially successful offering. Even the claim that PARC invented laser 
printing is deceptive. The only money that was ever made by Xerox from 
laser printers were computer peripherals attached to IBM mainframes and 
brought to the marketplace by personnel from the former XDS in El Se-
gundo. Though Gary Starkweather, one of the chief proponents of laser 
printing, was housed in Palo Alto, he was really a Rochester transplant 
working with Bob Adams in El Segundo to bring a computer printer to 
the market. PARC could not care less about computer printing attached to 
IBM mainframes.
Much has been made about Steve Jobs’ visit to PARC which led to 
the introduction of the LISA computer in 1983. The immaturity of PARC’s 
design is best manifested in the failure of this product and the limited 
market share penetration by the Macintosh computer in commercial use. 
The descendants of the STAR, through various versions of the Macintosh, 
never gained more than 3% market share in the personal computer busi-
ness while Apple had experienced two near-death experiences until its 
recent increase in profitability from an entertainment, not a productivity 
enhancement product. The claim that Xerox could have had a profitable 
business with the generations of hardware that followed the STAR is with-
out merit especially if one takes into consideration the amortization of 
R&D investments that Apple did not have to incur. The Apple computer 
company inherited the PARC arrogance of offering bundled proprietary 
hardware and software while the by far more successful Microsoft gar-
nered excessive profits by concentrating on software that invited devel-
opers to construct thousands of applications that improved office worker 
productivity. Microsoft was successful because it relied on competing 
manufacturers of personal computers to deliver lower priced devices that 
could be then economically justified. A view how Xerox could support of-
fice productivity improvement never entered into PARC planning.
166 paul strassmann
The spokesmen from PARC remained silent about the largest loss 
to Xerox from developments that were of direct benefit to Microsoft. The 
inconspicuous Charles Simonyi jumped over to Microsoft in 1981 and took 
with him from PARC the formidable BRAVO text-editing program, which 
was quickly transformed into the hugely successful Microsoft Word appli-
cation. Word software accounted for a large share of Microsoft’s billions of 
profits.17 The adaptation of BRAVO to the secretarial/administrative en-
vironment, running on inexpensive microcomputers could have delivered 
to Xerox the profit-making opportunity it was seeking. When Massaro 
was blindsided by PARC advocates to launching the STAR instead of up-
grading the more plebeian Xerox 820, the idea of delivering to secretaries 
a good text editor would never again enter on the agenda. While nobody 
was watching Xerox let perhaps its most valuable software property escape 
to Microsoft without even a whimper. 
After 1981 the leading lights of PARC migrated to other opportu-
nities that led to the formation of many successful firms. A placeholder 
management remained in charge without delivering to Xerox anything of 
substantial value except to continue the propagation of the myth of PARC 
greatness. 
A Historical Point of View
It was the British historian, Arnold Toynbee, who sharpened my 
understanding that flourishing civilizations start on the path leading to 
their decline when they are at the peak of their fame and prosperity. As is 
the case in Greek tragedies, it is at the pinnacle of their achievement that 
they are blinded to commit what Toynbee calls a fatal flaw. At the time 
when the damage is inflicted, there is little awareness about its ultimate 
consequences. The proponents of the damaging act may actually use well-
reasoned arguments why they are committing themselves to a course that 
may ultimately destroy their greatest achievements. Toynbee also teaches 
17 
Charles Simonyi was recipient of early Microsoft stock options for his contributions 
to Microsoft profitability.  According to Forbes magazine he is a billionaire many times 
over exclusively from Microsoft shares and now indulges in outer space adventures.
the computers nobody wanted 167
us that when external enemies (and competitors) finally deliver mortal 
blows, that takes place many years after a society has damaged itself from 
within as a consequence of internal strife.
It is interesting to contemplate a similar fate that befell the once 
vaunted IBM Corporation, which was rated for many decades, by FOR-
TUNE magazine, as the most admired global company. Similarly as in the 
case of Xerox, I can now backdate the start of the decline of IBM to the 
long-standing decision to sell equipment outright instead of renting it. It 
is true that such a change was to have been dictated by the US government. 
The fatal flaw was inflicted in ways how IBM implemented pricing and 
customer care policies. The introduction of plug-compatible peripherals 
and computers then started draining cash out of the rich IBM till. Cus-
tomers would now shift from a dependency on IBM systems engineers 
to consultants and in-house staffs. By de-coupling itself from an intimate 
understanding of customer needs — an IBM traditional strength — to in-
creased emphasis on winning orders, IBM sapped itself of the sources of 
its erstwhile power.
Parenthetically, I would also like to note that the current malaise 
that is inflicting another industry giant, Microsoft, has many similarities 
with the patterns I have observed in the deconstruction of both Xerox 
and IBM. In 2003 I pleaded, in vain, with the Chief Technical Officer of 
Microsoft, Craig Mundie to offer its products as a fully supported service 
instead as an increasingly commoditized software product. To this day 
Microsoft insists on selling it’s over-featured and insecure software for an 
outright license fee while the customers bear all of the costs of operating 
and maintaining what they purchased.18 The economics of Microsoft have 
now turned against it, as the costs of ownership of their software now far 
exceed the purchase expense.
It was from these observations that I started formulating a point of 
view on how to introduce and manage complex technological innovation. 
In the first half of 1970 information technologies had entered into a stage 
of development where computers actually worked. There were occasional 
18 On March 3, 2008 Microsoft finally announced that it would conduct a market test 
in September of 2008 with software as a service.
168 paul strassmann
failures, but in each case they could be ultimately traced to a human failure, 
not to breakage of the technology. The rising complexity of interactions 
between organization structure, corporate planning, untrained technical 
talent, software engineering, telecommunications and data center opera-
tions would soon exceed the capabilities of just about every corporation to 
run and operate their own information systems establishment. 
The management of information technologies calls for rapid and 
dynamic innovation. For vendors of IT that necessitates close and con-
tinuous involvement with customers as problems arise. When a sales force 
is allowed to degrade into promotion peddling, proposals and order tak-
ing, the value-added of this asset will decline and thus open the door to 
low-priced imitators. The worth of a sale force is in its “knowledge capital” 
that can earn extraordinary profits if it can price itself as a value-priced 
service instead of as a commodity expense. Customers are willing to pay 
for solutions. They have limited uses for any information technologies that, 
in isolation, cannot deliver useful results.
It was the MAX confrontation between Stamford and indirectly 
with XDS that heralded what would evolve as a pattern that progressively 
lead to the alienation between PARC and everyone else. PARC research-
ers would be seeking recognition from their professional peers through 
manifestation of brilliant research innovations. They were, fundamentally, 
post-graduate university students who become accustomed to receiving 
generous corporate privileges, but without any of the responsibilities to 
sustain the body that was feeding them. Their metric of success would be 
the number of professional papers in which their contributions would be 
cited. In fact, that was achieved beyond anybody’s ambition, as the soon to 
be delivered networked ALTO computers that allowed PARC researchers 
to generate more published professional papers than anybody else. 
Xerox corporate funding, initially without any oversight, kept 
nourishing the uniqueness of PARC by pumping more money into PARC’s 
research capabilities that made it extremely productive in designing and 
building of equipment that was reflecting the needs of researchers, rather 
then the needs of the prospective buyers of office productivity enhance-
ment devices. With laser printers, highly capable text preparation equip-
ment and Ethernet connectivity, the PARC recruiters could entice just 
the computers nobody wanted 169
about any brilliant researchers to join their team that was managed ef-
ficiently and generously, in contrast with the measly academic living of as-
sistant professors waiting for years to attain tenure. The only problem with 
the equipment built by PARC was that it was of alpha quality, which was 
barely functioning prototypes. PARC was a research laboratory and had 
ample support staff that made sure that any problems were quickly fixed. 
In fact, problems were seen as an element of the research environment.
 Several books have been written on the amazing speed with which 
PARC people developed various versions of the ALTO, MAX and Mesa 
machines. These stories represent a one sided view of PARC accomplish-
ments as a prodigiously effective research laboratory that nevertheless did 
not build anything that would have practical commercial use. To this date 
the books about PARC leave the readers pondering the puzzle why Xerox 
could not take advantage of perhaps the single largest outpouring of cre-
ative innovation that took place in a single research laboratory, in a period 
of only ten years. The reason for this monumental failure, that has now 
become a frequently cited example of a corporate foul-up, rests with parts 
of a story that have never been told. The commonly accepted lore about 
PARC has been presented on the basis of interviews that reflect mostly the 
tales, as told by PARC proponents.
Placing the blame on PARC alone is unfair. The story of intrigues 
and miscues, that reflect the Stamford and Rochester reality have never 
been adequately told in any of the published books because the Stamford 
HQ points of view was never told. PARC turned out to be without any 
benefit to Xerox because corporate management, and particularly McCo-
lough and Goldman allowed that to happen. Without engineering, manu-
facturing and market planning the seeds that created PARC would grow 
quickly into a fruit-bearing tree producing strange fruit except there was 
nobody there to convert it into something useful. The problem was that 
the tree would bear a luscious harvest that would be open for collection by 
everyone except by those who planted and irrigated it.
I found it interesting that when George Pake received the coveted 
National Medal of Science in 1987 from President Ronald Reagan, the ci-
tation was for services delivered to American science. PARC with its pio-
neering efforts was indeed a national asset, but not a Xerox asset.
A Postscript
D
on Massaro and David Liddle, who were responsible for the Xerox 
8010, left early in 1982 and formed the Metaphor Company. They 
would offer a workstation that was a STAR look-alike except for 
some modifications, such as a numerical keypad. Following the PARC tra-
dition of catering to intellectual workers, they offered sophisticated special 
purpose software for use by market researchers and brand managers who 
were believed to be able to afford the steep price for what was represented 
as an executive workstation. Massaro and Liddle hoped to succeed where 
Xerox had failed by concentrating on clever solutions that manipulated 
databases that offered unique solutions to marketing problems. As in the 
case of PARC, what they marketed was not competitive with the inex-
pensive approaches, such as what was offered by Microsoft. Metaphor re-
peated the arrogance of the PARC leadership who believed in bundling 
proprietary hardware with proprietary software. Unfortunately, such an 
approach would always lose to inexpensive, general-purpose hardware 
that would be capable of running ten thousands of applications produced 
by thousands of independent developers. It was only a matter of time be-
fore improved versions of the Microsoft multi-purpose operating system 
could produce whatever results could be obtained from Metaphor.
One way of looking at the Metaphor venture is to view it as an at-
tempt to reincarnate the failed STAR in another form, in a different mar-
ket, without the encumbrance of what was alleged to be the restrictions 
imposed by the Xerox bureaucracy from Stamford. Unfortunately, Mas-
saro and Liddle could never succeed, even without corporate staff over-
sight, because their approach was faulty. It suffered form every bias they 
acquired from the PARC way of thinking about the needs of the workplace. 
The failure of Metaphor can be seen as one of the proofs that it did not take 
172 paul strassmann
flawed Xerox management to make a direct successor of the Xerox 8010 
die from self-inflicted wounds.
It is interesting to note that sometime in 1989 Xerox sent Metaphor 
a letter accusing them of violating many of the proprietary features of the 
Xerox 8010 and Xerox 6085 and requested royalties. Xerox always viewed 
Metaphor as an imitation of much that had been developed in PARC. Met-
aphor counter-sued Xerox Corporation seeking a declaration that Meta-
phor’s database software products did not infringe on Xerox copyrights 
(which it did not) while ducking the issue whether it was a STAR look-
alike. The merits of the Xerox claims and Metaphor allegations were never 
completely resolved because soon after Metaphor sold out its database 
products to IBM and Xerox could not press its claims against hardware 
and a firm that disappeared.
Metaphor was amply funded as a start-up. It had a unique chance 
to prove that what PARC had produced was marketable and profitable. 
Metaphor could at least partially prove the PARC leaders were right and 
that Xerox was wrong. That was not the case, because of a misunderstand-
ing of what were the needs of administrative and office automation per-
sonnel in the 1980s. Although Metaphor received generous support from 
IBM, who ultimately bought the company in 1992 to salvage its database 
software, even a partial reincarnation of PARC was not feasible because of 
its fundamental flaws. 
Proceeding with Retirement
Late in 1984 Xerox engaged in a cost reduction campaign, which in-
cluded an attempt to lower rising costs of medical premiums. Xerox would 
claim that its employees had superior health and therefore the costs of any 
insurance should be lowered accordingly. Additional gyms were created 
at Xerox locations, with an increased emphasis on weight reduction and a 
healthy diet. To prove that Xerox employees were superior, the personnel 
department selected what was a representative sample of employees and 
sent them for an eight-hour medical examination. 
I was selected. The results of a comprehensive questionnaire, to-
gether with the usual test results, were then sent to the University of 
the computers nobody wanted 173
Michigan for analysis. In dues course I received findings about my health, 
which was excellent. My life expectancy, with 75% probability, was 94.5 
years. However, I was slightly overweight. If I could lose 15-20 pounds im-
mediately my life expectancy would increase to 95.3 years. 
The University of Michigan analysis amused me. I received great 
enjoyment from Mona’s chocolate mousse, which she made from confec-
tioners’ chocolate imported from Switzerland. I was not going to deprive 
myself to possibly live another 0.8 years forty years hence. 
At the time I was crushed by my son’s death as well as discouraged 
with my rapidly declining influence at corporate HQ. If I had another 40 
years ahead of me, which was more time than what I had spent working so 
far, I surely did not wish to spend any of it with Xerox that was now eager 
to shed staff, especially at the executive levels. I would be eligible for retire-
ment at the age of 56 with retirement benefits that would be counted as if I 
had stayed until my mandatory retirement, which would be now 62. It did 
not require calculations to figure out that I should quit immediately and 
seek another career while I was still able to do that. I would now go home 
to be with Mona most of the time.
My formal retirement from Xerox was on May 1, 1985. Even though 
I was not reporting to the CEO, David Kearns presided at my retirement 
party and gave me a cordial send-off. As a bonus, the Company funded 
me for another two years to be available for customer and public interest 
presentations, which was fully utilized. I would be also receiving monthly 
checks from a retirement fund that was an accumulation from payroll de-
ductions and from profit sharing. Xerox would be acting as a Trustee for 
such funds. When I discovered that the Trustee was investing a large part 
of these funds in Xerox stock, I decided to withdraw the entire balance. 
With reluctance, Xerox agreed but I had to sign that I would not come 
around begging for support in case I mishandled my funds. Apparently, 
lump sum distribution of pension funds frequently ended up as risky in-
vestments. 
My odyssey, which started 40 years before in Slovakia now arrived 
at a major milestone. There would be another 40 years, God willing, to see 
where life would take me.
the computers nobody wanted 175
Cheshire  36
Chief Information Officer  15, 80
COIN  68
Control Data Corporation  38, 92
Corporate Data Center  56
Counterculture ideology  88
Crum and Forster  130
Culbertson, David   36, 91
D
DanRay Telecommunications  63
Data Processing Financial & Gen-
eral  9
DECSYSTEM-20  117
Desktop Metaphor  126
Dessauer, John  143, 162
Diablo  80
Diablo 630  96
Diablo Data Systems  95
Digital Equipment Corporation  
28
E
Edwards, Gordon  7
Electronic Data Systems  70
Electro-Optical Systems  78
Elkind, Jerry   123
Engelbart, Douglas   91
European Regional Centers  59
Evans & Sutherland  91
Index
A
Adams, Bob   105
Advanced Research Projects 
Agency  112
AlohaNet  91
Amdahl Corporation  13
Amdahl, Gene  12
American Education Publications  
36
American Paper Manufacturers 
Association  150
APL Computer Language  61
Architecture of Information  79
Arpanet project  118
Arthur Andersen  1, 5, 20, 53, 61, 
68, 70, 79, 92, 97, 100, 102, 125
AT&T Long Lines  65
B
Boston Consulting Group  84
Brazilian Computer  67
Brother Dominic  163
Burroughs  16
C
Campbell, Jim   103
Carey, Chuck   91
Carlson, Chester   77
Carlson, Doris   158
Carnegie-Mellon  124
Century Data Corporation  80, 98
Chandler, Merritt   34
Charlton, Joe   91
176 paul strassmann
Kearns, David  53, 134
Kodak  72
Kornei, Otto   142
Kurzweil  80, 101
L
Lennox, Don   41
Lewis, Jack  42, 45
Licklider, J.C.R.   119
Liddle, David  171
Linowitz, Sol   162
LISP computers  128
LTV Corporation  76
Lykins, Paul   101
M
Maggs Brothers  156
Marcuse, Herbert   114
market probe  123
Marshall, George   90
Marx, Walter   24
Massaro, Don  93, 171
McCardell, Archie   40, 73
McColough, Peter  21, 160
McGill, Archie  65
McGurk, Dan  46
McKinsey & Company  84
Memorex  30
Metaphor  171
Mona  56
Moon, Alec  6
Mundie, Craig   167
F
Flavin, Joseph B.  7, 16
Fuji-Xerox  61
G
Gartner, Gideon  11
Ginn textbook company  36
Glavin, Bill   84
Glavin, John   162
Goldman, Jack   78
H
Hamel, Gary  131
Hay, Ray  52, 75
Hewlett-Packard  83
Hoffman, Abbie   114
Honeywell 200 Liberator  5
Honeywell Computers  80
Host-IMP interface  120
Howard, Mel   130
I
IBM  172
IBM360/67  47
IBM Office Products Group  85
IBM World Trade  7
Information Products Group  80
Information Services Division  49, 
69
J
Jackson, Bill   96
K
Kay, Alan   114
the computers nobody wanted 177
ROA ratio  73
Rock, Arthur   46
R.R. Bowker  36
S
Schoeffler, Sidney  37, 83
Schumpeter, Joseph   161
Scientific Data Systems  21
Senter, Bill   155
Sharp, Ian  61
Shugart  80
Silicon Valley  111
Simonyi, Charles   166
Smith-Corona  71
SRI International  124
Stanford Research Institute  91
Stornowaye  18
Suchman, Lucy   87
Swedish economy  152
Swedish Royal Academy  152
Systems Dynamics Corporation  
30
T
Taylor, Bob   112
Teem, Cliff  36
Thoman, Richard   71
Toynbee, Arnold  131, 166
Tregub, Burt  28
U
Union Camp Company  151
University Microfilm  36
N
National Dairy Products Corpo-
ration  1
National Medal of Science  169
Nixdorf Computers  129
Nixdorf, Heinz   128
Noda, Toneo  159
O
O’Neill, Jim  53, 72
Office of the Future  79
Office Products Division  80
Other Equipment Manufacturers  
81
Overeynder, Bernard   64
P
Pake, George   112
Palevsky, Max  21
Paperless office  122
PARC  163
Peck, George  15
Pendery, Donald  81, 134
Pendery Papers  85
Perillo, Lou  22
Potter, Bob   91
Professional Library Services  36
Profit Impact of Market Strategies 
83
R
Rank-Xerox  19
Redactron  80
Reedy, Bill  4
Road Runner  98
178 paul strassmann
V
Versatec  80, 100
Vice-President of Planning  80
W
Wang Laboratories  92
Western Union International  80, 
101
Whalen, Ken  65
White, George   81
Winter, Tom  69
X
Xerox 820  93
Xerox 860  92
Xerox 6085  130
Xerox 9700  105
Xerox Computer Services  80, 102
Xerox Financial Services  130
Xerox Learning Systems  36
Xerox Operating System  41
Xerox STAR 8010  126
Z
Zarem, Abe  64
