_____________________________________________________________________________ 
This document contains information developed at the Asynchronous Research Center at Portland State 
University.  You may disclose this information to whomever you please.  You may reproduce this 
document for any not-for-profit purpose.  Reproduction for sale is strictly forbidden without written consent 
of the author.   Copies of the material must contain this notice.   
ARC# 2012-is15 
printed on July 11, 2012 at 11:22 
page 1 
 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
ASYNCHRONOUS RESEARCH CENTER 
Portland State University 
 
Subject: 
Keynote for the Vail Computer Elements Workshop 
Date: 
25 June 2012 
From: 
Ivan Sutherland 
ARC#: 
2012-is15 
 
The Tyranny of the Clock 
INTRODUCTION – STATIC ELECTRICITY 
I once experimented with a big CMOS power transistor. It was rated for about 
5 amps and about 20 volts. To try it out I used a car battery for power and a light bulb 
from an automobile brake light as a load. The big CMOS transistor served as a switch to 
turn the light bulb on or off. I left the gate terminal of the transistor unconnected. 
To turn the light on, I touched the positive terminal of the battery with one 
hand and the gate terminal of the transistor with my other hand. My body conducted 
positive charge to the gate, turning on the transistor and lighting the light. To my 
surprise, when I let go the light stayed on. The light would stay on for 15 seconds or so, 
but gradually drifted towards OFF as the static charge on the transistor gate gradually 
drained away. Touching the negative battery terminal and the gate turned the light out. 
This experiment shows vividly that a CMOS transistor is a voltage controlled 
current source. The CHARGE on the gate of a transistor controls the flow of current 
between its source and drain. Moreover, unless removed, the charge will remain in 
place for a relatively long time.  
Of course, this is the idea behind today!s common DRAM memories. We 
store tiny charges on tiny wires where they remain for a few milliseconds. By refreshing 
them often enough we can store enormous numbers of bits in a very small space. 
But logic designers tend to forget this important property of CMOS circuits. If 
you put a charge on a wire it will stay there, at least for a time that is very long 
compared to logic speeds. Moreover that charge will control the behavior of any 
transistor whose gate is attached to the wire. Instead, designers tend to think that only a 
flip-flop can store a bit of data. Only the electrical designers of DRAMs and CCDs 
regularly make good use of static electric charges. So remember: EVERY WIRE IS A 
POTENTIAL STORAGE ELEMENT. 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
ARC# 2012-is15 
ARC# 2012-is15 
printed on July 11, 2012 at 11:22 
page 2 
 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
WIRES CONSUME POWER 
Every wire is a storage element. What does it store? It stores electric charge. 
One may think that a logic circuit sets the voltage of its output terminal. NOT SO, it 
merely delivers current to the output terminal to either add or remove charge from that 
output wire. To add charge, the logic circuit draws current, and therefore energy, from 
the power supply just as my body took charge from the car battery. Some of the energy 
from the power supply remains stored on the output wire in the form of charge; some is 
lost in the transistors of the logic gate, just as the resistance of my arms consumed a 
tiny amount of energy. To remove charge, the logic circuit drains the charge from the 
wire, thus consuming all the energy stored on the wire and dissipating it as heat.  
Obviously it takes more energy to charge the greater capacitance of a longer 
wire than the smaller capacitance of a short one. In fact, the length of wire charged and 
discharged each second accounts for almost all of the energy the chip uses, and all that 
energy ends up as heat.  
WIRES ARE SLOW 
Designers, quite correctly, think of the charge on a “short” wire as spreading 
instantly throughout the wire. Even so, it takes time for the logic circuits to charge or 
discharge the wire and whatever may be connected to that wire. In well-designed 
circuits, the wires usually account for at least half of the delay. Novice designers often 
forget that their circuits must also put charge on the wire; the result is slow circuits. 
But electricity moves through “long” integrated circuit wires relatively slowly. 
Integrated circuit wires have both resistance and capacitance all along their length. I 
think of the charge put into a wire as spreading through the wire much as heat spreads 
through a metal bar; indeed, the equations are the same. Imagine yourself holding one 
end of a silver spoon while I heat the other end with a candle. Eventually you!ll get 
uncomfortable as your end heats up. The delay in a “long” integrated circuit wire grows 
as the square of the length of the wire rather than linearly. Boosters or repeaters at 
intervals along the wire can hasten delivery.  
WIRES COST MONEY 
Wires cost money because they account for more than half of the processing 
steps in a “logic” chip. Such a chip may have about a dozen layers of wire. The logic 
transistors hide underneath the wires. It!s the wires that set the size of the chip. The 
very regular wiring patterns of DRAM chips permit cost savings by using only two or 
three wiring layers.  
Wires cost design time because they must fit. After designing the logic, an 
abstract mathematical task, one then faces the geometric task of where to place the 
logic and how to route the wires. That task, called “place and route,” comes near the 
end of the chip design. It!s never pleasant, because it faces a little-recognized geometric 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
ARC# 2012-is15 
ARC# 2012-is15 
printed on July 11, 2012 at 11:22 
page 3 
 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
growth law: as the number of things to connect increases, not only does the number of 
wires increase, but also the average length of each wire increases. This is the same 
truth that creates traffic congestion in big cities but not in country towns.  
But it!s even worse for the integrated circuit designer, because he must place 
his wires in such a way that each and every signal arrives “on time” to meet the tyranny 
of the clock. Because the delay in each wire increases with the square of its length, the 
designer must put “repeaters” in longer wires, and that adds area, making the chip 
larger. My notion is that the layout of a modern chip is an impossible task; a few 
exceptions to that impossibility do actually reach production.  
Of course, these difficulties delay the schedule, and that costs money too.  
REVOLUTION – AKA PARADIGM SHIFT 
Like all tyranny, the tyranny of the clock stems from the range over which we 
choose to subject ourselves to the tyrant!s authority. “Revolution” is the word used for 
the behavior of a people fed up with political tyranny. Recall “Taxation without 
representation,” and “Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité.”  
“Paradigm Shift” is a way to escape from technical tyranny. The Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) is fond of seeking paradigm shifts, 
believing that their investment in high-risk, high-reward projects may lead to new ways 
of thinking about and solving problems. I thought you might like to see a “Paradigm 
Shift” right before your eyes. – Roll the film.  
I do love a good pun. But seriously, what is the real problem? It!s the tyranny 
of the clock. We impose that tyranny on ourselves by choosing to treat geometrically 
separated events as simultaneous. The “simultaneous” fiction helps designers think 
about complex concurrent tasks by dividing time into periods. It's the kind of help that 
students get from 55-minute class periods for scheduling classes. Is the 55-minute hour 
the right time increment for all teaching? The best class I ever took had a six-hour 
laboratory every Monday with lunch optional. Class periods are common because they 
make scheduling possible, not because they improve learning. 
I promote the idea that we let things happen at their own natural pace. I!ll start 
by describing one system I!m working on: MERGE SORT. I want to sort long lists of 
numbers as fast as I can deliver them to the sorter.  
I have found, empirically, that my logic takes about twice as long to decide 
which of two numbers is the larger than it takes to stream a data element to the sorter. 
In 90 nm CMOS, for example, I can make an on-chip network that will move data at 4 
GHz, or about 250 psec per data element, but comparison takes about 400 psec. Were I 
to use a clocked circuit, 250 psec would be a very fast clock indeed. Typical 90 nm 
chips run at 1 GHz or slower.  
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
ARC# 2012-is15 
ARC# 2012-is15 
printed on July 11, 2012 at 11:22 
page 4 
 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
Multiple comparator circuits are an obvious answer. But each comparison in a 
merge sort depends on the result of the previous comparison, so how can we do 
comparisons in parallel? 
My plan is to do some comparisons that might be useful “on speculation.” 
Instead of two comparison circuits, I suggest using four. The four circuits will compare 
the first two numbers in each list with the first two in the other list. Each comparison can 
start as soon as suitable data arrive. Only one of those comparisons produces an 
immediately useful answer, namely the one comparing the first number from each list. 
The other comparisons may or may not prove useful. 
Choosing the first output advances one of the input lists. This renders useless 
the comparison of that element to the second member of the other list. Yes, we wasted 
that comparison, but we saved time because the next useful comparison got started 
before the choice was made. The next useful comparison is already half finished.  
Of course, it takes N*logN comparisons to sort N numbers. I propose to put 
logN of my comparison units in series so that I can sort N numbers in linear time. I!ll also 
need some local storage between stages to store the pairs of sorted lists that are inputs 
to each stage. The first comparator merges pairs of lists-of-one, producing sorted lists of 
two numbers each. The next stage merges pairs of lists-of-two, producing sorted lists of 
four numbers each, and so on. The intermediate storage holds the first output list and 
then feeds it on for comparison with the second output list. The final comparator merges 
a pair of lists-of-N/2 elements to produce the final sorted list of N elements. FIFO 
memories can form the intermediate storage.  
The total storage required is, of course, N values, because all N values must 
have entered the sorting system before the greatest of them can emerge. The latency of 
the system is (N) + (logN) because the final element can enter only after the preceding 
N-1 have entered and the final element must then pass through logN stages. A system 
to sort 1000 numbers, for example, takes only slightly longer than the time it takes to put 
the 1000 numbers into the sorter.  
Let us consider a fact about this sorter that I didn!t at first notice. Suppose the 
comparison time is T: how much speedup do we get by using four sorting circuits in 
parallel? It!s not a factor of four, because half of the steps are wasted. My first guess 
was that the time per element would be T/2. Surprisingly, the speedup turns out to be a 
bit more than a factor of 2. The reason is that we can abort the wasted comparisons 
before they complete, and so we waste less than half of the available comparison time.  
SOME LESSONS IN ASYNCHRONY 
Let us talk for a minute about self-timed First In First Out (FIFO) memories. 
Software people and many hardware designers think a FIFO has three parts: a block of 
addressable memory, a write pointer, and a read pointer. Here are some things such a 
FIFO must do: 1) Its read and write actions compete for memory cycles. 2) It must 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
ARC# 2012-is15 
ARC# 2012-is15 
printed on July 11, 2012 at 11:22 
page 5 
 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
resolve simultaneous read and write requests. 3) Binary pointer values count up or 
down. 4) A decoder converts binary pointer values into one-out-of-N signals to address 
the memory. 5) Data values flow from input to memory cells. And 6) data values flow 
from memory cells to output. Have I got all that right? It!s hard to design such a device 
and be sure it works correctly. 
Now let!s consider a self-timed FIFO. It has a series of storage locations 
through which data elements flow in sequence. There are no pointers. There is no 
decoder. There is no input vs. output contention: input and output are entirely 
concurrent.  
The algorithm for such a FIFO is trivial. It!s essentially the behavior I would 
have in a bucket brigade. I can act only if I have no bucket and my predecessor proffers 
me his bucket. When I act I do three things, 1) I capture the bucket of water, 2) I empty 
my predecessor!s hands, and 3) I proffer the bucket to my successor. This is the basic 
pipeline equation. The algorithm requires only one single AND function to detect when 
to act and enough amplification to do the necessary actions.  
My predecessor must be FULL and I must be EMPTY for me to accept fresh 
data. It!s incredibly simple. Maybe we!ll do a KLA at this point. 
The important thing is to know the difference between FULL and EMPTY. The 
circuits we promote at the ARC use a single wire to “remember” this essential piece of 
state. Not surprisingly we call it a “state wire.” A circuit we call GasP acts when it 
detects the FULL and EMPTY state of its two adjacent state wires. When it acts it does 
exactly the three things I mentioned before. 1) It causes data latches to capture the 
data, 2) it drives the predecessor state wire, which was FULL, to the EMPTY state, and 
3) it drives the successor state wire, which was EMPTY, to FULL. Notice that this FIFO 
requires N+1 wires to carry N bits of data plus their FULL or EMPTY state.  
Another way of looking at a GasP circuit is that it!s part of a ring oscillator. 
Everybody knows that three or five, or any larger odd number, of CMOS inverters in a 
ring will oscillate. The AND logic in the GasP circuit couples adjacent rings to coordinate 
their actions. The state wires remember the state of a partial oscillation for later 
completion. All self-timed circuits use the interrupted actions of coupled ring oscillators.  
GasP circuits take the unusual step of driving each state wire from both ends. 
Remember that the wire itself is the storage. I like the “HI is FULL” convention. With this 
convention, each GasP circuit drives its output state wire HI and its input state wire LO. 
Each state wire is driven HI at its input end and LO at its output end. We take care to 
avoid ever driving both directions at once. That!s made easy by the simple fact that an 
AND function is always quicker turning off than it is turning on. A small “keeper” circuit 
prevents the charge on the state wire from gradually leaking away. 
Our preferred GasP circuits run at the speed of a five-inverter ring oscillator. 
In 90nm technology that!s about 4 GHz. We use a form we call 6/4 GasP that has 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
ARC# 2012-is15 
ARC# 2012-is15 
printed on July 11, 2012 at 11:22 
page 6 
 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
forward latency of 6 gate delays and reverse latency of 4 gate delays. We choose to 
make forward latency greater than reverse latency because copying data forward is a 
real action whereas moving an empty space backwards changes only a state wire. The 
sum of forward and reverse latency is cycle time. We choose cycle time to be 10, the 
cycle time of a five-inverter ring oscillator. GasP circuits with a cycle time of 10 are 
possible with forward and reverse latencies of all values from 1 to 9; there are design 
cases where we might want to use another one of these over our default 6/4 GasP form.  
MORE CONSERVATIVE LOGIC 
Those who prefer to drive wires from only one end use a different FULL and 
EMPTY protocol. They need two state wires rather than one, and so sending N bits 
requires N+2 wires. The sender signals the presence of data on a “forward” or “request” 
wire. The receiver signals acceptance of data on the “reverse” or “acknowledge” wire. 
Micropipelines, my 1988 Turing award paper, outlined a “two phase” or 
“transition” protocol for the request and acknowledge wires. Each transition of the 
request wire indicates the presence of a new data element. Up transitions have exactly 
the same meaning as down transitions. That!s exactly what today is called “Double Data 
Rate” or DDR signaling. Today!s DDR protocols with source clocking are exactly what 
you get if you omit the acknowledge wires. The acknowledge wires provide a double 
data rate acceptance signal that permits self-timed operation.  
Because the request and acknowledge wires change just once for each data 
element, the state is FULL when the request and acknowledge differ in state and 
EMPTY when they match. The logic for a FIFO with this protocol is exactly the same as 
for GasP, but must first compute FULL or EMPTY from the two pairs of state wires. That 
requires an XOR gate that GasP can safely omit. Another form of asynchronous pipeline 
we use, called “Click,” includes the XOR gates and uses N+2 wires. Click circuits are 
readily implemented using only standard cell libraries. Indeed the inventors of Click 
intended their circuits to fit as easily as possible into standard design flows. One of 
them, Willem Mallon, now works with us in the ARC.  
Those who object to the transition signaling, double data rate, or two-phase 
protocols are free to use a four-phase protocol on the request and acknowledge wires. 
In the four-phase protocol, only rising transitions carry meaning; falling transitions are 
ignored. There!s been much literature devoted to how best to get rid of the meaningless 
falling transitions with the least increase in the complexity of the logic. 
CANOPY GRAPHS 
It is handy to think about asynchronous pipelines in terms of a “Canopy 
Graph.” The canopy graph is named after its tent-like shape. It plots throughput 
vertically and occupancy horizontally. We often measure pipeline circuits by making a 
racetrack ring pipeline and sending data elements around it like racecars.  
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
ARC# 2012-is15 
ARC# 2012-is15 
printed on July 11, 2012 at 11:22 
page 7 
 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
I was surprised to figure out that 6/4 GasP rings work with any number of 
stages, even or odd. Because I knew that a ring oscillator must have an odd number of 
stages, I initially made my GasP rings with an odd number of stages, just in case. Only 
later did I realize that 6/4 GasP rings with either even or odd numbers of stages work 
equally well. Moreover, one can easily initialize a 6/4 GasP ring with any number of data 
elements from none to its full capacity. Some other FIFO control circuits introduce 
protocol polarity issues that limit either the number of stages that can form a ring or the 
number of initially full elements such a ring can hold.  
Figure 1 shows measured and predicted canopy graphs for an 11-stage GasP 
ring pipeline. If the ring is empty, there!s no throughput. If the ring is entirely full, there!s 
likewise no throughput. A single data element, or one empty space, produces some 
throughput. Two data elements or two empty spaces provide twice as much throughput. 
Notice that this ring of 6/4 GasP elements gets more throughput from each vacancy 
than from each data element. The greater reverse throughput happens because 6/4 
GasP can move an empty space backwards in four time units but takes six time units to 
copy data forward. In between completely empty and completely full there!s an 
occupancy that achieves maximum throughput. Because bubbles move faster than 
data, maximum throughput for 6/4 GasP requires the pipeline to be about 60% full.  
GasP NETWORKS 
Building a pipeline network requires two special kinds of GasP modules: the 
addressable branch and the demand merge. The addressable branch GasP module has 
one input and two outputs. It sends data elements to the right or left according to an 
address bit carried with the data payload. I designed my addressable branch GasP 
module to run just as fast as an ordinary FIFO GasP module.  
The demand Merge module has two inputs and one output. Like a freeway 
merge, it applies the rule of “first-come-first-served” to the two incoming channels. The 
demand merge module requires arbitration because the two inputs might arrive “exactly” 
at the same time. I designed my demand merge GasP module to run at the same speed 
as an ordinary FIFO GasP module except in the very unlikely case of a near tie, which is 
slower. 
Figure 2 shows the canopy graph for two rings of 100 GasP stages each that 
share a 50-stage center section. The first stage of the center section is a demand merge 
module; the last stage of the center section is an addressable branch module. The two 
rings form a kind of infinity symbol; we named the test chip Infinity.  
Notice that Infinity!s canopy graph is flat on top. Usually a flat top indicates a 
slow stage, and suspicion naturally fell on my demand merge module. But it was a 
careful design and shouldn!t cause such trouble. Careful examination revealed that a 
few long wires are responsible for the flat top. Prasad Joshi, then a Master!s student at 
USC under Peter Beerel, back-annotated the long wire lengths to re-calculated the 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
ARC# 2012-is15 
ARC# 2012-is15 
printed on July 11, 2012 at 11:22 
page 8 
 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
logical effort of the driving GasP modules and was thus able to predict the delay 
variation observed by the chip experiment.  
COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE 
Why, you may ask, did I spend seven pages on preamble before getting to 
the important subject of computer architecture? I wanted to set the stage by saying what 
I know to be true: we can build outstandingly fast self-timed on-chip data networks. They 
can branch and they can merge in whatever patterns you choose. In effect, we have the 
elements of a self-timed freeway system for data. Data elements can travel though such 
a network like trucks on the freeways, carrying routing information with them. In 90 nm 
technology the throughput is about 4 billion data elements per second. Because forward 
latency is only 6/10 of cycle time, each data element reaches about 6.6 billion branch 
points per second. I take as a given that on-chip communication can be fast and flexible.  
The computer architect today is faced with the problem of how to fill a silicon 
chip with useful circuitry. The no-brainer choice is to replicate over and over what we 
already know how to build, namely a microprocessor core. This is called “multi-core.” I 
think multi-core is a bad idea. Why? 
For one thing we can!t run all those processors concurrently because running 
them together will melt the chip. For another thing, even if we could run them all at once, 
the chip lacks sufficient memory bandwidth to keep them all busy. And for a final thing, 
our software friends haven!t a clue about how to use five processors together, let alone 
50 or 100. The only good thing about multi-core is that step and repeat will fill the chip 
with circuitry – it!s truly a “no-brainer.”  
A recent paper by a Stanford group led by Horowitz points out an obvious 
truth: special purpose hardware can do computations faster and use less energy than 
general purpose hardware. One easy way to see “why” is that general-purpose 
hardware must “fetch the algorithm from memory.” General-purpose hardware must 
read software instructions to control its actions. Special purpose hardware has a 
narrower scope of capability, but avoids the energy and time cost of generality.  
My proposal is that we put relatively few general-purpose microprocessors on 
a chip. That will leave a big open space to fill. Let!s fill the remaining space with special 
purpose hardware. Now we can start the important discussion about which special 
purpose hardware to include. The machine will be very good at the things built into it, 
and no worse than a big multi-core chip at everything else.  
WHICH SPECIAL PURPOSE DEVICES 
It shouldn!t be hard to guess at the top ten special purpose choices. Graphics 
provides a rich set of algorithms that we already know how to build into silicon. Matrix 
arithmetic is a part of that, and again we know much that could be useful. I!m  going to 
spend my time talking about some less obvious choices. 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
ARC# 2012-is15 
ARC# 2012-is15 
printed on July 11, 2012 at 11:22 
page 9 
 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
Sorting is my prime candidate. I remember the old days when tape-to-tape 
sorting speed was an essential feature of many machines. I believe that a low-energy, 
high-speed sorting system could have major impact on many tasks. If sorting were fast 
and inexpensive, at least some “pointer chasing” tasks could be converted to sorting 
tasks. I!ve talked already about fast sorting. 
Crypto is another obvious candidate. Well-known algorithms could be built 
into the hardware – security should depend only on the key. Indeed, one might think of 
encrypting and decrypting as a routine part of memory access to minimize the time and 
area over which data and program are “in the clear.”  
Memory access is a rather less obvious choice. There have been several 
proposals to provide more indirection in memory access to facilitate garbage collection. 
How much energy could we save by checking memory accesses on a block-by-block 
rather than on a word-by-word basis? Array access mechanisms with stride and extent 
built into hardware could reduce software time and energy for the low level tasks 
required to step addresses through memory, to say nothing of relieving pressure on 
register space. Think of a special purpose memory access device able to execute your 
choice of a few different access patterns at little or no cost to software. 
Full-precision floating point is another option. Adding a million floating-point 
numbers accurately is difficult because the sum one computes may depend on the order 
of addition. A proper sum prevents a large value from overwhelming the contributions of 
many small values. Instead of sorting the numbers first, notice that the 11-bit exponent 
of a double-precision floating-point number is only 2048 positions. Double-precision 
floating-point numbers carry a 53-bit mantissa. Thus a fixed-point accumulator 
containing 2048 + 53 = 2101 bits can hold all double-precision floating-point values. 
Moreover, a 2101-bit accumulator is only a tiny part of a modern chip. It can add 
floating-point numbers with full precision by converting each to its fixed-point form 
before adding. The accumulator could use a carry-save form to conserve time and 
energy. Converting a sum back to floating-point notation will require carry resolution and 
normalization. If you allow me to do the easy cases fast and the harder cases more 
slowly, I!m sure I can produce any number of efficient ways to convert back to the 
standard floating-point form.  
SELF-TIMING AND COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE 
A notion of “data-absent” appears in many advanced programming 
languages. A String in Java can hold zero or more characters. A List of Names can 
have the type List<Name> and yet be empty. That!s a typed kind of emptiness. Yet the 
registers of my computer, r0 to r15, for example, have no concept of either type or 
emptiness. Might there be value in making “empty” a first class register value? 
I think so. For example empty registers might serve for communication. 
Suppose the machine instruction: add r0, r1 -> r2 finds r1 empty. Such an instruction 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
ARC# 2012-is15 
ARC# 2012-is15 
printed on July 11, 2012 at 11:22 
page 10 
 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
might stall until r1 gets a value. Because memory fetch takes so long, many score 
boarding schemes have a way to mark a register as “pending” until a value returns from 
memory. A similar approach might let programs communicate if one program could fill 
and another program could drain the register in question. 
Including EMPTY or FULL markers in a register is reminiscent of the FIFO 
discussion we shared earlier. Recall that a shared value that can be either EMPTY or 
FULL provides the essence of pipelining. I remind you that the UNIX pipe is one of the 
least painful forms of concurrency known to the programming world.  
A critical part of computer architecture is how to access a large register file 
with only a few bits of register address. Sparc uses “register windows” for just that 
purpose. Groups of registers form a stack with push and pop operations that bring 
different groups into play. Register windows allow a 5 bit register address to choose 
from more than 2**5 registers, albeit not all at the same time. 
Let us think of alternate register addressing schemes. Let us think of such 
schemes as providing virtual registers much as a memory map provides virtual memory. 
Such a scheme might map five-bit virtual register addresses into eight-bit real register 
addresses. Thought of as virtual addressing, would register windows be your scheme of 
choice? 
My scheme of choice would put a FIFO of registers at each register address. 
If each such FIFO were eight registers long, a five-bit register address, for instance, 
could access 2**5 FIFOs, each 8 registers long, for a total of 2**8 registers, albeit not all 
at once. Instructions accessing a FIFO would require extra bits to copy, consume or 
recirculate values from a FIFO. I note that a FIFO register is ideal for register renaming 
in loops.  
To implement FIFO registers requires a way to represent EMPTY or FULL. 
Such an architecture must offer a way to stall when attempting to write into a FULL 
FIFO or when attempting to read from an EMPTY FIFO. Such FIFO registers might be 
ideal for decoupling different phases of a software system, just as the UNIX pipe uses 
buffer memories to provide time independence to the piped processes. 
A FINAL WORD ABOUT ENERGY 
Clock gating is an important tool for reducing the energy consumption of a 
running computer. Clock gating avoids wasting energy on unnecessary clock signals to 
idle parts of the machine. Synchronous systems require elaborate logic to decide when 
to omit clock signals. 
The pipelines I!ve been talking about here offer clock gating for free. They 
produce only those timing signals necessary for copying. When data enter a 
communication channel, a state wire changes state to announce that the data are 
ready. If and only if latches can capture the data, a GasP circuit produces a suitable 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
ARC# 2012-is15 
ARC# 2012-is15 
printed on July 11, 2012 at 11:22 
page 11 
 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
timing signal that serves the role of a clock. Clock gating is truly free. Moreover, 
because we depend on timing only for local signals, clock skew is a non-problem.  
In our laboratory at Portland State University we!ve begun to explore another 
power-saving measure called “power gating.” Power gating avoids not only unnecessary 
energy consumption of unused clock signals, but also unnecessary energy loss to 
leakage of idle circuit elements. Power gating reduces the supply voltage to idle circuits 
to reduce their leakage and consequent energy loss. 
We!ve found power gating remarkably easy to implement in GasP. Power 
need be applied to a circuit only when it is in use OR in anticipation of impending use. 
That OR function is remarkably like the AND function already in each GasP module. 
Moreover, one of our students has simulations showing that the OR function and some 
additional drivers can turn power on before it!s needed. I love this idea because it's a 
remarkably simple solution to a problem that, at first, seemed hard.  
SIMPLICITY 
Simplicity is a necessary concomitant of reliability. Unfortunately some 
manufacturers think this too high a price to pay.  Sir C.A.R. (Tony) Hoare, KBE. 
The best Science and Engineering find simple answers. It has been my 
pleasure to observe close up the birth of a number of simple solutions. Here are five 
examples: 
1) Henri Gouraud noticed that simple linear shading could hide the edges of a 
polygonal surface from the human eye thus producing an illusion of smooth 
surface. This simple idea is the basis of his PhD thesis.  
2) Mark Raibert noticed that an automated pogo stick could use three entirely 
independent feedback systems to achieve stable operation. The first adds energy 
to keep the bouncing height constant. The second uses the hip joint during flight to 
ready the foot position for the next landing: placing the foot behind or in front of the 
balance point speeds or retards forward motion. The third uses the hip joint when 
the foot is on the ground to adjust the attitude of the body. Mark!s promotion to a 
tenured faculty position followed from the simplicity of this idea. 
3) I noticed a mathematical relationship between the complexity of a logic 
gate and its loss of ability as an electrical amplifier. I named this simple idea 
“Logical Effort.” Because doing logic and driving electrical loads are mathematically 
equivalent, one can easily choose transistor strengths for near-optimum 
performance. David Harris, Bob Sproull and I published a book on the subject. 
4) Scott Fairbanks and I noticed that self-timed pipelines require only a single 
AND function. We called the resulting circuit family GasP. Great performance 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
ARC# 2012-is15 
ARC# 2012-is15 
printed on July 11, 2012 at 11:22 
page 12 
 
An Asynchronous Research Center Document 
results from this simple observation because the Logical Effort of GasP circuits is 
very small.  
5) It now appears that power gating may yield to an equally simple solution. If 
so, we may be able easily to save energy in a variety of pipeline circuits.  
 
References: 
I. Sutherland. “The Tyranny of the Clock,” Remarks for the ACM Turing Centenary, Internal ARC Report 
ARC# 2012-is13, Portland State University, 16 June 2012. Available at: 
http://arc.cecs.pdx.edu/publications. 
 
ARC Films  – "Paradigm Shift.” Available at: http://arc.cecs.pdx.edu/publications. 
 
R. Hameed, W. Qadeer, M. Wachs, O. Azizi, A. Solomatnikov, B. Lee, S. Richardson, C. Kozyrakis, and 
M. Horowitz. “Understanding Sources of Inefficiency in General-Purpose Chips,” 
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 54, No. 10, pp.85-93, 2011.  
 
A. Peeters, F. te Beest, M. de Wit, and W. Mallon. “Click Elements: An Implementation Style for Data-
Driven Compilation,” Proceedings IEEE International Symposium on Asynchronous 
Circuits and Systems (ASYNC), pp. 3–14, 2010. 
I. Sutherland. "Micropipelines," Communications of the ACM, Vol. 32, No. 6, June 1989, pp. 720-738. 
 
P. Joshi, P. Beerel, M. Roncken, and I. Sutherland. “Timing Verification of GasP Asynchronous Circuits: 
Predicted Delay Variations Observed by Experiment.” In D. Dams, U. Hannemann, 
M. Steffen (Eds.) Willem-Paul de Roever Festschrift, LNCS 5930, pages 260-276. 
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2010. Available at: 
http://arc.cecs.pdx.edu/publications.  
 
I. Sutherland, R. Sproull, D. Harris. “Logical Effort: Designing Fast CMOS Circuits,” Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, Inc., 1999.  
 
September 18, 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slide  1 
Asynchronous Research Center!
Fleet, Inﬁnity & Marina!
Ring: Throughput vs Occupancy 
September 18, 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slide  2 
Asynchronous Research Center!
Fleet, Inﬁnity & Marina!
Infinity test 
M 
out 
in0 
in1 
B 
in 
out0 
out1 
M 
F 
I 
F 
O 
B 
F 
I 
F 
O 
F 
I 
F 
O 
Merge 
Data-directed Branch 
September 18, 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slide  3 
Asynchronous Research Center!
Fleet, Inﬁnity & Marina!
Infinity: Throughput vs Occupancy 
September 18, 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slide  4 
Asynchronous Research Center!
Fleet, Inﬁnity & Marina!
Dock: Throughput vs Occupancy 
1.0 volts (green), 0.4 volts (blue) and 2.95 volts (red & died) 
