THREE-DIMENSIONAL STRUCTURES were created by 8 com­
puter using programs developed by Gary Watkins, a graduate stu­
dent at tbe University of Utah. The simple "wire frame" version of 
the interlocking blocks (top left) is readily produced because no 
effort is made to remove hidden lines. By using special programs, 
however, the hidden lines can be identified and the structure can 
be displayed as a solid (top right). In this case the electron beam in 
the display tube generates surfaces by a raster technique, point by 
point and line by line; the entire process takes about a minute per 
image. To make pictures in color three different black-and-white 
images are created on the screen, one for each primary color, and 
then photographed through filters on color film. As the two pic­
tures at the bottom demonstrate, the computer program can also 
create highlights, as if the pictures were taken with a flashbulb. 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
COMPUTER DISPLAYS 
Pictures "painted" rapidly and accurately by an electron bean1 under 
computer control are helping designers and engineers at lTIany tasks. 
COlTIputer displays can also help to clarify con1plex physical phenomena 
W
hereas a microscope enables us 
to examine the structure of a 
subminiature world and a tele­
scope reveals the structure of the uni­
verse at large, a computer display en­
ables us to examine the structure of a 
man-made mathematical world simu­
lated entirely within an electronic mech­
anism. I think of a computer display 
as a window on Alice's Wonderland in 
which a programmer can depict either 
objects that obey well-known natural 
laws or purely imaginary objects that 
follow laws he has written into his pro­
gram. Through computer displays I have 
landed an airplane on the deck of a mov­
ing carrier, observed a nuclear particle 
hit a potential well, flown in a rocket at 
nearly the speed of light and watched a 
computer reveal its innermost workings. 
My interest for some years has been 
the programming of computers to draw 
pictures on the face of a cathode ray 
tube. Obviously computers can produce 
pictures in other ways, such as by means 
of mechanical plotters or by printing 
arrays of symbols, but because the essen­
tial problems in creating pictures by 
computer can be understood by con­
Sidering images produced by electron 
beams I shall ignore these other forms of 
output. I shall also ignore the kinds of 
computer-driven picture tubes that pre­
sent modest amounts of text at high 
speed in such places as airline terminals 
and brokerage offices; their operation is 
straightforward. 
Computer displays have become of 
major importance to two groups of peo­
ple. One group has a pictorial problem 
in the workaday world for which it 
would like computer help. These users, 
for example, may want to shape a metal 
paj·t on a computer-controlled machine 
tool; they begin by describing the part 
to a general-purpose computer, which 
by Ivan E. Sutherland 
draws a picture of the part and verifies 
that the description is accurate. Other 
users employ computers to produce the 
intricate high-resolution photographic 
masks required for making integrated 
electronic circuits [see bottom illustra­
tion on next two pages]. Similar pictorial 
problems in which computers can help 
arise in highway planning, automobile 
and aircraft deSign, topographical map­
ping, architecture, the layout of publi­
cations and the production of clothing 
patterns. In these and many more areas, 
written language is far from adequate. 
The other group using computer dis­
plays is interested in gaining insight into 
complex natural or mathematical phe­
nomena. These users simulate physical 
situations of various kinds in the com­
puter and use display devices to present 
the results of the simulation. For ex­
ample, an organic chemist II)ay want to 
synthesize 
a 
particular molecule; 
he 
creates a picture of the molecule on a dis­
play screen and then initiates a program 
by which the computer presents a selec­
tion of simpler molecules from which 
the desired substance can be synthesized 
[see illustrations on pages 72 and 73]. 
An engineer designing a communication 
circuit asks the computer for a graph 
showing how circuit response varies with 
frequency. A physician studying how 
blood flows through the arteries obtains 
a plot that reveals high vorticity at ex­
actly the locations where the lesions of 
atherosclerosis are most common. A 
physicist programs a computer to illus­
trate how elementary particles interact 
with their own electric fields to give his 
students some feeling for quantum-me­
chanical behavior. A circuit designer 
draws a circuit and asks a computer to 
simulate its operation and to plot its per­
formance in a graph of voltage and cur­
rent. A feedback theorist describes the 
location of poles and zeros on a com­
plex plane and watches as the computer 
plots the root locus. A mathematician en­
ters the equations for conformal map­
pings and observes the maps produced 
by each equation. A pilot practices take­
offs and landings on a simulated airfield 
that can assume any orientation on the 
display screen as he operates "controls" 
for engine power and aircraft attitude. 
All these people, interested in educating 
themselves or others, use computer dis­
plays as one of many tools for gaining 
deeper understanding of a problem. 
Two Kinds of Display 
Two broad classes of computer-dis­
play systems are now in common use: 
calligraphic displays and raster displays. 
Calligraphic displays "paint" the parts of 
a picture on the cathode ray tube in any 
sequence given by the computer. The 
electron beam in a calligraphic display 
is moved from place to place in a pattern 
that traces out the individual lines and 
characters that make up the picture. Ras­
ter displays make pictures in the same 
way that television sets do: the image is 
painted in a fixed sequence, usually from 
left to right and from top to bottom. The 
calligraphic display has the advantage 
that information to be displayed can be 
stored in computer memory in any order, 
whereas information for a raster display 
must first be sorted from top to bottom 
and from left to right so that it can be 
put on the screen in the correct se­
quence. On the other hand, the deflec­
tion amplifiers, deflection yokes and oth­
er electronic components needed for a 
raster display are much less costly than 
those required for a calligraphic display, 
not only because they need not be so 
carefully made but also because suitable 
components are now mass-produced. 
57 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
2 
3 
11 
12 
13 
,--
I 
, 
11 
I 
I 
I 
! 
'--
COMPUTER DESIGN OF "GREEK TEMPLE" demonstrates the 
versatility and speed of present·day graphic displays and computer 
programs. The sequence was photographed at the International 
Business Machines Research Laboratory; the computer was an 
IBM 1 130 with a 2250 display unit. The "draftsman" begins by ask· 
4 
5 
14 
15 
ing the computer to display three geometric solids selected from a 
library of shapes on file in a disk memory : a hexahedron, a cylin­
der and a triangular prism (1). The remaining operations are car­
ried out by pressing keys on an "interactive" console that can copy, 
move, rotate or distort anything placed on the screen. The drafts-
The task of sorting information from 
top to bottom and from left to right for 
presentation on raster displays has large­
ly precluded their use for anything but 
presentations of text. In principle, how­
ever, a raster display has the potential of 
producing pictures with a range of light 
and dark tones, in color if desired, that 
proVide a realism unequaled by the line 
drawings of a calligraphic display. The 
potential of this type of presentation can 
be seen in the pictures on page 56, which 
were made in our laboratory at the Uni­
versity of Utah by photographing a low­
speed simulation of a raster display. I 
shall describe later some recent algo-
rithms, or mathematical routines, for 
sorting picture information to eliminate 
hidden surfaces in making raster dis­
plays. I believe such displays will have 
become a common form of computer 
output within a very few years. 
The information to be projected on the 
face of a computer display tube is speci-
DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS exploits the flexibility and pre­
cision now provided by interactive computer displays. This sequence, 
photographed at Fairchild Semiconductor, was made with a Sanders dis­
play unit coupled to an IBM 1130 computer. The goal in this applica­
tion is to end up with photolithographic masks in which line patterns 
are located with an accuracy of 50 millionths of an inch. The resolution 
58 
of the display is defined by a coordinate grid of 1,024 lines and 
1,024 columns. The coordinates of the lines drawn on the face 
of the cathode ray tube are recorded magnetically and then 
used to control digitally driven machines that cut greatly en­
larged versions of the masks. Subsequently the masks are op­
tically reduced in size to the tiny dimensions characteristic of 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
6 
16 
7 
8 
17 
18 
man lengthens the cylinder (2) and rotates the three elements to a 
plan view (3). He then adds five more columns (4, 5, 6, 7). The dis· 
play is rotated (8) until the columns are viewed at eye level (9) . 
The hexahedron is then moved to a position below the columns 
(10) and widened (11). The emerging temple is rotated to a side 
9 
10 
19 
20 
view (12) and the hexahedron is lengthened until it becomes a 
floor slab (13). The prism is raised (14) and lengthened (15). 
Again the temple is rotated (16) and the prism is widened to form 
a roof (17), The finished temple is displayed from above (18). Back 
at ground level the viewer walks toward it (19) and enters (20). 
fied in terms of a coordinate system that 
covers the tube face. This coordinate sys­
tem can be thought of as a grid of points 
that covers the face of the tube even 
though the grid is not actually etched on 
the glass. The resolution of the display 
system can be specified by saying how 
many rows and columns of points there 
are in the coordinate system. Most mod­
ern display systems have a minimum res­
olution of 1,024 rows and 1,024 columns 
and a few systems have four times as 
many rows and columns. To specify a 
point on a 1,024-by-l,024 array requires 
that each x and y value contain 10 bi­
nary digits, or "bits" (210 = 1,024); to 
specify a point in a 4,096-by-4,096 array 
requires 12 bits for each coordinate. 
Higher resolution is not generally sought 
because it is difficult to maintain accu­
racy at higher resolutions and also be­
cause the diameter of the electron beam 
is so large that having higher deflection 
resolution improves the appearance of 
integrated circuits. This circuit will be 150 mils on a side and 
contain a total of 16 "cells" of seven different types. The pat· 
tern in frame 1 is a mask that specifies the location of metal 
interconnections in a logic cell containing 13 diodes and tran­
sistors. In designing the pattern the operator uses a light pen 
to indicate the two end points of a line segment and the dis· 
play program automatically completes the line. The pen is also used to 
move elements around. In this frame the ultimate cell is magnified 308 
diameters. In frame 2, at lower magnification (77 diameters) , a variety 
of cells are being summoned up from memory and are being moved into 
position with the help of grid points. In frame 3 the routing for one lev­
el of metal interconnections is being added. In frame 4 the job is done. 
59 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
the picture oniy slightly. Recently, how­
ever, workers at 'the Bell Telephone 
Laboratories have built a device that 
uses a very fine laser beam to produce 
computer-controlled film images with a 
resolution of 32,000 lines and 26,000 
columns. The device is being used to 
make high-resolution circuit masks [see 
top illustration on pages 66 and 67]. 
Although modern calligraphic displays 
have the ability to post dots, straight 
lines and text, the earliest display sys­
tems could post only individual dots on 
the screen. The computer specified the x 
and y coordinate for each dot to be 
posted. 
The coordinate specifications 
were converted from digital form to ana­
logue voltages, which were then ampli­
fied to drive the deflection system of the 
cathode ray tube [see top illustration on 
page 65]. After the transients in the con­
version process and the deflection sys­
tem had subsided, the electron beam 
was turned on for a microsecond or so to 
plot the indicated dot. Characters and 
lines could be built out of individual 
dots, bllt of course not very quickly. 
To speed up the process of drawing 
lines and characters, special analogue 
circuits have been developed that auto­
matically trace outlines on the screen in 
a continuous process. To post a charac­
ter the character-generator circuit pro­
duces a wave form for the x and y deflec­
tion systems and an associated pattern 
for turning the beam on and off; the two 
combined cause the character to appear 
[see bottom illustration on page 65]. To 
post a straight line on the screen, the 
analogue line generator will produce 
coordinated "ramp" wave forms for the 
x and y deflection systems so that the 
electron beam moves smoothly and con­
tinuously from one end of the straight 
line to the other. Modern display sys­
tems can produce characters in about 
five microseconds each and straight lines 
in three to 40 microseconds, depending 
on length. Some display systems include 
analogue equipment for producing sim­
ple curves, such as circles, automatically, 
but such facilities are still rare. 
To produce a straight line all the way 
across a display screen in 40 microsec­
onds is a prodigious feat of electrical 
engineering. The human eye has a re­
markable ability to detect even slight 
deviations from straightness. Moreover, 
if two lines are plotted end to end, any 
error in their length such as might be 
produced by overshooting or a failure of 
the electron beam to be turned on 
promptly will show up either as an over­
lap or as a gap in the lines. The lines 
must be traced not only straight but also 
at a constant rate because any change in 
the beam's rate of motion will show up 
as a change in the brightness of the line. 
To be sure, one can compensate for 
changes in the writing rate of the line by 
changing the electron-beam current, but 
such a compensation circuit must be ac­
curate or discrepancies will be visible. 
No display system that I know of is en-
tirely satisfactory in performance, and 
even the best need periodic tuning to 
keep operating well. Considering the 
difficulty of the task, it is amazing that 
the systems work at all. 
The Logic of Displays 
III addition to the analogue circuits for 
generating lines and characters, a com­
puter-display system must incorporate 
digital logic circuits to connect the dis­
play to the computer. Because the logic 
needed for this purpose often has char­
acteristics in common with the process­
ing unit of a computer, I have come 
to call these digital circuits the display 
processor. The display processor fetches 
information from a memory where the 
picture to be posted is defined and con­
verts it to the elementary driving Signals 
for the analogue circuits that generate 
lines and characters. 
The display processor interprets dif­
ferent formats of information in the 
memory to give them meaning in terms 
of the picture produced. For example, it 
may interpret sequences of characters to 
produce rows of text on the screen, or it 
may distinguish sequences of connected 
line segments from isolated line seg­
ments, in each case producing the in­
dividual commands required by 
the 
analogue line generator to yield the de­
sired picture. The display processor ac­
counts for more than half of the cost of 
many display systems and strongly af-
COMPUTER 
DIGITAL TO ANALOGUE 
CONVERTERS 
DEFLECTION 
AMPLIFIERS 
10-BIT BINARY 
X VALUE 
X-COORDINATE 
VOLTAGE 
TO DEFLECTION PLATES 
OR COILS 
CATHODE RAY 
TUBE 
10-BIT BINARY 
Y VALUE 
Y-COORDINATE 
VOLTAGE 
SYNCHRONIZING 
SIGNAL 
TIMING CIRCUITS 
COMPUTER DISPLAY EQUIPMENT consists basically of a dig. 
ital computer, which specifies the point·by·point coordinates of the 
desired display, together with circnits that convert the digital out· 
put into analogue form for deflecting the electron beam in a 
cathode ray tube. If the values of x and yare each specified by 10 
binary digits (O's and I's), the electron beam can be directed to any 
60 
INTENSIFICATION PULSE 
point in an array consisting of 1,024 lines (the y axis )  and 1,024 
points per line (the x axis\. With only the circuits shown here, the 
image on the screen would have to be built up from discrete points. 
More modern d,isplays include analogue function generators to 
sweep the electron beam in a continuous fashion to generate 
smooth lines, numbers, letters of the alphabet and special symbols. 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
The sun breaks through a winter overcast to light the undercast of the New York metropolis. 
. 
SCIENTIFIC
. 
The September Issue of AMERICAN 
wIll be devoted to 
the single topic of 
TECHNOLOGY AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
under the title of 
TI I EJ BIOSPI I EJ 
RYSZARO HOROWITZ 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
Every rent a car company wlll 
rent you a car. And that's where 
the comparison ends. 
There are about 15,000 places in this 
rent new Ford Torinos, Mustangs, Lincoln 
country where you can rent a car. 
Continentals, Mercury Cougars, and about 
They go from local guys with 
28 other kinds of cars, including convertibles, 
a handful of cars to 
station wagons, sports cars, and even trucks. 
national companies 
Most of these things help you when you 
with thousands. 
rent or return the car. But we've learned 
Some merely hand you 
that people can use a lot of help in between. 
the keys to a car. 
You can know where you want to go but 
Some, in comparison 
- not how to get there. So we give you 
to the ones who do 
We can rent you a car at over a 
state, city, and even airport maps 
nothing, do a lot. 
hundred airports you've never even heard of. 
on which we'll trace the 
But nobody else does everything Hertz does. 
best route. 
We know places where 
First, we make it easier to rent a car. 
If you don't 
you can ward off an attack 
We can have a car 
have a place 
of the midnight hungries. 
waiting for you in any of 
to stay or if you want 
over 100 countries, 
a good meal at an odd 
in practically 
hour, we can suggest 
every major 
a few places. 
airport, and 
We even wrote a 
in many that 
book for each of many 
aren't so 
U.S. cities that'll tell 
major. 
you everything you 
If you 
need to know about them. 
want to rent 
If you're on vacation, we have special 
a car in one 
rates for the United States, Canada, Hawaii, 
that take children and dogs. 
city and 
Europe, and practically anyplace else. 
drop it off in any of over 1500 others, we'll 
If you're not, we have commuter rates, 
arrange it for a small drop-off charge. 
airport rates, etc., etc. 
(In 50 U. S. cities and many overseas, there's 
Lastly, we rent you a Ford that's 
no drop-off charge. Ask us for details.) 
probably better maintained than the 
In a number of cities, we have 
/; 
car you left at home, a car that's 
the only office where you can rent a car or 
checked out, washed, 
return it at any hour of the day 
and serviced every time 
or night. 
it's rented. 
If you want to drive 
As you can tell, we're 
something other than a 
not just a place to rent a car. 
regular Ford Galaxie, 
We consider it our business 
ask for it when you make 
to help people travel as pain-
your reservation. You can 
We'll rent you a Ford your wife 
lessly as possible. 
might never dream of letting you own. 
Hertz 
You don't just rent a car. You rent a company. 
ClH[RT1' SYST(/oI.',,"C.,lS70 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
fects the programming techniques that 
must be used with the system. Moreover, 
not much 
progress 
has 
been 
made 
in standardizing the design of display 
processors. For these reasons prospective 
users must carefully weigh the character­
istics of competitive systems. 
For the past six or seven years my own 
professional interest has been in improv­
ing the design of display processors. My 
colleagues and I have designed or in­
fluenced the design of a series of dis­
play processors of increasing complexity. 
Although we know that the evolution of 
display-processor design is far from com­
plete, we have learned much about how 
the design of a display processor inter­
acts with the programming requirements 
for the display system. Like computer 
systems themselves, displays require a 
great deal of programming to make them 
useful; enlightened display-processor de­
sign simplifies the programming task. 
The 
objective 
of 
most 
computer­
graphics programs is easily stated: to 
represent objects of some kind and to 
provide a means for manipulating them. 
For example, if one is designing the mask 
for an integrated electronic circuit, the 
objects to be represented are the tran­
sistors, resistors, gates, wiring and other 
elementary components from which the 
circuit is to be built. In depicting an or­
ganic molecule the objects to be repre­
sented are the individual atoms of the 
molecule and the bonds between them. 
In each application the objects are repre­
sented in the memory of the computer in 
a format suitable to the application. For 
instance, it may be convenient to list the 
atoms one after another in a table, giving 
the type and the three-dimensional co­
ordinates for each atom. It may be con­
venient to represent the bonds by listin g 
each bond in a table with the index num­
bers of the two atoms it joins. Such a stor­
age format is conveFlient not only for dis­
play but also for the scientific programs 
that will manipula te this "data base." 
The data base for a computer-display 
application is utilized in many ways. If 
the user wants to change the program he 
is working on, he may give commands 
that cause the computer to change the 
data base by replacing, adding or delet­
ing information. Thus the user might add 
a new atom to his molecule. If he is ex­
plot'ing some line of thought, he may ask 
that computations be done on the data 
base. For example, the computer might 
compute the total weight of the molecule 
represented, or it might compute new co­
ordinates for the atoms corresponding to 
some quantum-mechanical law the user 
is trying to understand. Finally, the user 
will want to see some pictorial represen­
tation of the data base on his computer­
display system. It is important to note 
that the pictorial representation of the 
information in the data base is only one 
of many ways the information is used. 
The Data behind the Display 
The format of the information in the 
data base is not usually suitable for direct 
use by the display processor. The data 
base represents all the relevant facts 
about 
the 
objects 
being 
considered, 
whereas the display processor needs in­
formation about the particular appear­
ance of the objects. For instance, the 
data base may distinguish among dif­
ferent types of chemical bond, all of 
which look the same on the display. Or 
the data base may identify different 
kinds of atoms according to their atomic 
number, whereas in the display they are 
to be presented with a different code 
letter, such as C or H or N. The appear­
ance of the objects can be derived from 
the data base by a suitable program and 
stored for use by the display processor. 
The results of this computation form a 
"display file" [see bottom illustration on 
next page]. The display file is a second­
ary representation of the objects stored 
in the data base. 
Conversion of the information from 
the data base to the display file involves 
geometric computation, selection of the 
relevant information and expansion of 
compact notations into individual lines 
and characters for display. Thus the two­
dimensional 
coordinates 
required 
to 
make a perspective presentation of the 
molecule 
from 
a 
selected 
viewpoint 
might be computed from the three-di­
mensional coordinates known for each 
atom. If a magnified view of some por­
tion of the object is desired, it can be 
DOT-BY-DOT method of generating lines and characters was originally used in computer 
graphics. Newer analogue techniques are much faster and create cleaner images (see below)_ 
t 
>­
f­
(jj 
Z 
w 
f­
Z 
t 
>­
f-
(jj 
Z 
w 
f­
Z 
.----,---r-.--,--..,.---.,-------
TIM E ----;:0. 
TIM E ---;:,. 
-------
3 .... 
--------
'-
-------
...... " 
"\ 
--- ----..\ 
--'-___ ......J _ _____ 1 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 I 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
1 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
1 
X----7 
READY FOR 
NEXT CHARACTER 
t 
Y 
ANALOGUE CHARACTER GENERATOR produces separate wave forms for the x and y 
deflections of the electron beam, along with an on-off intensity pattern. Such display sys­
tems can write a character in a few microseconds and a page of text in several milliseconds. 
65 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
HIGH-RESOLUTION LASER BEAM produced this test pattern 
using a new computer-display technique developed by the Bell 
Telephone Laboratories. One-third of the 15-by-2 1-centimeter test 
pattern is reproduced here actual size. Normally the device is used 
to make masks for integrated circuits. Modulators and lenses con­
trol the fine beam of an argon laser, which is deflected to scan a 
photographic plate by a 10-sided mirror rotating on air bearings. 
The laser beam produces an image consisting of 32,000 scan lines 
with 26,000 image points per line. The accuracy of the beam can 
be controlled to better than one arc second, equivalent to a de­
viation of less than a third of an inch in a line a mile long. Not 
only is the device extraordinarily accurate but also it can produce 
provided by geometric scaling as the dis­
play file is prepared. Particular items of 
information in the data base can be 
selected for display or omitted entirely. 
For example, it may be desirable to omit 
from the picture all hydrogen atoms and 
all bonds connected to them so that the 
heavier part of the molecule can be seen 
more clearly. Finally, the compact nota-
tions of the data base can be expanded 
into appropriate symbols on the screen. 
Each atom might be converted into a 
circle with a letter in it; each bond might 
be converted into a pair of lines (in per­
spective, if that is desired). 
It has long been recognized that the 
dual representation commonly used in 
display applications-the data base and 
INPUT FROM KEYBOARDS, CONTROLS, DRAWING TABLETS, ETC. 
1 INPUT 
COMPUTATION 
PROGRAMS 
PROGRAMS 
DISPLAY FILE 
the display file-leads to a complex pro­
-gram. In many display systems the user 
can point to an object of interest on the 
screen by using a light pen, a device that 
identifies a specific point on the screen 
by producing a brief pulse when the 
electron beam sweeps past that point. 
This tells the computer that some object 
in the display file is to be changed. The 
CATHODE RAY TUBE 
DISPLAY-FILE 
GENERATOR 
PROGRAMS 
SIMPLE 
DISPLAY PROCESSOR 
OUTPUT PROGRAMS 
I 
I·I---) 
TO OTHER OUTPUT DEVICES 
. 
. 
(PRINTERS, PLOTTERS, 
_ 
_ 
MAGNETIC TAPE, ETC.) 
TYPICAL PROGRAM STRUCTURE for computer displays has 
the form shown here. Information about objects is stored in the 
data base. Information about the appearance of the objects is 
66 
stored in the display file. The actual appearance of the objects is 
specified by programs in the display-file generator. These programs 
perform geometric operations and expand the definition of objects. 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
(:)/lliilliii 
I I 
11111 11111 
11111 
11111 
+ 
I 
MI 
in 12 minutes a circuit mask that formerly 
took 12 hours of machine time. A portion of 
the test pattern is enlarged 10 diameters at 
the right. The effective resolution exceeds 40 
lines per millimeter, which is remarkable 
over a field measuring 15 by 21 centimeters. 
computer must somehow be able to re­
late each item in the display file to the 
item in the data base that caused it to 
appear. 
If, having identified the item in the 
data base, the computer is instructed to 
change it, the computer must then also 
change the relevant parts of the display 
file. If the display picture is to be kept up 
to date so that changes appear promptly 
after they are initiated, computation of 
the display file must be done quickly. 
Unfortunately 
general-purpose 
digital 
computers are not well suited to this kind 
of geometric computation. For all these 
reasons designers of display processors 
have begun to provide more computing 
capability in the display processor to en­
able it to interpret the data base directly, 
thus eliminating the need for a display 
file altogether [see illustration below]. If 
the design is successful, changes in the 
data base will instantly be reflected in 
the picture and an identification of a 
part of the picture will instantly identify 
the corresponding item in the data base. 
SpeCialized display processors deSigned 
to handle such graphical computations 
are now beginning to reach the market. 
An early innovation in display proc­
essors, now almost universal, provided 
them with the ability to display many 
symbols from a single symbol definition 
in memory. With this capability the 
display file can contain a single definition 
of a transistor symbol and several refer­
ences to that symbol's definition. For 
each reference the display processor 
fetches the individual lines of the symbol 
from the single definition and traces the 
transistor symbol again in a different po­
sition on the display screen [see "a" in 
illustration on page 79]. ObViously all 
coordinate information in the symbol is 
INPUT FROM KEYBOARDS, CONTROLS, DRAWING TABLETS, ETC. 
1 INPUT 
COMPUTATION 
PROGRAMS 
PROGRAMS 
DISPLAY 
PROCESSOR 
OUTPUT 
PROGRAMS 
CATHODE RAY 
TUBE 
TO OTHER OUTPUT DEVICES 
(PRINTERS, PLOTTERS 
MAGNETIC TAPE. ETC.) 
ADVANCED DISPLAY PROCESSOR eliminates the display file and display-file generator 
by prcviding more powerful computation and selection functions. This simplifies program­
ming by eliminating elaborate cross-references between the data base and the display file. 
One gift 
works many 
wonders 
Photo contributed by Harold Halma 
GIVE 
THE 
UNITED 
WAY 
Hel p work wonders for the 
poor, the sick, the aged, the 
young. Give them the hope, 
the health and the happi­
ness they might never have 
without you, 
Your fair share gift 
works many wonders 
THE UNITED 
(6) WAY *o 
27.5 million families benefit from child care, 
family service, youth guidance, health pro­
grams, disaster relief and services for the Armed 
Forces through 31,300 United Way agencies. 
67 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
2 
3 
4 
5 
RIDE IN "ROCKET CAR" down a "country road" was pro­
grammed by a group under Judah L_ Schwartz at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, which has found computer displays valu­
able in demonstrating abstruse physical phenomena_ The road is 
lined with telephone poles shaped like inverted L's_ The middle 
number under the picture shows the rocket's velocity as a decimal 
fraction of the velocity of light (the decimal point before the first 
digit is omitted). The number at bottom left of the screen is the 
number of telephone poles passed. The upper number at bottom 
right is the reading of clocks by the side of the road; the lower 
number shows the time aboard the rocket. The rocket-borne clock 
shows a lower cumulative reading than the roadside clocks do, 
stored with respect to the location of the 
symbol, and the location for the symbol 
must be established before the symbol 
definition is called on. This symbol capa­
bility in display processors is identical 
with the subroutine capability found in 
all general-purpose computers. Like the 
subroutine capability, it makes possible 
more compact coding because many 
symbols can be created from a single 
definition. 
Unfortunately including subroutine 
capability in the display processor tends 
to introduce new complexities in the dis­
play programming. A display processor 
capable of handling subroutines must 
remember during the execution of each 
subroutine the location of its call; if the 
display file is changed, such information 
may be lost. Moreover, the number of 
parameters that can be provided to dis­
play subroutines is generally limited to a 
simple indication of position. Symbols of 
different sizes must have different defi-
1 
1 
f, 
y
\ 
I 
\ \ 
2 
2 
nitions in the display file even though 
the size of an object may be represented 
in generalized form in the data base. The 
display file for a processor equipped for 
subroutining takes on a structure that 
may correspond in part, but not entirely, 
to the structure of the data base, and the 
display-programming system has to de­
cide when to call on this structure. The 
subroutining capabilities in the display 
processor prove most useful when the 
structure that the display processor can 
interpret is sufficiently rich to represent 
everything wanted in the data base. If 
the symbol parameters available in the 
subroutining capability cannot handle 
the variability of the symbols represent­
ed in the data base, it is often not worth 
the effort of using the subroutining capa­
bili ty a t all. 
The fact that information in display 
subroutines can be specified with respect 
to a symbol origin makes it possible to 
specify a position that is outside the 
3 
4 
3 
4 
I 
I I 
$ 
boundary of the display screen. Unfor­
tunately a capacity of only 10 or 12 
"bits" of information is usually provided 
in the memory registers that hold the 
screen coordinates. Thus if the displace­
ment of an image produces values that lie 
outside the screen, those values will be 
truncated to the required 10 or 12 bits by 
the removal of the most significant parts 
of the sum. 
The "Windowing" Problem 
The effect of such truncation is that 
the coordinate positions immediately 
beyond the right edge of the screen 
appear at the left edge of the screen, and 
the coordinate positions just above the 
top of the screen appear at the bottom of 
the screen. Symbols that overlap an edge 
of the screen will reappear at the op­
posite edge. Consequently if screen co­
ordinates are merely truncated to 10 or 
12 bits, the screen will appear to have 
5 
5 
QUANTUM·MECHANICAL SCATTERING, representing what 
happens when a particle of given energy meets a barrier, is de­
picted in these M.LT. computer displays. The particle is represent­
ed by a Gaussian curve, or wave packet, which is the probability 
distribution for finding a particle, such as a proton, in a given re-
gion of space. In the upper sequence the particle has only half the 
energy needed to pass through a square barrier. Nevertheless, at 
the peak of the collision (frames 5, 6) the wave packet penetrates 
the barrier, thereby indicating a finite probability for finding the 
particle in a region that should be inaccessible to it according to 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
6 
6 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
demonstrating the dilation of time experienced by objects (and 
observers) traveling at a large fraction of the velocity of light. As 
the rocket car accelerates, the telephone poles appear to bend over 
the road, as viewed by an observer in the car. Actually they are 
leaning away from the observer because the tops of the poles are 
farther away from him than the bottoms of the poles and thus light 
from the tops takes slightly longer to reach his eye. Therefore he 
sees the top of each pole at an earlier point in time, hence farther 
down the road, than the bottom of the pole. The horizontal memo 
bers atop the poles appear to rotate away from the observer and 
finally to bend down. This is a more complicated result of the 
special theory of relativity and was not put into computer program. 
the topology of a torus. The phenomenon 
is particularly annoying if one end of a 
short line moves off the edge of the 
screen only to reappear at the other edge. 
The line between such end points will 
cross the entire screen going in the wrong 
direction. 
The cures for these well-known dif­
ficulties all provide the display user with 
a drawing area much larger than the 
actual display screen. By one means or 
another the display hlbe is made to be­
have as if it were a window through 
which this much larger drawing can be 
seen. The computations involved in pro­
viding this illusion are called windowing. 
When properly provided, windowing 
seems to be a natural part of the way the 
display operates. Objects that move off 
the screen disappear smoothly at a well­
defined edge. Only when windowing is 
missing from a computer-display system 
is the absence of this feature immediate­
ly evident. 
7 
7 
There are two basic methods of win­
dowing. One method is to provide the 
display system with larger analogue de­
flection voltages than are needed for cov­
ering the screen itself and simply to 
blank out the beam anytime it is deflect­
ed beyond the edge of the screen. This 
procedure, although it is widely used, 
has the shortcoming that it places an 
additional burden of accuracy on the 
analogue deflection system and that it 
must of necessity operate slowly, since 
there is no way to speed up the beam 
when it is drawing parts of the picture 
outside the viewing area. The second 
method of windowing is to provide a 
mechanism to precompute digitally the 
actual coordinates of the part of the pic­
ture that should appear in the window. 
In this method the display tube is pro­
vided only with valid data and so does 
not waste time drawing invisible parts 
of pictures. This alternative, often called 
clipping, is widely programmed in soft-
8 
9 
8 
9 
ware for sophisticated computer-graph­
ics systems. 
Windowing is the most important of 
several kinds of geometric computation 
needed in preparing information for 
presentation on a display screen. Unfor­
tunately the programs required for win­
dowing in an ordinary general-purpose 
digital computer, even a big and fast one, 
can process only about 1,000 line seg­
ments per second. If additional compu­
tations are needed, for instance to pre­
sent a two-dimensional perspective view 
of a three-dimensional object, the opera­
tion takes substantially longer. Recently 
my colleagues and I have spent much 
time developing special display proces­
sors that overcome these delays by trans­
ferring the necessary computations to 
high-speed, special-purpose digital cir­
cuits. These processors make it easy to 
obtain 
rapid, 
dynamically 
changing 
views of three-dimensional objects [see 
top illustration on next two pages]. 
10 
10 
the pre·quantum·mechanical description of nature. Subsequently 
the packet is reflected and the probability distribution is flattened. 
In the lower sequence the energy of the wave packet is exactly 
equal to the barrier height. In classical physics the particle should 
lose all its energy on entering the barrier and remain there for· 
ever. In quantum physics a small probability packet gets tern· 
porarily trapped inside the barrier (frames 7,8, 9, 10) while most 
of the packet is reflected. In addition a small, flat packet is trans· 
mitted. This indicates the probability of a particle's "tunneling" 
through the barrier when the experiment is repeated many times. 
69 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
11 
DIG 
ElB 
wEJ DIG 
G B 
Q 0 
13 
TAKEOFF AND LANDING ON AIRCRAFT CARRIER have 
been simulated by the Evans & Sutherland Computer Corporation 
for the Naval Training Device Center. The display system used for 
this demonstration is installed at Bolt, Beranek and Newman Inc. 
It follows the design illustrated at the bottom of page 67, in which 
circuit hardware in the display processor replaces a "software" pro­
gram for handling information stored in the data base. Only such a 
14 
15 
system provides the computing speed needed for this kind of real­
time simulation in which two complex objects are moving rapidly 
in three·dimensional space. Frame 1 shows what the "pilot" sees 
looking down the deck before takeoff. Through a keyboard on the 
computer he can adjust the engine throttle and the attitude of the 
aircraft. At the left of the screen is a vertical line with a cross that 
indicates the aircraft's altitude. The two boxes at the bottom right 
I became involved in the development 
of such high-speed displays through 
a desire to present an observer with 
a simulated three-dimensional environ­
ment. My idea was very simple: Mount 
miniature cathode ray tubes on the user's 
head, one tube in front of each eye, so 
that the computer can control exactly 
what he sees. Measure the position of the 
user's head and compute a perspective 
picture appropriate to that viewing posi­
tion. As the user turns his head, the per­
spective picture should change just as if 
the object portrayed were really in the 
room with him. There is no need to mea­
sure his eye position because the picture 
presented on his glasses is not changed 
by the part of it on which he chooses to 
focus. 
Because 
the 
three-dimensional 
objects he sees -will appear to remain 
stationary in space as he moves around 
HEAD-MOUNTED DISPLAY at the University of Utah employs 
a display processor similar to that used for the aircraft carrier se­
quence. Two miniature cathode ray tubes are built into the goggles. 
A mechanical linkage tells the computer where the viewer is look­
ing at each instant. The display processor instantaneously supplies 
70 
the correct image for each head position. The viewer is free to look 
anywhere in a 300-degree circle and can look up and down through 
an angle of about 45 degrees. Two samples of what he sees are 
shown at the right. The objects grow larger or smaller and move 
with relation to one another as the observer moves around. 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
, 16 
8 
17 
18 
EJ B  
19 
EJ El  
0 8  BEl 
e a  
EJ ZI  
of the 8creen indicate the aircraft's compass heading (east at take· 
o ff )  and the direction to the carrier's superstructure. At bottom left 
are an artificial horizon and a rate·of·climb indicator. Frames 2 
through 7 show the aircraft moving down the deck and becoming 
airborne. The pilot sees the horizon tilt ( 8) as he banks to the left. 
In the next four displays ( 9, 10, 11, 12) the view from the left win· 
dow of the aircraft is shown on the left half of the screen while the 
view ahead appears on the right half. Ordinarily the two windows 
are on separate screens in their normal relation to the pilot. As the 
pilot continues to bank, the carrier disappears from the left win· 
dow and reappears in the front window (12, 13) . Still flying coun· 
terclockwise in a large circle, assisted by being able to see the car· 
rier's wake, the pilot lines up the carrier for his approach (14, 15, 
16, 17), and then finally levels off for a perfect landing (18, 19, 20 ) .  
them, an illusion that the objects are 
present in the room with the observer 
should be created. The equipment il­
lustrated at the bottom of the opposite 
page was designed to create this illusion. 
The head-mounted display does in­
deed provide the illusion of seeing three­
dimensional objects at identifiable loca­
tions in the user's environment. Because 
the objects presented are transparent and 
made of glowing lines essentially free of 
texture, no one is fooled into thinking 
they are real. On the other hand, even 
naive observers are able to identify the 
size of the objects portrayed and are able 
to move themselves into an appropriate 
viewing position to examine a particular 
feature of the objects portrayed. 
Logic of High·Speed Displays 
The significant thing about the head­
mounted display project is not the opera­
tional results but rather that it forced us 
to think carefully about the problems of 
presenting a real-time perspective pic­
ture. vVe needed a solution to the win­
dowing problem in three dimensions be­
cause as the user turns his head away 
from objects they move out of the field 
of .view provided by the optical system. 
If the objects are to move smoothly out 
of view, the correct end points for the 
parts still in view must be very rapidly 
computed, and prompt decisions must be 
made in order to omit parts that are 
entirely out of view. Since no general­
purpose digital computer is capable of 
doing these computations fast enough to 
present dynamic views of any but the 
most trivial objects, we were forced to 
design and build special-purpose equip­
ment to do rotation, windowing and 
perspective computation. Having a good 
solution to the windowing problem in 
three dimensions quickly led us to a solu­
tion in two dimensions for our latest de­
sign for a display processor. 
Computing a perspective picture of a 
"wire frame" three-dimensional object is 
really rather easy. The position of each 
part of the object on the screen is com­
puted by projecting the object onto the 
screen in straight lines [see top illustra­
tion on page 74J .  Fortunately straight 
lines in three-dimensional space project 
into straight lines on the screen. Thus the 
rotation and projection computations for 
each line segment need be done only for 
the ends of the line; the center parts of 
the line can be filled in by the two·di­
mensional analogue line generator. If 
windowing or clipping in three dimen­
sions is done before projection, the prob­
lems of dividing by a zero or a negative 
depth coordinate are avoided [see bot-
tom illustration on page 74J. The digital 
pi·ocessing equipment we developed for 
the head-mounted display project is able 
to accept information in three dimen­
sions, convert it to an appropriate view­
point and viewing direction and present 
valid display-screen coordinates to an 
ordinary line generator for drawing a 
perspective picture on the screen. 
vVe have found it particularly useful to 
have a display system in which a three­
dimensional computing engine is built 
into the display processor. In the first 
place, coordinate information for display 
can be in three dimensions instead of in 
two. Symbols can be scaled on the draw­
ing as well as merely being positioned, 
and three-dimensional symbols can be 
rotated to any desired angle with respect 
to other objects in the drawing. Since 
clipping is done in the display processor, 
the processor can accept the stored data 
to a resolution much finer than the actual 
resolution of the display itself. Such data 
can be regarded as a drawing on a huge 
piece of paper (a piece covering a square 
mile, say), any part of which, or all of 
which, can be presented on the display 
screen. For many applications such ca­
pabilities can eliminate the need for a 
display file altogether and so greatly sim­
plify the programming of the display. 
Again our hope is to operate the display 
7 1  
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
COMPUTER·AIDED CHEMICAL SYNTHESIS program was developed at Harvard Uni· 
versity by W. Todd Wipke under the direction of Elias J. Corey. The computer is supplied 
with a library of chemical compounds and chemical reactions, together with a program for 
manipulating this information. By interacting with the computer the chemist can select the 
most efficient way to synthesize a desired compound. The chemist starts his "conversation" 
with the computer by drawing the structure of the target molecule on a writing tablet. The 
tablet contains a coordinate grid that relays the position of the pen to the di splay screen. 
Here a molecule related to the target molecule appears on the screen at the left, while the 
screen at right displays a variety of chemical pathways to the target in the form of a "tree." 
The development of these displays is depicted in the pictures at bottom of these two pages. 
2 
3 
9 
11 
processor directly on the data base so 
that changes in the data base are iostant­
ly reflected in the display. 
To provide for flexibility in the format 
of the data bases, we have chosen four 
typical fOlms in which information com­
monly appears in applications [see il­
lustration on page 79]. In the first form 
a sequence of coordinate values is simply 
connected by a sequence of straight 
lines. This form is the common one for 
connecting data points on a graph. In the 
second form disjoint lines are repre­
sented by pairs of pointers that indicate 
the location of the coordinate data to 
be used for the end points. This format 
would be useful for representing the 
bonds in a molecule. The coordinates 
can be either two- or three-dimensional. 
The disjoint-line format is useful in a 
variety of pictOrial representations. 
The third fOlm is the simple sub­
routine, where standard format param­
eters for position, size and rotation are 
provided. For all fixed-geometry sym­
bols, such as those used in making 
circuit diagrams, this form is adequate. 
We have also 
designed 
the 
display 
processor so that it does not execute any 
subroutine that is entirely outside the 
viewing 
area. 
This 
provision 
greatly 
4 
12 
CHEMICAL SYNTHESIS PROBLEM i s  presented to a venerable 
PDP·l computer at Harvard by a chemist who uses a writing tablet 
to draw a picture of the molecule he wants to make. By frame 3 he 
has drawn the basic structure of a molecule with eight carbon 
atoms. He adds a double bond at the extreme right of the molecule 
( frame 4) , then bends the bond into the proper stereochemical con· 
figuration (5, 6 ) .  Addition of an oxygen atom ( 0 ) ,  a nitrogen atom 
(N) and another carbon atom ( indicated by the line projecting 
from the nitrogen ) completes the skeleton structure of the target 
molecule : longifolene ( 7). The computer is now asked to search 
for somewhat simpler compounds that can be converted to longi. 
folene in a single chemical step. The result of the search is shown 
by the tree in frame 8. Longifolene is designated by the 1 at the top 
of the tree; three related compounds, designated 2, 3 and 6, are 
72 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
13 
speeds up the display of magnified views 
of complex objects. Finally, complete 
subroutines are available for displaying 
objects that are similar in a non geometric 
way. For example, cross-hatched boxes 
can be defined by position, size and 
type of cross-hatching. Such boxes are 
not geometrically similar because the 
number of cross-hatch lines must be 
computed from the size of the box; 
moreover, the angle of the cross-hatch­
ing must be constant regardless of the 
size or orientation of the box. 
The Hidden-Surface Problem 
In spite of the advances that have 
been made in computer graphics in the 
past decade, most of the objects dis­
played are still in the form of line draw­
ings. It is difficult to present solid objects 
with to day's computer displays ; indeed, 
only half a dozen research installations 
even try. The preliminary efforts are 
nonetheless rewarding. The difficulty is 
in computing what parts of an object are 
visible from a given viewing position and 
what parts are not. If an object repre­
sented in three dimensions is to be 
rendered as being solid, some parts of 
the object must be able to obscure other 
6 
14 
parts hidden behind it. Many workers 
have tackled this "hidden-surface prob­
lem," and in the past few years several in­
teresting solutions have been developed. 
The effectiveness of a solution to the 
hidden-surface problem can best be de­
scribed in terms of the growth of the 
solution time with the complexity of 
the situation. Almost any method will 
work adequately with very simple situ­
ations, but because the computation 
time required by some methods grows 
with the square of the situation com­
plexity, much computation time may be 
required for complex situations. Four 
years ago I showed in Scientific Ameri­
can a computer-drawn picture of a solid 
object produced by Lawrence C. Rob­
erts, which was typical of the best then 
available [see "Computer Inputs and 
Outputs," by Ivan E. Sutherland; SCI­
ENTIFIC AMERICAN, September, 1966] . 
His program took 1.5 minutes to draw a 
picture containing 40 separate blocks 
from which hidden lines had been re­
moved; the computing time was roughly 
proportional to the square of the number 
of objects examined. Today general-pur­
pose computers of not much greater 
power can produce pictures such as 
those shown on page 56 in about a third 
7 
15 
of the time, and the growth law of these 
programs appears to be about N log N, 
where N is the number of objects. 
The traditional approach to the hid­
den-surface problem was to compare 
each object in the picture with every oth­
er object to see which was obscured. 
This procedure requires N - 1 compari­
sons for the first object, N - 2 for the 
second object, N - 3 for the third object, 
and so on, for a total of (N2 - N) -;- 2 
comparisons. Moreover, the computa­
tions must be executed in three dimen­
sions with high precision because they 
are done before projection onto 
the 
screen. The new methods consider only 
the task of computing the picture rather 
than the task of comparing objects. If a 
picture of the television type is to be pro­
duced, there are, after all, only some 
250,000 points on the television screen at 
which intensities can be displayed. Why 
bother to compute to any better preci­
sion than that? 
The most elegant, although perhaps 
not the fastest, algorithm to date is one 
invented by John Warnock of the Uni­
versity of Utah and somewhat embel­
lished by others 
(including 
myself). 
·Warnock's algorithm concentrates on 
computing 
shades 
for 
parts 
of 
the 
8 
16 
I rnH¶-
t 
1 1- 1- f 
OUTPUT 
STRUCTURE 
ItlDE:.' 
w 
x I\  
" " ,z, " " ' " 
listed at the ends of the hranches of the tree. The chemist asks to 
see the structures of these three molecules and they are presented 
to him iu frames 9, 10 and 11, together with coded information at 
the left of the screen that descrihes the chemical reaction that will 
convert each to longifolene. The computer also evaluates each reac· 
tion and assigns a priority, or preference. The computer is then 
asked to find related compounds that can he converted into com· 
pound No. 3. While the search proceeds the computer can be asked 
what it is "thinking." The words "Computing" (frame 12) and 
"Pair matches ?" (frame 1 3 )  appear on the screen. The last remark 
indicates the computer is puzzled whether a particular molecular 
structure is identical with another one. Two routes to compound 
No. 3 appear in frame 14 and five routes to compound No. 2 ap­
pear in frame 15. In the last frame the search is carried still deeper. 
73 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
y 
x 
X' _ X' D  
s - Z' 
Y' -Į 
s -
Z' 
PERSPECTIVE PROJECTION for a computer display is obtained by placing the origin of 
the coordinate system at the observer's eye. The projection of all points on the screen is 
then readily computed from the geometry of similar triangles. The diagram shows how the 
two end points, 1 and 2, of an arrow are projected to the points ls and 2s' The first equa· 
tion states that Xs is to x as the distance to the screen, D, is to z. Other dimensions are ob· 
tained similarly. Objects extending beyond the screen must be "clipped," as shown below. 
o 
y 
p 
o 
R 
"CLIPPING," OR "WINDOWING," PROBLEM arises when objects in real space extend 
beyond the limits of the screen or lie behind the observer. In the latter case ( top ) z has a 
negative value. Although the equations are correct for such points, the result would be to 
project the object upside down. The problem can be avoided ( bottom ) if all lines are first 
clipped off at planes defined by the edges of the screen. If one applied the usual equati?ns 
to the point P, a numerical overflow would result. Point R in the line RS would project to 
point R"', and points close to R would project upward on the screen. By proper windowing, 
or clipping, the line P'Q appears on the screen correctly as P"Q" and R'S appears as R"S". 
74 
screen , and also on computin g shades for 
as large an area as is possible at 0I1e time. 
I shall descrihe Warnock's algorithm in 
some detail not only because it sho\vs 
m uch ingenuity in the solution of a dif­
ficult problem in computer graphics but 
also because it utilizes a particularly ap­
pealing technique of computation. 
Data for Warnock's algorithm are de­
fined in terms of a collection of surfaces 
that form the objects to be shown. The 
simplest com putations result if these 
surfaces are planes bounded by straight 
lines, but the algorithm could be ap­
plied to more complex surfaces. Each 
surface is assigned a color and a shade, 
and each surface is considered to be 
opaque. Rotation and translation are 
used to get the surfaces into the ob­
server's coordinate system, and a per­
spective division is performed to posi­
tion the objects on the screen. Depth 
information is preserved through the 
perspective projection. 
vVarnock's program now breaks the 
screen up into a few subregions and ap­
plies a standard procedure to each one. 
The standard procedure is to sort all 
surfaces by x and y position to de­
termine whether they are entirely out­
side the subregion, surround it or par­
tially intersect it. This sorting is done by 
first considering gross measures of the 
surface's position (such as: Is its leftmost 
point to the right of the subregion?) and 
then considering, if necessary, the indi­
vidual edges of the surface. Obviously 
surfaces that are outside the subregion 
need not be considered further. The al­
gorithm then considers the surfaces that 
surround or intersect the region and at­
tempts to prove that certain of them are 
hidden by others. For example, if a sur­
rounding surface can be shown to be 
in front of all other surfaces throughout 
the region, all the other surfaces are 
eliminated and the program can shade 
the entire region according to the shade 
of that surface. If there is only a single 
edge in the subregion, perhaps the pro­
gram can fill in the appropriate pair of 
shades. 
The important thing about Warnock's 
algorithm is its response to a subregion 
in which the situation is too complicated 
to handle. In such cases the algorithm 
simply subdivides the subregion into 
smaller regions. The sorting task for a 
subdivided region is Simpler than it was 
for its predecessor because all surfaces 
that surrounded the predecessor will sur­
round any of its subdivisions, and all sur­
faces that were found to lie off to the 
side of the predecessor will also lie to the 
side of its subdivisions. Only those sur­
faces that partially intersected the prede-
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
Are you sure you're at the 
right address? 
Write: 
We bel i eve ca reer a dva ncement may depen d as much on b e i n g  
i n  t h e  r i ght p l a ce a t  t h e  r i g h t  t i m e  a s  it d o e s  on a b i l ity . I f  y o u  
a g ree , t h e n  n o w  ( wh i l e  there i s  l ots of summert i m e  f o r  m a k i n g  
a move ) y o u  shou l d  look i nto w h a t  is ha ppen i n g  at N C R . 
N C R  i s  now the second l a rgest company i n  the wor l d  i n  the 
computer systems b u s i ness - supp l y i n g  h a r dwa re and softwa re 
a n swers for a who l e  wor l d  fu l l  of expa n d i n g  ma rkets . But the 
more a n swers we work out , the more questions we sti r u p .  
That's why w e  a re sti l l  grow i n g  ra p i d l y . Why w e  need more 
e n g i neers , of a l l  degrees . M o re phys i c i sts , too . And softwa re 
peop l e .  That's why N C R  cou l d  be the ri ght p l ace -
a n d  n o w  the r i g ht t i m e - for you to a dvance your ca reer . 
I n  many pos itions you wou l d  be ha n d l i n g s i g n i f i ca nt l y  
more respons i b i l ity tha n y o u  d o  now , beca use o u r  e m p l oyees 
a dvance as fa st as they a re a b l e  to a ssume a d d itiona l duties . 
U n l ess you a re a bs o l ute l y  s u re you 're a t  the r i ght a ddress , 
te l l  u s  about your backgrou n d  a n d  ca reer objectives . 
T. F .  Wade, Executive a n d  Profes s i o n a l  P l acement 
The National Cash Reg i ster Com pa ny, Dept. S C - 6  
D ayto n ,  O h i o  45409 
We are an Equal O pportunity Employer M/F 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
Credit card fraud is now costing AI 
But therE 
• 
• 
stanng us rl# 
EWYO 
CREDI 
William 
20 West 
New Yor 
7-
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
lericans a record $200,000,000 a year. 
; a remedy 
"ht in the face. 
BANK 
CARD 
Field 
rd St. 
N. Y. 
The number of credi t  cards in 
Americans' wallets has zoomed to 
300,000,000. And the upsurge has 
been a bonanza for the swi ndler. 
Credi t cards are stolen from 
wallets,handbags,bureau drawers, 
and mailboxes. Some are thrown 
carelessly in trash baskets, and are 
found by scavengers uninhibited 
by scruples. 
E v e n  o r g a n i z e d  c r i m e  h a s  
gotten into the act. They have 
developed soph i s ti c a te d  tech· 
n iques of forgery, and organized 
a thriving black market, where 
the going rate for a credit card is 
over $50. 
Unless i t  provi des complete and 
positive iden tification, no credi t  
card is i m m u n e ,  n o  credi t-card 
holder free of the danger. 
Worst of all, the efforts by law 
en forcemen t and private agencies 
to stop the thievery have had little 
s uccess. The problem has been 
attacked by state and federal leg­
i s l a t ures. B u t  t h e  losses keep 
mounting. 
However, there is an answer. 
Of a l l  the m e t h o d s  devised t o  
keep credi t  cards o u t  o f  the 
hands of crimin als, none 
h a s  p r o v e n  as e f f e c ­
t i v e  as the Polaroid 
Portrai t ID System. 
It puts the owner's picture (in 
full color) and pertinent data on 
a single piece of film, and seals i t  
wi th a chemically bonded lami­
na tion . 
I t's almost impossible to alter 
it wi thout detection . 
As a result, few criminals would 
be foolish enough to try to use a 
Polaroid ID card. 
They can forge a signature, but 
not a face. 
Recen tly, there has been dra­
matic evidence of the degree of i ts 
secur i ty. One of the many bank­
ing insti t utions that have installed 
the Polaroid Portrai t  ID System 
gave their cardholders a guaran tee 
of complete and uncondi tional 
freedom from fi n ancial loss due 
to lost or stolen cards. No deduct­
ible; no limit based on date of 
notification ;  simply no loss a t  all. 
The Polaroid portrait ID card 
is made in a number of formats. 
So there's a style that suits just 
about any situation that calls for 
fast, posi tive iden tification. 
I f  you'd like more detailed in­
form a ti on, wri t e  to : Pol aroi d 
Corporation, Dept. 57- 1 90, Cam­
bridge, Mass. 02 1 39. 
We'll show you how to solve 
the problem in the s n a p  of a 
shutter. 
Polaroid® 
The Polaroid Portrait 
ID System. 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
SheH hug us if she could. 
M o re p re c i s e l y, s h e ' d  h u g  o u r  J o h n 
We l s h .  
O n e  of J o h n ' s  c u stomers m a n u fac­
tu res concrete stat u e s .  H e  casts t h e m  
i n  9 0 0  p o u n d  stee l m o l d s  w h i c h  m u st 
be c l ea n ed of res i d u a l  concrete with a 
hot m i n e ra l  acid afte r each cast i ng. 
Hot ac i d  c l e a n s  away concrete eas­
i l y. 50 eas i l y, that i f  l eft u n checked, it 
can also attack and pit the steel m o l d s .  
That's why J o h n ' s  customer was test i n g  
M A I NTM 3 3 5  a c i d  i n h i b i t o r - f o r  t h e  
safety, eco n o m y  a n d  p ro l o nged bath 
l i fe i t  prom i sed. But h e  d i d n 't expect to 
test i t  u n d e r  such severe cond i t i o n s .  
U s i n g  h i s  e l ectrica l l y  powered crane, 
h e  l owered o n e  of his m o l d s  i n t o  the 
h o t  m i n e r a l  a c i d .  A n d  t h e n  i t  h a p ­
pened . The power fa i l ed . 
W i t h  n o  power to l i ft t h e  m o l d  o u t  
of t h e  ac i d ,  J o h n 's customer was s u re i t  
wou l d  be corroded beyo n d u s e  by t h e  
t i m e  power was resto red . 
A n d  i t  w o u l d  h a v e  b e e n  t o o  i f  it 
were n ' t  fo r MA I N  3 3 5 .  Th i s  u n sched­
u l e d a c i d  e x p o s u re t e s t  p ro v e d  t h a t  
M A I N  3 3 5  e s t a b l i s h e s  a b a r r i e r  b e ­
tween the stee l m o l d  a n d  t h e  acid, p re­
ve n t i n g  corros i o n .  
J o h n  k n ew MA I N  3 3 5  cou l d  effec­
t i v e l y  i n h i b i t  a c i d  c o r ro s i o n  u n d e r  
n o r m a l  acid c l ea n i n g  co n d i t i o n s .  B u t  i t  
t o o k  h i s  c u s t o m e r ' s  p a r t i c u l a r  a c i d  
c l ean i n g  operat i o n  and a powe r fa i l u re 
to s u bsta n t i ate o u r  c l a i m s  that MA I N  
3 3 5  i s  effective even u n d e r  seve re a c i d  
expos u re co n d i t i o n s .  
Th i s  MA I N  3 3 5  s u ccess i s  o n l y  o n e  
exam p l e  o f  t h e  way Ab bott C h e m i c a l s  
w o r k s  t o  h e l p  y o u  f i n d  so l u t i o n s  t o  
you r c h e m ical p ro b l e m s .  
O n e  o f  o u r  j o b s  a s  t h e  c h e m i c a l  
m a rket i n g  a r m  o f  Abbott Laborato ries 
is t o  f i n d  i n d u s t r i a l  a p p l i c a t i o n s  fo r 
m a n y  of t h e  1 0 0 0  c h e m i c a l s  A b b o tt 
syn t h es izes each year. 
To d o t h i s, we rely heavily o n  o u r  
peo p l e .  T h e  J o h n  We l s h e s  w h o  h e l p  
t h e i r c u stomers f i n d  s o l u t i o n s  t o  t h e i r 
c h e m ical p ro b l e m s .  Who fi nd new uses 
f o r o u r  e x i s t i n g  c h e m i c a l s .  W h o  
u n cove r n e w  a p p l i c at i o n s  fo r n ev e r­
befo re- u sed ch em icals. 
In th e p rocess, we've d eve l oped a 
series of eco n o m i ca l p o l y m e r  cata ly sts 
u sed in  m a n ufactu r i n g  u rethane foa m s .  
A 
better a n t i o x i d a n t/ s ta b i l izer f o r  
m i d d l e  d i sti l l ate fue l s . 
A nd  a spec i a l  p o l y m e r  catalyst fo r 
o v e r p r i n t  v a r n i s h e s  a n d  o t h e r  s p e ­
c i a l ty coat i ngs. 
H e l p i n g  s o l ve you r p ro b l e m s  i s  what 
our p ro d u ct deve l o p m e n t  i s  a l l  about. 
a
· 
N o rth Chicago, 1 1 1 . 60064 
Mon trea l ,  P. Q . ,  Canada 
Zurich, Switzerland 
Cro n u  I la, Austral i a  
B u e n o s  A i res, Argen t i n a  
Abbott Chem ical P rod u cts D i v i s i o n  
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
cessor region have to be considered in 
dealing with its successor regions. Thus 
the number of surfaces to be considered 
in each subregion becomes quite small 
as the area of the subregion decreases. 
If the situation in a subregion of the 
smallest possible size is too complex, the 
algorithm simply picks a shading rule 
from the nearest adjacent surface, be­
cause such a choice affects only a single 
point on the display screen. 
Many varieties of the Warnock algo­
rithm are possible, depending on how 
complex a situation the algorithm can 
handle without having to subdivide, and 
also on the method of subdivision. War­
nock's own programs always divided re­
gions into four equal parts and yielded 
an output only when the en tire square 
was the same shade. The subdivision of 
such an algorithm is shown in the illus­
tration at top left on page 8 1 .  A smarter 
display program, which avoids subdivi­
sion when there is only a single edge in 
view, will produce the subdivision pat­
tern shown in the adjacent illustration on 
the same page. This program, of course, 
requires slightly more time for the com­
putation of each square. Thus there is a 
trade-off between the complexity of the 
display program and the number of sub­
areas that need to be considered. We are 
currently investigating this trade-off sta­
tistically in an attempt to discover what 
kind of algorithm may be the best. 
The work of 
Gary 
vVatkins 
and 
Gordon Romney of the University of 
Utah has developed some interesting 
statistics about the pictures we are draw­
ing. The most Significant and surprising 
fact is that the sorting task in the hidden­
surface problem is not complicated in 
depth but is quite complicated laterally. 
The pictures shown in this article, al­
though complicated, are not very deep. 
That is, if you penetrate the picture with 
a ray at any particular position, you will 
hit fewer than 10 surfaces in all but spe­
cially contrived cases, and the average 
number of surfaces struck is more nearly 
three. We have concluded that the prob­
lem in producing hidden-surface pic­
tures of the type shown here is largely 
the problem of sorting the pictures in the 
x and y directions to discover those few 
surfaces for which a depth computation 
is required. 
Once the hidden-surface problem is 
solved, shading and color are relatively 
easy to introduce. The hidden-surface 
computation develops information to tell 
which surface is visible at each point on 
the screen. Since each surface in the 
computer includes a color, as well as oth­
er properties, the program can compute 
precisely 
what 
hue, 
saturation 
and 
a 
2 
c 
x ,  
X ,  
X ,  
I 
I 
I 
I 
J 
J 
J 
J 
I 
10 
3 
4 
1 2  
1 1  
4 
6 
2 
5 
Y, 
Y, 
Y, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
b 
8 
12 
9 
8 
CAPACITOR 
9 
6 
TRANSISTOR A 
IN MEMORY 
POSITION, ] 
SIZE, 
A 
CALL TRANSISTOR 
POSITION, 
SIZE, 
CALL CAPACITOR 
POSITION, 
SIZE, 
CALL TRA NSISTOR 
I 
I 
J 
10 
7 
8 
9 
IN MEMORY 
1 
2 
4 
4 
4 
5 
9 
1 1  
2 
3 
7 
8 
5 
6 
10 
12 
TRANSISTOR B 
TRANSISTOR 
SUBROUTINE 
1 
2 
2 
3 
4 
7 
4 
8 
4 
5 
6 
9 
10 
1 1  
1 2  
END 
CAPACITOR 
SUBROUTINE 
1 
3 
5 
7 
I 
J 
I 
I 
J 
J 
END 
2 
4 
6 
8 
2 
10 
2 
12 
5 
5 
6 
9 
6 
X ,  
Y, 
x ,  
Y ,  
X ,  
Y ,  
I 
I 
I 
J 
I 
I 
I 
J 
d 
-
A 
I 
• 
C 
B 
IN MEM ORY 
DO CROSSHATCH 
SUBROUTINE 
POSITION, ] A 
SIZE, 
HATCHING TYPE, 
POSITION, ] 
B 
SIZE , 
HATCHING TYPE, 
POSITION, ] 
C 
SIZE, 
HATCHING TYPE, 
REPRESENTATION OF OBJECTS IN DATA BASE takes four principle forms. Line seg­
ments can be represented either as strings of connected coordinates ( a )  or as sets of dis­
joint lines, each connecting two coordinates ( b ) .  Once such linear displays have been 
created they can be stored in the memory for recall at any future time. The representation 
at the upper left in b is the symbol for a transistor. If point No. 4 were shifted downward 
by changing Y4' all the lines terminating at No. 4 would be shifted simultaneously without, 
however, destroying the topology. Another common representation ( c )  stores symbols of 
fixed geometry, such as elements for designing circuits. These can be called to the screen, 
placed in any desired location and scaled to any size. The record in the memory will then 
list "Position," "Size" and a code for calling the subroutine that draws the device. If the 
device is a transistor, the subroutine might read like the sequence of numbers in b. A capac­
itor will be called by its own subroutine. Another representation scheme ( d )  defines a 
class of objects that are similar in some simple but non geometric way, such as hatched boxes. 
79 
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
BCZBNCB/SCDPB 
A high- speed d igital MODEM transce iver -- one o f  the smalle s t ,  lightes t ,  mos t  
versat i le i n  the defense c on:municat ions fie ld - - was .de l ivered to the U . S .  Ail:' 
Force recently by Hughe s .  
The 7 0 - lb .  MODEM (modulator -demodulator) , r e p lac e s  a 
current 2S0- lb. dev ic e .  
I t  transmits or rece ives 1200 or 2400 d igital b i t s  per 
s ec ond in a nɉrrow frequency range over norma l te lephone c ircu i t s , and will be 
u sed in conj unc t ion with military c omputers , teletypes , radars ,  and o ther s ens ors . 
Switzerland ' s c ompu ter iz ed air de fense sys tem -- built in Cali fornia by Hughe s 
but c ode -named "F lorida" by the Swi s s  - -
has been accep ted and put in ope ra t ion. 
It c ons i s t s  of several radar s tations that provide s imul taneous range , bearing , 
and height data to the high-speed Hughes computer , nerve center of the sys tem. 
Should a target be identified as an immed iate threa t ,  the c ommander c an r eque s t  
all-weather aircraf t or sur fac e - t o-air mi s s i le s  to intercep t and de s tr oy .  
New uses for lasers deve loped by Hughe s inc lude cutting c lo thing pat terns for 
Gene sc o ,  Inc . , Nashvi l le garment manufac turer ; pro totype of the c omputer-c on­
trol led system can cut d i fferent patterns s ing ly from a var iety of mater ial s  much 
fas ter than a blade • • • •  and trimming thick or thin f i lm r e s i s tors wi th a laser 
re s i s tor trimmer that can cut nichrome , gold , chromium, and tantalum f i lms as 
well as s tandard inks ; 
its s ingle Q - switched laser i s  split and d i s tribu ted to 
as many as f our individual ly c ontrol led trimming s tations . 
Three c us tom-des igned cal ibrat ion vans , fir s t  of their kind , have been del ivered 
to the U. S . Navy by Hughe s .  
The mob i le vans c onform to inters tate highway re­
quirements and· will be driven to the dock to calibrate the Pac i f ic f l ee t f s e lec ­
tronic and ordnanc e equ ipment - -
eliminating the pre sent expense of remov ing 
ship s · equipment to land -based labora t ories and s ubs tantially reduc ing d own- t ime . 
Current programs at Hughes Re search Laboratories inc lude! 
1) S tudy o f  the phy­
s ic s  and app licat ions o f  low-vol tage gas d ischarge s . 
2 )  S tudy o f  " d ouble s tream" 
p lasma ins tabi l i t ie s , noise gene rat i on in plasmas , and behavior o f  p lasmas in 
c ros s ed e lec tric and magnet ic f ie ld s . 
Phy s ic i s t s  or e lec t r ical engineers wi th 
experience in s o l i d - s tate microwave are needed . 
Acc redi ted degree and U. S .  
c i tizenship requ ired . 
P lease wr i te :  
Mr . A l  J .  S imone , Hughes Re search Labora­
torie s ,  Ma l ibu , California 902 6 5 . 
Hughe s  is an equal oppor tunity emp loye r . 
Mi l l ime ter wave frequenc ies --
which of fer gre at promise for fu ture spac e c om­
munic a t ions and data l inks 
-- wi ll be s tud ied in an experiment Hughes is bui ld ­
ing for NASA f s ATS -F s a te l l i te . 
Advantages inc l ud e :  
wide bandwid th , p lasma pene ­
t ra t ion , 
reduc ed spec trum c rowd ing , reduc ed s ize and we i gh t  of c omponents . 
The 
Hughes -bui l t  equipment for the exper iment inc ludes the mi l l ime t e r -wave tube . 
A new, al l - e lec tronic mas s  memory device deve loped by Hughe s promises to make 
c ompute r informat i on proc e s s ing fas ter ,  s imp le r ,  and more e f fic ien t .  
Trademarked 
DYNABIT , 
it s t ore s vas t quan t i t i e s  of informa t ion on magne t ic wire thinne r than a 
human hair . 
I t  has no moving par t s , c an wi ths tand severe env ironmental c ond i .. 
tions , and c an be adap ted to new or exi s t ing c omputer appl ica tions . 
Crealing a neW world wilh elecl(oniŶ 
r ---- - - - - - - - - - -----, 
I 
I 
! HUGHES ! 
L _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  J 
H U G H E S  ,A I R C R A F T  C O M PA N Y  
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
HIDDEN·SURFACE PROBLEM has been solved by special algo· 
rithms that answer the question : Which of several surfaces lies in 
front of all the others ? It is no trick, for example, to have a com· 
puter draw transparent structures such as that shown at top left on 
page 56. The computer plots above represent algorithms for analyz· 
ing such a structure and removing hidden lines. The approach at 
the left, invented by John Warnock of the University of Utah, em· 
ploys an algorithm that systematically divides the screen into sub· 
regions (in this case units of four ) and applies a standard proce· 
dure to each one. All the surfaces that occur in a given subregion 
are sorted out and the subregion is divided, if necessary, to end up 
with only a single surface that lies in front of all others. The meth· 
od is described more fully in the text. A similar algorithm, which 
often proves faster, is represented at the right. It avoids subdivi· 
sion when only a single edge appears in any subregion. Improve· 
ments on these algorithms led to the "solid" fi gures on page 56. 
brightness to display. In the simplest pic­
tures the surface is simply displayed in 
its appropriate color. It is only slightly 
more difficult to compute the shade, or 
brightness level, based on a two-part re­
flectance property: one part for diffuse 
reflectance and the other for specular re-
flectance. The photographic output rou­
tines can also compensate for the color 
sensitivity of the film used in photo­
graphing the display, so that the result­
ing prints come out exactly as desired. 
As a surface of a given color becomes 
more nearly perpendicular to the observ-
er's line of sight, its specular reflectance 
dominates its diffuse reflectance and it 
becomes whiter as well as brighter. This 
effect can give objects a shiny appear­
ance if much specular reflection is in­
cluded, or a dull appearance if only the 
diffuse reflectance is used. 
BELL LABORATORIES EXPERIMENT illustrates how a photo. 
graph can be analyzed by computer and then redrawn with arbi· 
trary symbols. In this case the Greek letter "alpha" was used as a 
primary symbol to build up more complex patterns that range 
from very light to very dense in terms of average density per unit 
"cell." These cells were then assigned by a computer to match the 
point·by·point reflectivity of the photograph. Leon D. Harmon and 
Kenneth C. Knowlton did the experiment as a study in perception. 
8 1  
© 1970 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC
