-1-
SKEI'CHPAD, 
A MAN-MACHINE GRAPHICAL COMMUNICATION SYSl'EM 
by 
IVAN EDWARD SUTHERLAND 
B.S., Carnegie Institute of Technology 
(1959) 
M.S., California Institute of Technology 
(1960) 
SUEMITTED. m PARrIAL· FOLFILI.MENT OF THE 
REQUIREMENTS :FOR.THE ·DEGREE OF, 
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY 
at the 
MASSACHUSEI'I'S INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 
January, 1963 
Signa.ture of Author •••••••••• ~ .............................................. . 
Department of Electrical Engineering, January 7, 1963 
Certified by ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 
Thesis Supervisor 
Accepted by ••••••••••••••••••••••• , ... , ....... , e· •••••• e ....................... . 
Chairman, Departmental Committee on Graduate Students 
SKETCHPAD, A MAN-MACHINE GRAPHICAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEM 
by 
IVAN EDWARD SUTHERLAND 
Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering on. 
January 7, 1963, in partial fulfillment of the require-
ments for the degree of Doctor of. Philosophy. 
ABSTRACT 
-2-
The Sketchpad system uses drawing as a nove1 communication 
medium for a computer. 
The system contains input, output, ~nd 
computation programs which enable it to interpret information drawn 
directly on a computer display. 
It has been used to draw electrical, 
mechanical, SCientific, mathematical, and animated drawings; it is 
a general purpose system. 
Sketchpad has shown 'the most usefulness 
as an aid to the understanding of processes, such as the ~otion of 
linkages, which can be described with pictures. 
Sketchpad also makes 
it easy to draw highly repetitive or highly accurate drawings and to 
change drawings previously- drawn with it. The many drawings in this 
thesis were all made with Sketchpad. 
A Sketchpad user sketches directly on a co~uter display with a 
"light pen." The light pen is used both to position parts of the 
drawing on the display and to point to them to change them. 
A set of 
push buttons controls the changes to be made such as "erase," 9r 
"move." Except for legends, no written language is ~sed. 
Information sket.ched can include straight line segments and 
circle arcs. Arbitrary symbols may be defined from any collection of 
line segments, circle arcs, and previously defined symbols. 
A user 
, 
may define and use as many symbols as he wishes. 
Any change in the 
definition of a symbol is'at once,.seen wherever that symbol appears. 
Sketchpad stores exp1icit information about the topology of a 
drawing. 
If the user moves one vertex of a polygon, both adjacent 
sides will be moved. 
If the user moves a symb01, all lines attached 
to that symbol will automatically move to stay attached to it. The 
topological connections of the drawing are automatically indicated by 
the user as he sketches. 
Since Sketchpad is able to accept topologi-
cal information from a human being in a picture language perfectly 
natural to the human, it can be used as an inp¢. prograW:for :computation 
programs Which require topological data, e.g., circuit simulators. 
Sketchpad itself is able to move parts of the drawing around to 
meet new conditions which the user may apply to them. 
The user 
indicates conditions with the light pen and push buttons. 
For example, 
to make two lines parallel, he successively points to the lines with 
-3-
the light pen and presses a button. 
The conditions themselves are 
displayed on the drawing so that they may be erased or~hanged with 
the light pen language. 
Any combination of conditions can be defined 
as a composite condition and applied in one step_ 
It is easy to add entirely new types of conditions to Sketchpad's 
vocabulary. 
Since the conditions can involve anything computable, 
Sketchpad can b~ used for a very wide range of problems. 
For example, 
Sketchpad has been used to find the distribution of forces in the 
members of truss' bridges drawn. with it. 
Sketchpad drawings are stored in the computer in a specially 
designed "ring" structure. 
The ring structure features rapict pro-
cessing of topological information with no searching at all. The basic 
operations used in Sketchpad for manipulating the ring structure are 
described. 
Thesis Supervisor: Cla.ude E. Shannon 
Title: 
Donner Professor of Science 
-4-
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I am indebted to Professors Claude E. Shannon and Marvin Minsky 
for their help and advice throughout the course of this research. 
Their helpful suggestions at several critical times gave Sketchpad 
much of its present character. 
Special thanks are due to Professor SteVen) ;A.~". Cdons;',of:'the -; 
Mechanical Engineering Department and to Douglas T. Boss of the 
Electronic Systems Laboratory. 
Even though I was outsiqe their 
Computer Aided Design group, they provided at least as unstintingly 
of their time and ideas as if I had been their only concern. 
lowe a great debt to the MIT Lincoln Laboratory for tne tre-
mendous sUl>port it afforded me. 
I wish to thank Wesley A. Clark and 
\ 
Jack L. MitchelJ.for making theTX-2 computer available to me and 
for providing help to make the special equipment I needed. 
I 
appreciate the helpful suggestions and interest that they and all the 
members of GroUl> 51 provided. 
Special thanks are due Leonard M. 
Hantman for the'- additions he made to Sketchpad. 
The Research Laboratory of Electronics at MIT provided me with 
office space and congenial office mates whose discussion and interest 
I greatly ~ppreciate. 
Finally, I wish to thank Lawrence G. Roberts who was a constant 
source ,of answers to specific questions I had both about the best 
ways to program TK-2 and about the mathematic,S of difference equations 
and matrix manipulations. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Abstract 
•• If •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 
Acknowledgements .................................................. 
Table of Contents 
List of Figures 
................................................. 
................................................... 
Introduction •••••••••••••.••••••••••••••••••••••••• 
History of Sketchpad ............................... 
Ring Struc~ure ••••.•..•••.••..••.••••...•...•..•••. 
Light Pen .. . ...................................... . 
Display Generation .• 
Recursive FUnctions ................................ 
Building a DraWing, The Copy Function 
Constraint Satis~ction ••••••• 
! ••••••••••••••••••••• 
Examples and Conc1usiops . ................. 
' ........ . 
-5-
2 
4 
5 
6 
8 
24" 
34 
54 
67 
87 
102 
110 
120 
Chapter I. 
Chapter II. 
Chapter III. 
Chapter IV. 
Chapter V. 
Chapter VI. 
Chapter VII. 
Chapter VIII. 
Chapter IX. 
Appendix A. 
Constraint Descriptions .•....•...••.••••........••. 141 
Glossary 
B. 
C. 
Push Button Controls 
Structure of Storage Blocks 
144 
147 
D. 
Ring Qperation MACRO Instructions •••••••.•••.•.•••. 152 
E. 
F. 
proposal for an Incr~~enta1 Curve Drawing Display 
Mathematics of Least Mean Square Fit . ............. . 
154 
161 
G. 
A Brief Description of TX-2 •.••••.•••••.••••••••••• 164 
.......................................................... 170 
Bibliography ...................................................... 175 
Biographical Note ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 176 
-6-
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 
Hexagonal Pattern o. 0 ••••••••• 0 
0 
• 
0 •• 0 
0 
• 
0 
• 
0 •• 0 ••••• 0 
• •• 10 
1.2. 
TX-2 Operating Area - Sketchpad in Use ••••••••••••••• 11 
Plotter Used with Sketchpad •••...•••.••••••••••••••.• 12 
1.4. 
Line and Circle Drawing •.•••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 14 
Illustrative Example ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 15 
1.6. Four Positions of Linkage •••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 20 
n andn on Same Lattice 
20 
Figure 3·1. 
N- COm:Ponent Elements ••••.••.••••••••••••••••••••••••• 36 
Basic Ring Structure 
o • 
0 •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 41 
Line Segment and End Points .......................... 43 
3.4. 
Zero and One Member Rings •••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 43 
Fresh Point Block 
0 
.. 0 0 ••• 0 •••••••••••••••••••••• 
46 
Compacting the Ring Structure . . . . . . . . . . . ........... 47 
Instances Generic Block •••••••••••••••••• 0 ••••••••••• 51 
Generic Structure .................................... 52 
Figure 4.1. 
Light Pen •• 0 
• 
0 
0 
0 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• ........................... 56 
4.2 .. 
Construction of Light Pen •••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 56 
4.3._ 
Predictive Pen Tracking •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 58 
4.4. 
Displays for Pen Tracking •••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 58 
Address in Display Register ••••••••••••••••••• 0" 
••••• 61 
4.6. 
Operation of Pseudo Pen Location ..•• 0 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• •• 61 
Figure 5.1. 
5.2. 
Figure 6.1. 
Figure 7.1. 
Figure 9.1. 
9.2. 
9.3. 
9.4. 
9.5. 
9.6. 
9.7. 
9.8. 
9.9. 
9.10. 
9.11. 
Figure E.1. 
E.2. 
E.3. 
-7-
~1nkled Display ••••••••• ' •••••••••••••••••••••••• ,.... ,69 
Coordinate Systems •••••••••• ~ •••••••••••••••••••••••• 
Display of Constrain~s ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 
Display of Scalar and, Digits, ......................... . 
Applying Two Constraints Indirectly to ~o Lines ••••• 
73 
84 
84 
94 
Definitions to Copy •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 106 
Zig - Zag for Delay Line ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 122 
BCD Encoder for Clock ..........................• 
~ .... 
Three Bar Linkage . , ................................. . 
Conic Drawing Linkage ................................ 
122 
125 
125 
Dimension Line s •• 0 ...... 0 ................ 0 • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• ".,. • 
• •• 128 
Truss Under Load ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 128 
Cantilever and Arch Bridges 
Winking Girl and Components, 
Girl Traced from Photograph 
· ........................ . 
· ... 
' ................... 
' .. . 
· ...... ~ .; ................ . 
131 
133 
134 
Girl with Features Changed ••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 135 
Circuit Diagrams ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 137 
DDA for Drawing Lines •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 155 
DDA for upright Conics ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 157 
DDA for the General Conic •••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 159 
Chapter I 
INTRODUCTION 
-8-
The Sketchpad system makes it possible for a man and a computer 
to converse rapidly through the medium of line drawings. Heretofore, 
most interaction between men and computers has been slowed down by the 
need to reduce all ~ommunication to written statements that can_be typed; 
in the past, we have been writing letters to rather than conferring with 
our computers. 
For many types of communication, such as describing the 
shape of a mechanical part or the connections of an electrical circuit, 
typed statements can prove cumbersome. The Sketchpad system, by 
eliminating typed statements (except for legends) in favor of line draw-
ings, opens up a new area of man-machine communication .. 
The decision actually to implement a drawing system reflected our 
feeling that knowledge of the facilities which would p~ove useful. 
could only be obtained by actually trying them. 
The decision actually 
to implement a drawing system did not mean, however, that brute force 
techniques were to be used to computerize ordinary. drafting tools; it 
was .implicit in the research nature of the work that simple new 
facilities should be discovered which, when implemented, should be use-
ful in a wide range of applications, preferably including some unforseen 
ones. It has turned out that the properties of a computer drawing are 
entirely different from a paper drawing not only because of the accuracy, 
ease of drawing~ and speed of erasing provided by the computer, but also 
primarily because of the ability to move drawing parts around on a computer 
drawing without the need to erase them. 
Had a working system not been 
developed, oUr thinking would have been too strongly influenced by a. 
lifetime of drawing on paper to discover many of the useful services 
-9-
that the computer can provide. 
As the work has progressed, several" simple and very widely applicable 
facilities have been discovered and implemented. 
Th~y provide a sub-
picture ~~pability for including arbitrary symbols on a drawing, a~­
straint capability for relating the parts of a drawing in any computable 
way, and a definition copying capability for building complex relation-
ships from combinations of simple atomic constraints.* When combined 
with the ability to point at picture parts given by the demonstrative 
lig:q.t pen language, the subpicture, constraint, and definition copying 
capabili ties produc~ a system of" extraordinary power. 
As was hoped at 
the outset, the system is useful in a wide range of applications, and un-
forseen uses are turning up. 
AN INTRODUCTORY EXAMPLE 
To understand what is possible with the system at present let us 
consider using it to draw the hexagonal pattern of Figure 1.1. We will 
issue specific commands with a set of push buttons, turn functions on and 
off with switches, indicate position information and point to existing 
drawing parts with the light pen, rotate and magnify picture parts by 
turning knobs, and observe the drawing on the display system. 
This 
1 
equipment as provided at Lincoln Laboratory's TX-2 computer is shown 
in Figure 1.2. When our drawing is complete it may be inked on paper, 
12 
as were all the drawings in the thesis, by the plotter 
shown in 
* 
Terms with specialized meanings are listed in the glossary at the 
very end of this thesis. 
FIGURE 1. 2. 
TX-2 OPERATING AREA -
SKETCHPAD IN USE. 
On the display can be seen part of a bridge 
similar to that of Figure 9.6. 
The Author is holding 
the Light pen. 
The push buttons used to control 
specific drawing fUnctions are on the box in front 
of the Author. 
Part of the bank of toggle switches 
can be seen behind the Author. 
The size and position 
of the part of the total picture seen on the display 
is obtained through the four black knobs just above 
the table. 
-11-
FIGURE 1.3. 
PLOTTER USED WITH .SKETCHPAD 
A digital and analog control system 
makes the plotter draw straight lines and 
circles either under direct control of 
the TX-2 or off-line from punched paper 
tape. 
-12-
-13-
Figure 103. It is our intent with this example to show what the computer 
can do to help us draw while leaving the details of how it performs its 
functions for the ch~pters which follow. 
If we point the light pen at the display system and press a button 
, . 
called "draw", the computer will construct a straight line segment* 
which stretches like a rubber band from the initial to the present 
location of the pen as shown in Figure 1040 
Additional presses of the 
button will produce additional lines until we have made six, enough for 
a single hexagon. 
To close the figure we return the light pen to near 
the end of the first line drawn where it will n lock on" to the end 
exactly. A sudden flick of the pen terminates drawing, leaving the 
closed irregular hexagon shown in Figure l ... 5A. 
To make the hexagon regluar,:we can inscribe it ,in a circle. 
To 
i 
draw the circle we place the light' pen where the center is to be and 
press the button "circle centertt, leaving behind a center point. 
Now, 
choosing a point on the circle (which fixes the radius~) we press the 
button "draw" again, this time getting a circle arc* whose length only is 
controlled by light pen position as shown in Figure 1 .. 4. 
Next we move the hexagon into the circle by pointing to a corner of 
, the hexagon and pressing the button "move It so that the corner follows 
*The terms "circle" and "line" may be used in place of "circle arc" and 
t1line segment" respectively since a full circle in Sketchpad is a circle 
arc of 360 or more degrees and no infinite line can be drawn. 
-, 
/ 
\ 
/' 
I 
I 
-14-
...... 
Ip~; 0; ~G~T~E~" 
, 
\ --
./ 
\ '-
,..., 
LINE 5EGMENT DRAWN ~ 
"-I 
I 
I 
/ 
\P~~ ~F :~GHT ~EN 
-~ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
I 
I 
5 TART DRA \I -----.\ 
. CIRCLE CENTER /' 
ARC OB1 A I NED----J 
TERM I NATE ----[ 
" 
FIGURE 1.4. 
LINE AND CIRCLE DRAWING 
/ 
-15-
A. SIX 51DED FIGURE 
B. TO BE INSCRIBED IN C1RCLE 
C. BY MOVING EACH CORNER 
O. ON TO CIRCLE 
E. MAKE S10E5 EQUAL 
F. ERASE tlRCLE 
G. CALL 7 HEXAGONS 
H. JOIN CORNERS 
FIGURE 1.5. I LLU5TRAT 1 VE EXAMPLE 
-16-
the light pen, stretching two rubber band line segments behind it. 
B.y 
pointing to the circle and giving the termination flick we indicate that 
the corner is to lie on the circle. Each corner is in this way moved 
onto the circle at roughly equal spacing around it as shown in Figure 1.5D. 
We have indicated that the ~ertices of the hexagon are to lie on the 
circle, and they will remain on the circle throughout our further 
manipulations. If we also insist that the sides of the hexagon be of 
equal length, a regular hexagon will be constructed. 
This we can do 
by pointing to one side and pressing the "copy" button, and then to 
another side and giving the termination flick. 
The button in this case 
copies a definition of equal length lines and applies it to the lines 
indicated. 
We have said, in eff'ect, make ~ 
line equal in length to 
that line. 
We indicate that all six lines are equal in length by five 
such statements. 
The computer satisfies all existing conditions (if it 
is possible) whenever we turn on a toggle switch. 
This done, we have a 
complete regular hexagon inscribed~in a circle. 
We can erase the entire 
circle by pointing to any part of it and pressing the "delete If button. 
The completed hexagon is shown in Figure 1~5F. 
To make the hexagonal pattern of Figure 1.1 we wish to attach a 
large number of hexagons together by their corners, and so we designate 
the six corners of our hexagon as' a~tachment pOints by pointing to each 
and pressing aputton. 
We now file away the basic hexagon and begin 
---" 
work on a fresh -"sheet of paper" by changing a switch setting. 
On the 
new sheet we assemble, by p;ressing a button to create each hexagon as 
a subpicture, six hexagons 'around a central 'seventh in approximate 
position as shown in Fi~ure 1.5G. 
Subpictures may be pOSitioned, each 
in its entirety, with the light pen, rotated or scaled with the .knobs 
r 
-17-
and 'fixed in position by the pen flick termination signal; but their 
internal shape is fixed. 
By pointing to the corner of one hexagon, 
pressing a button, ,and then-pointing to the corner of another hexagon 
we can fasten those corners together, because these corners have been 
designated as attaChment points. If we attach, two corners of each outer 
hexagon to the appropriate corners of the inner hexagon, the seven are 
uniquely related, and the computer will reposition them as shown in 
( 
, 
Figure lo5H. 
An entire group of hexagons, once assembled, can be 
treated as a symbol. 
The entire group can be called up on another "sheet 
of paper" as a subpicture and assembled with other groups or with single 
hexagons to make a very large pattern. Using Figure 1.5H seven times 
we get the pattern of Figure 1010 
Constructing the pattern of Figure 
1.1 takes less than five minutes with the Sketchpad system. 
INTERPRETATION OF INTRODUCTORY EXAMPLE 
In the introducto~ example above we have seen how to draw lines 
and circles ,apd how to move existing parts' of the drawing around. 
We 
used the light pen both to position parts of the drawing and to point 
\ 
, 
' 
to existing parts. For examPle, we pointed to the circle to erase it, 
and while drawing the sixth line, we pointed to the 'end of the first 
line drawn to close the hexagon 0 
We also saw in action the very 
general subpicture, constraint, and definition copyillg capabilities 
of the system. 
Subpicture: 
The origin~l hexagon might just as well have been anyth;i.ng 
else: a picture of a transistor, a roller bearing, an air-
pl~ne wing, a letter,' or an entire figure for this repo~t. 
Any number of different symbols may be drawn, in terms,' of 
other simpler symbols if desired, and any symbol" maybe used 
as often as desired. 
C,ons:tr.aint: 
When we asked that the vertices of the hexagon lie on the 
circle we were ~aking use ofa basic relationship between 
picture parts that is built into the system. 
Basic rela-
tionships (atomic constraints) to make lines vertical, 
horizontal, parallel, or perpendicular; to make points 
li.e . on lines or circlesj to make symbols appear upright; 
vertically above one another or be of equal size; and to 
relate symbols to other.drawing parts such as points and 
lines have been included in the system. 
It· is so easy to 
program new constraint types that the set of atomic'con-
straints was expanded from five to the seventeen listed 
, , in Appendix A in a period of. about two days; specialized 
constraint types may be added as needed. 
Definition Copying: 
In the introductory example above we asked that the sides 
of the hexagon be equal in length by pressing a button 
while pointing to the side in question. 
Here we were using 
the definition copying capability of the system. 
Had we 
defined a composite operation such as to make two lines 
both p~rallel and equal in length, we could have applied 
it just as easily. 
The number of operations which can be 
defined from the basic constraints applied to various pic-
ture parts is almost unlimited. 
Useful new definitions 
are drawn regularly; they are as simple as horizontal lines 
and as complicated as dimension lines complete with arrow-
heads and a number whicb indicates the length of the line 
correctly. 
The definition, copying capability makes using 
the constraint capability easy. 
IMPLICATIONS OF INTRODUCTORY EXAMPLE 
As we have seen in the introductory example, 'drawing with 
-18-
the Sketchpad system is different from drawing with an ordinary pencil 
and paper. Most important of all, the Sketchpad drawing itself is 
entirely different from the trail of carbon left on a piece of paper. 
Information about how the drawing is tied together is stored in the 
computer as well as the information which gives'-;,the drawing its particular 
appearance. 
Since the drawing is tied together, it will keep a useful 
appearance even when parts of it are moved. 
For example, when we moved 
the corners of the hexagon onto the circle, the lines next to each corner 
-19-
were automatically moved so that the closed topology of the hexagon was 
preserved. Again, since we indicated that the corners of the hexagon 
were to lie on the circle they remained on the circle throughout our 
further manipulations. 
It is this ability to store information relating the parts of a 
drawing to each other that makes Sketchpad 'most useful. 
For example, the 
linkage shown in Figure 1.6 was drawn with Sketchpad in just a few 
minutes. 
Constraints were applied to the linkage to keep the length of 
its various members constant. 
Rotation of the short central link is 
supposed to move the left end of the dotted line vertically. Since 
exact information about the properties of the linkage has been stored in 
Sketchpad, it is possible to observe the motion of the entire linkage 
when the short central link is rotated. 
The value of the number in 
Figure 1.6 was constrained to indicate the length of the dotted line, 
comparing the actual motion with the vertical line at the right of the 
linkage. 
One can observe that for all positions of the linkage the 
length of the dotted line is constant, demonstrating that this is indeed 
a straight line linkage. 
Other examples of moving drawings made with 
Sketchpad may be found in the final chapter. 
As well as storing how the various parts of the drawing are related, 
Sketchpad stores the structure of the subpicture used. 
For example, the 
stor~e for the hexagonal pattern of Figure 1.1 indicates that this 
pattern is made of smaller patterns which are in tUrn made of smaller 
patterns which are composed of single hexagons. 
If the master he~agon 
is changed, the entire appearance of the hexagonal pattern will be 
,", chSJlged. 
The structure of the pattern will, of course, be the same. 
For 
example, if we change the basic hexagon into a semiCircle, the fish 
scale pattern shown in Figure 1.7 instantly res:ults. 
-20-
1081 
1081 
FIGURE 1.6. 
FOUR POSITIONS OF LINKAGE 
NUMBER SHOWS LENGTH OF DOTTED LINE 
FIGURE 1.1. 
1\ AND {\ ON SAME LATT ICE 
-21-
Since Sketchpad stores the structure of a drawing, a Sketchpad 
drawing explicitly indicates similarity of symbols. 
In an electrical 
drawing, for example, all transistor symbols are created from a single 
master transistor drawingo 
If same change to the basic transistor symbol 
\ 
is made, this change appears at once in all transistor symbols without 
further effort. Most important of all, the computer "knows" that a 
"transistor" is intended at that place in the circu~t. It has no need 
to interpret the collection of lines which we would easily recognize as 
a transistor symbol. 
Since Sketchpad stores the topology·of the draw-
ing as we saw in closing the hexagon, one indicates both what a circuit 
looks like and its electrical connections when one draws ·it with 
Sketchpad. 
One can see.that the circuit connections are stored because 
moving a component automatically moves any wiring on that .component 
to maintain the correct connections. Sketchpad circuit drawings will soon 
be used. as inputs for a circuit simulator. 
Having drawn· a circuit one will_ 
find out its electrical propert~es. 
SKETCH.PAD ANI;> THE DESIGN PROCESS 
Construction of a drawing with Sketchpad is itself a model of 
the design process. 
The locations of the points and lines of the draw-
ing model the variables of a design, and the goemetric constraints ·applied 
to the points and lines of the drawing model the design constraints 
which limit the values of· design variables. 
The ability of Sketchpad 
to satisfy the geometric constraints applied to the parts.of a drawing 
models the ability of a good designer to satisfy all the design· conditions 
imposed by the·limitations of his material~, cost, etc. 
In fact, since 
designers in many fields produce nothing themselves but a drawing of a 
part·,. design conditions may well be thought of as applying: to "the 
-22-
drawing of a part rather than to the part itself. If such design con-
d1tions were added to :Sketchpad's vocabulary of constraints the cam-
puter could assist a user not only in arriving at a nice looking draw-
ing, but also in arriving at a sound design. 
PRESENT USEFULNESS 
At the outset of the research no one had ever drawn engineering 
drawings directly on a computer display with nearly the facility now 
possible, and consequently no one knew what it would be like. 
We have 
now accumulated about a hundred hours of experience actually making 
drawings with a working system. 
As is shown in the final chapter, 
application of computer drawing techniques to a variety of problems has 
been made. 
As more and more applications have been made it has become 
clear that the properties of Sketchpad drawings make them most useful 
in four broad areas: 
For Making Small Changes to Existing Drawings: 
Each time a drawing is made, a description of that drawing 
is stored in the computer in a form that is readily trans-
ferred to magnetic tape. 
Thus, as time passes, a library 
of drawings will develop, parts of which may be used. .in other 
drawings at only a fraction of the investment of time that 
was put into the original drawing. 
Since a drawing stored 
in the computer may contain explicit representation of design 
conditions in its constraints, manual change of a critical 
part will automatically result in appropriate changes to 
related parts. 
For Gaining Scientific or Engineering Understanding of Operations That 
Can Be Described Graphically: 
The description of a drawing stored in the Sketchpad system 
is more than a collection of static drawing parts, lines and 
curves, etc. A drawing in the Sketchpad system may contain 
explicit statements about the relations between its parts 
so that as one part is changed the implications of_. this 
change become evident throughout the drawing. 
It is possible, 
as we saw in Figure l .. .6,-:-to,give-:-the:_prope'~ty,-Of :f-ixed'.l.ength 
to lines so as to study mechanical linkages, observing the 
path of some parts when others are moved. 
As we saw in Figure 1.7 any change made in the definition 
of a subpicture is at once reflected in the appearance of 
that subpicture wherever it may occur. 
By making such 
changes, understanding of the relationships of complex 
sets of subpictures can be gained. 
FOr example, one can 
study how a change in the basic element of a crystal 
structure is reflected throughout the crystal. 
As, a Topological Input Device for Circuit Simulators, etc.: 
Since the ring structure storage of Sketchpad reflects 
the topology of any circuit or diagram, it can serve 
as an input for many network or circuit simulating 
programs. 
The additional effort required to draw a 
. circuit completely from scratch with the Sketchpad system 
may well be recompensed if the properties of the ,circuit 
are obtainable through simulation of the circuit drawn. 
For Highly Repetitive Drawings~ 
The ability of the computer to reproduce any drawn 
symbol anywhere at the press of a button, and to 
recursively include subpictures within subpictures 
makes it easy to produce drawings which are composed of 
huge numbers of parts all similar in shape. 
Great interest 
in doing this comes from people in such fields as memory 
development and micro logic where vast numbers of elements 
are to be generated at once through photographic processes. 
Master drawings of the repetitive patterns necessary can be 
easily drawn. 
Here again, the ability to change the 
individual element of the repetitive structure and have 
the change at once brought into all sub-elements makes 
it possible to change the elements of an array without 
redrawing the entire array. 
-23-
Those readers who are primarily interested in the application 
of Sketchpad are invited to turn next to Chapter IX, page 120 for 
aditional examples and conclusions. 
-24-
. Chapter II 
HISTORY OF SKETCHPAD 
When at the end of the summer of 1960 Jack I. Raffel told me that 
there was considerable interest at Lincoln Laboratory in making a cam-
puter "more approachable" through advanced use of displays, I paid 
little heed, but a seed had been -planted.. 
As work on TX-O computer at 
MIT during the winter of 1960-61 brought me some familiarity with using 
display and light pen, the idea began to grow in my mind that applica-
tion of computers to making line drawings would be exciting and might 
prove fruitful. 
Late in April, 1961, following up Mr. Raffel's earlier 
suggestion, I approached Wesley A. Clark, then in charge of computer 
applications in Group 51 of Lincoln Laboratory, with the proposal that 
I use TX-2 in an investigation of comput~r drawing techniques. 
lowe a 
great deal to Mi:-. Clark's initial enthusiasm and, though I didn It bow 
. 
. 
1 
it at the time, to the many design features he had incorporated into 
TX-2 seemingly with just such a project in mind. 
During the summer of 1960, Herschel H. Loomis had done some preli-
minary drawing work6 on. TX-2 which he was kind enough to demonstrate tor 
me in May, 1961, as my first contact with TX-2. 
During the summer of 
1961 I devised a curve tracing program and some of the first notions 
about interlaced and twinkled display. 
Lat~ in the summer of 1961 a 
project to connect-an ink-1ine-on-paper plotting system to TX-2 was re-
12 
vived. 
An EAI plotter, 
painted bright red, had. been at Lincoln Labo~ 
.ratory for two or three years before, but interest in 'the project had 
faded for lack of a user. 
Throughout the Sketchpad effort I have 
-25-
maintained a collateral interest in the hardware development necessary 
to get the plotter working.. 
The plotting syst~ has been incorporated 
as a. part of the overall Sketchpad system, but of course its development 
is only incidental to the research embodied in the thesis. 
From the earliest stages of the project development I had had the 
closest contact with Professor Claude E. Shannon whose penetrating 
questions have served as the measuring stick by which I could judge my 
progress. 
He agreed to supervise the drawing effort as a thesis project 
in the fall of 1961. 
In the process of contacting faculty members to 
form a thesis committee I became aware that my effort was not unique and 
that I was not alone in my interest and enthusia.sm for graphical com-
puter input and output. 
'!he availability of computer controlled display 
systems and particularly of light pen devices for manual input made it 
almost inevit·able that computers would one day be involved in engineer-
ing drawing. 
People at MIT had long talked of such an application. 
Computer application to geometric problems was not new. 
'!he APT 
(~utomatically ~ogrammed 1:001 J development through which a computer is 
able to control a milling machine to produce a complex metal part had 
evolved many useful geometric manipulation techniques. 
I made contact 
with the Computer Aided Design group at MIT which was composed partly of 
the people of the MIT Electronic Systems LaboratorY (formerly calle4 the 
Servomechanisms Laboratory) who developed APT and partly of people in 
the Mechanical Eng~neering Department who brought a knowledge of the 
problems faced by designers to the project. 
I had been surprised that so little practical work had been ,done in 
application of computers to line drawing, especially since display 
-26-
systems and light pens were relatively common when my work began. 
I can 
see now, however, that I have had a unique opportunity to pursue my in-
terest. 
I was able to visit many separate laboratories for discussion 
and ideas without becoming so attached to anyone that I was forced into 
its way of thinking. 
In particular, members of the Mechanical Engineer-
ing Department, notably Professor steven: A. ,Coons:;, who agreed to serve 
on my thesis committee, suggested mechanical design problems and appli-
cations. 
Members of the Electronic Systems Laboratory, notably Douglas 
Ross, provided help and advice on n-component elements. 
The Artificial 
Intelligence group, notably Professor Marvin Minsky, another committee 
member, gave advice and encouragement in the niceties of picture repre-
sentation and the kind of interest aimed more at a fundamental under-
standing of the processes developed than in their practical application. 
Lincoln Laboratory provided not only advice but also technical support 
including to date about 600 hours of time on the TX-2,., 
Whatever success the Sketchpad effort has had can in no small 
measure be traced to the use of TX-2.* TX-2's 70,000 word memory, 64 
index registers, flexible input-output control and liberal supply of 
manual intervention facilities such as toggle switches, shaft encoder 
knobs, and push buttons all contributed to the speed with which ideas 
could be tried and accepted or rej ected', 
Moreover, being an experi-
mental machine it was possible to make minor modifications to TX-2 to 
match it better to the problem. 
For example, a push button register 
was installed at my request. 
Now that we know what drawing on a com-
puter is like, much smaller machines can be used for practical applica-
tions. 
* A brief description of TX-2 may be found in Appendix Q. 
-27-
RESEARCH PROGRESS 
Thus it was that in the fall of 1961 work began in earnest on a 
drawing system for TX-2. 
In the early fall I perfected my light pen 
tracking programs and subroutines for displaying straight lines and pre-
senting a portion of the total picture on the display at increased magni-
fication. 
In early November 1961, my first light pen controlled drawing 
program was working. 
It is significant that at this time a notion of 
"strong conditions tf was used to give geometric nicety to the drawing. 
For example, lines could be drawn parallel or perpendicular to existing 
lines but carried no permanent trace of the relationship other than the 
accident of their position. 
This early effort in effect provided the 
T-square and triangle capabilities of conventional drafting. 
Somewhat 
before my first effort was working, Welden Clark of Bolt:; :Berane'k;~ :8.nCt 
Nevnnan -demop,s'trated ~a similar.program to~~me: Qn the PDP-l computer.5 
Early in December 1961 Professor Shannon visited TX-2 to see the 
work I had been doing. 
As a result of that visit the entire effort took 
new form. 
First, Professor Shannon suggested point blank that I include 
circle capability in the system. 
Second, I realized when he asked for 
paper to sketch a drawing he intended to enter into the computer that 
the strong conditions notion which simulated the conventional tools of 
drafting was not adequate for computer drawing. 
As a result of includ-
ing circles into the Sketchpad system a richness of display experience 
has been obtained without which the research might have been rather dry. 
As a result of trying to improve upon conventional drafting tools the 
full new capability of the computer-aided drafting system has come into 
being. 
-28-
In December.lg6l,and during the first part of 1962, then, I began 
working on the problems of display generation for cirlces outlin~ in" 
Chap~er V. 
The circle generating subroutine gave great difficulty espe-
cially in the details of edge detection and closure. 
At about this same 
time I started work on the ring structure representation of the drawing 
outlined in Chapter III; the preliminary drawing effort of November 1961 
had used conventional table storage. 
By the first of February 1962, the 
ring structure was in use, but without the generic blocks which give it 
its· present flexib.ility. 
Intersection programs for lines and circles 
had been written and debugge~ and the second g~neration drawing program 
could be begun. 
In making the second generation drawing program, explicit represen-
tation of constraints and automatic constraint satisfaction were-to be 
included. 
I learned of the matrix method described in Appendix F for 
finding the minimum mean square error solution to linear equations from 
Lester D. Earnest of the MITRE Corporation and obtained a macro, SOLVE, 
from Lawrence G. Roberts which did the arithmetic involved~·' Armed with 
the tools for representing and doing arithmetic for:constrairits ~iI,werit 
gaily ahead with programming. 
In the first crack at representing constraints I made two baSic 
errors which have subsequently been corrected. 
First, I provided that 
the constraints be tied not only to the variables constrained but also 
to related nonvariables. 
For example, the horizontal constraint not 
only referred (as it should) to the two end points of a line, but also 
(as has been . subsequently removed) to the line itself. It was impos-
sible to make points have the same y coordinate without having a line 
-29-
between them; deletion of the line deleted the constraint as well. 
In 
more recent work constraints refer only to variables so that lines need 
not be present to make points have the same y coordinate. 
The second error in constraint representation was in the numerical 
computation of the relationship represented by the constraint. 
At f'irst 
I insisted that f'or any constrained variable it be possible to compute 
directly the linear equation of' best f'it to the constraint. 
That is, 
f'or each constraint on a variable the equation of a line could be f'ound 
along which the con.~traint would be satisfied or nearly so. 
Not only 
was it difficult to compute the equation of' such a line, requiring a 
special purpose program for each type of constraint, but also my lack 
of regard for the niceties of the scale factor of the computed equa~ion 
resulted in instabilities in the constraint satisf'action p~ocess. 
Whereas for the relaxation procedure to operate proper.ly it is neces-
sary to remove "energy" from the system at each stage, my computations 
for certain cases added energy. It was early summer of 1962before 
definition of the mathematical properties of constraint types in terms of 
eo 
subroutine for computing directly 'the error . introduced . by .. a con-
straint not only cured the instability troubles but also made it easy to 
add new constraint types. 
Along with the new capabilities of the constraint satisfaction pro-
grams and the extensive use to be made of' constraints, the second genera-
tion drawing program included for the first time the recursive instance 
expanSion which made possible instances within instances. 
The trials of' 
getting systems to work are many; one which stands out in my mind was 
that instances within instances rotated in the wrong direction when the 
-30-
outer instance was rotated. 
Nei-ther: ~ were the things I tried to do 
always correct. 
For example, the initial instance expansion routine 
forced each instance of a picture to be smaller than the master drawing 
for that instance. 
I have since come to appreciate the value of having 
some normalizing factor in products so that all fixed point numbers can 
. be treated as signed fractions in the range, -1 ~:',X 9.1, representing 
/ 
I 
the fraction of full scale deflection on the coordinate system in ques-
tion. 
In late March 1962, I discovered that points could be related to 
instances through the use of two linear equations relating the coordi-
nates of the point to the four components of the instance position. 
Armed with this new information, the difficulties I had been having 
with attachers on instances yielded to the same general fonnat used for 
other constraints. It >,became possible for a single instance to have as 
many attachers as desired, each of which could serve as attachment point 
for any number of instances. 
The first actual programming of the maze-solving high. speed con-
straint satisfaction methods proposed much earlier began about March 
1962. 
I had. not had. enough experience before that time with the ring 
structure to face the extensive ring manipulations which would be re-
quired for this part of the work. 
The development of the ring manipula-
tion, macros shown in Appendix D was started in connection with the maze 
solving routines. 
By Memorial Day 1962, the second version of Sketchpad. was consid-
ered working well enough that a motion picture was made showing the 
various drawing manipulations possible. It was possible to draw line 
-31-
segments and circle arcs, and;;,po:txit>t6othSm,:,to"e'r8S'E!,:~thein O'r:mov.~.'~tllec 
pOints on which they depend. 
A limited number of constraints were 
available which could make lines horizontal or vertical, force points 
to lie on li.nes or circles, and relate instances to their attachment 
points. 
Constraint satisfaction was primarily by relaxation, but for 
certain simple cases the maze solving methods would give more rapid re-
suIts. It was possible to see that sketching could indeed be done on 
the computer. 
Not yet available were display for points or constraints, or any 
notion of digits, text, scalars and dummy variables. It was almost im-
possible to add new constraint types to the system, and even had they 
been added, the recursive merging and the definition copying capability 
were not available to apply them easily to the object picture. Sketch-
pad at this stage was a nice 'demonstration and toy but as yet lacked the 
richness of detail now available. 
During the late spring of 1962, then, enough experience had been 
gained with' computer drawings to realize that more capabilities were 
needed. It was possible for me, armed wi tll- photographs of the latest 
developments, to approach a great many people in an effort to get new 
ideas to carry the work on to a successful conclusion. 
OUt of these 
discussions came the notions of copying definitions and of'r:recu.rs:ive 
merging which are, to me, the most important contributions of the 
Sketchpad system. 
Also out of these talks came the conviction that a 
generic structure would be necessary if the system were to be made easy 
to expand. 
On June 9, 1962 all this new information came to a head and 
an entirely new system was begun which has grown with relatively little 
-32-
change into the final version described here. 
Had I the work to do 
again, I could start afresh with the sure knowledge that generic struc-
ture"separation of subroutines into general purpose ones applying to 
all types of picture parts and ones specific to particular types of 
picture parts, and unlimited applicability of functions (e.g. anything 
should be moveable) would more than recompense the effort involved in 
achieving them. 
I have great admiration for those people who were able 
to tell me these things all along, bQt I, personally, had to follow the 
stumbling trail described in this chapter to become convinced myself. 
It is to be hoped that future workers can either grasp the power of 
generality at once and strive for it or have the courage to stumble 
along a trail like mine until they achieve it. 
Towards the end of the summer of 1962 the third and final version 
of Sketchpad was beginning to show remarkable power. 
I had the good 
fo.rtune at this time to obtain the services of Leonard M. Hantman, a 
Lincoln Laboratory Staff Programmer, who added innumerable service 
functions, such as magnetic tape manipulation routines, to the system. 
He also cleaned up some of the messy programming left over r-rarn my 
rushed efforts at getting things working. 
For example, he shortened 
and improved my original ring manipulation macros. 
Also, :,to-waids ,·,the 
end of the summer the plotting system began to be able to give ~s~ab.le 
output. 
Hantman added plotting programs to Sketchpad through which the 
figures in this paper were made. 
Computer time began to be spent less and less on program debugging 
and more and more on applications of the system. 
It was possible to 
provide preliminary services to other,people, and so a user group was 
-33-
formed and informal instruction was given in the use of Sketchpad. 
A 
library tape was obtained and has ever since been collecting pictures 
for possible future use. 
The user group experience showed that rela-
tively new users with no programming knowledge could produce simple 
drawings with the system if a skilled user (myself) prepared the build-
ing blocks necessary. 
For example, a secretary designed and drew an 
alphabet with the aid of a 10 x 10 raster of pOints to use as end points. 
Both the raster and the alphabet are now a part of the library. 
Even now, however, there are possibilities for application of the 
system not yet even dreamed of. 
The richness of the possibilities of 
the definition copying function, and the new types of constraints which 
might easily be added to the system for special purposes suggest that 
further application will bring about a new body of knowledge of system 
application. 
For example, the bridge design examples shown at the end 
of this paper were not anticipated. 
There are, of course, limitations to the system. 
In the last chap-
ter are suggested the improvements, some just minor changes, but some 
major additions which would change the entire character of the system. 
It is to be hoped that future work will far surpass my effort. 
Chapter III 
RING STRUCTURE 
-34-
The Sketchpad system stores information about drawings in two sepa-
rate forms. 
One is a table of display spot coordinates designed to make 
display as rapid as: possible; the other is a file designed to contain 
the topology of the drawing. 
The topological file is set up in a spe-
cially designed ring structure which will form the major subject of this 
chapter. 
The ring structure was des igned to permit rearrangement of the 
data storage structure for editing pictures with a min~um of file 
searching, and to permit rapid constraint satisfaction and display file 
generation. 
The ring structure was not intended to pack the required 
information into the smallest possible storage space. 
We f'elt that we 
could write f'aster running programs in less t~e by including some re-
dundancy in the ring structure. 
This was cons idered more important than 
the ability to store huge drawings. 
Moreover, the: large storage capaci-
ty of the TX-2 did not force storage conservation. 
The particular form 
of the ring structure chosen has led to some of the most interesting 
f'eatures of the system simply because the changes required to keep the 
ring structure consistent led to useful facilities such as recursive 
merging discussed in Chapter VI. 
N-CCHPONENT ELEMENTS 
In the drawings made by the Sketchpad system there are large popu-
lations of relatively few types of entities with very little variation 
in fonnat between entities of each type. 
For example, an entire 
-35-
drawing may be composed of line segments and end points, each line seg-
ment connecting exactly two end points, and each point having exactly 
two coordinates. 
Because of this unifo~ity within each given type of 
entity, it is possible to set up a standard storage format for each 
type of entity with standardized locations for information about the 
various properties which entities of that particular type usually have. 
Each entity, therefore, is represented in the computer 'as an n-component 
element, that is, by a block of n consecutive registers in storage each 
of which contains a specific kind of info~ation about that element. 
th 
For example, the coordinates of a point are always stored. in the i 
and jth registers of its n-component element or block. 
S~ilarly, the 
th 
th 
n 
and m 
registers of a line block always contain the addresses of 
the start and end point blocks for that line as Figure 3~~ 1 shows. 
Par-
ticular numerical locations for various pieces of information are shown 
in Appendix C. 
MNEMONICS AND CONVENTIONS 
In using n-component elements it has been found useful to give 
symbolic names to the various registers of each element so that the 
actual numerical locations of various kinds of information need not be 
remembered. 
'lhus, for example, the coordinates of a point are stored 
in the PVALth ~nd',PVAL+lst (for Point VAIlle) registers of its n-compo-
nent element. 
Since all programming for Sketchpad is done in a symbolic 
programming language in terms of mnemonics, it is easy to rearrange the 
internal format of any kind of n-component element by changing the nu-
merical values assigned to the mnemonic symbols used within that kind 
of element. 
In the figures in this thesis, symbolic locations of 
-36-
LINE 
PO, NT A 
LSP 
PO I NT B 
LEP 
POINT 
POINT A 
POINT B POINT 
X COORDINATE 
X COORDINATE 
PVAL 
PVAL 
Y COORD 1 NATE 
Y COORDINATE . 
FIGURE 3.1. 
N-COMPONENT ELEMENTS 
-37-
pieces of data within n-component elements are shown to the right of the 
data. 
Actual register addresses are shown to the left of the data. 
The 
position of particular pieces of data may Change from figure to figure 
as it becomes necessary to more fully illustrate the structure, but the 
mnemonic address will indicate which data are being shown. 
Although the use of mnemonics gives complete flexibility to the for-
mat of n-component elements, certain conventions were followed in fmple-
menting Sketchpad and in the figures of this thesis. 
1. 
The location of an n-component element is the address of :"" 
its first (lowest numbered) register; 
2. 
The first component of the element (the contents of its 
first register) is used to indicate the type of element; 
and 
3. 
All numerical information such as values of coordinates 
is located at the end (highest numbered locations) of 
the element. 
In the figures, higher numbered registers run down the page, making 
the location of an element the address of its top register. 
SUch element 
locations are indicated by symbolic names to the lett of the n-camponent 
element or contained within components of other elements which make ref-
erence to them. 
Most of the components of the n-component elements in the Sketchpad 
system are pointers containing addresses of other elements. 
SUch point-
ers indicate topological information such as the end points of a line 
segment. 
If an n-canponent element is to be relocated in storage, that 
is, if the information it contained is to be stored in same other regis-
ters to compact the storage structure prior ~o saving it On magnetic 
tape, the contents of any topological component referring to the element 
which is to be relocated must be changed to refer to the new location. 
-38-
However, relocation of an element in storage should not change the ap-
pearance of the picture represented, and so numerical information such 
as the coordinates of points or the size of subpictures must not be 
changed. 
Segregation of numerical information at the end of the n-cam-
ponent element facilitates the-relocation of elements. 
Gross transfers of the entire storage structure can be accomplished 
by treating all topological pOinters as relative to some basic address. 
In Sketchpad, for example, a topological pointer to an n-camponent ele-
ment contains not the absolute computer address of that element, but the 
location of the n-camponent element relative to the first address of the 
storage structure area, LIST. 
At various times it has been necessary to 
change the location of the storage area, giving LIST a different value. 
The use of relative pointers proves useful for inter-machine cammunica-
tion also, making it possible to store a given data structure anywhere 
in memory. 
In the illustrati,ons, however, the relati ve pointing is sup-
pressed, as if LIST = O. 
REVERSE INDEXING 
Suppose that index register a contains the relative location of the 
n-component element for a line segment and that it is desired to know 
the coordinates of that line's start point (LSP). 
The address of the 
th 
start point block may be found -in the LSP 
entry of the line block as 
shown in Figure 3.1. We can pick up- this address using reverse indexing 
by the instruction: 
LDA ex LSP + LIST 
th 
load. the accumulat.or fram the!.SP 
entry of the block pointed to by 
-39-
index register a. 
LIST enters in because pointers are relative. 
Now if 
we transfer the contents of the accumulator to index register ~ and per-" 
form the instruction: 
LDA f3 PVAL + LIST 
the X coordinate of the start point of the line will be placed in the 
accumulator. 
Note that in these instructions we used the index register to indi-
cate which n-camponent element is being considered and the address por-
tion of the instructions to indicate the specific component selected. 
This is called "reverse indexing" to distinguish it from "normal" index-
ing in which the index register indicates the ith entry of the table 
referred to in t~e address portion of the instruction. 
The only normal 
thing about "normal" indexing, however, is the widespread inclusion in 
computers of an instruction which increments an index register and trans-
fers control to a specified !location if the index register has not yet 
reached same specified value, usually o. 
The 709' s TIX instruction is 
typical. 
A real value of the TX-2 for implementing the Sketchpad system 
turned out to be its ability to reset an index register from a register 
indicated by the contents of another index register (or even the prior 
contents of the index register to be re~et!). TX-2's accumulator is not 
used in"this index register processing. 
A special symbolism was built 
into the compiler to make it easy to use double index instructions; the 
instruction: 
RSX f31 a LSP + LIST 
puts into f3 the address of the start point of the line pointed to by 
-40-
index register a. 
The Sketchpad program consists in large part of such 
instructions. 
RING STRUCTURE 
The basic n-component element structure des'cribed above has been 
somewhat expanded in the implementation of Sketchpad so that all refer-
ences made to a particular n-component element or block are collected 
together by a string of pointers which originates within that block. 
For example, all the line segments which terminate on a particular point 
may be found by following a string of pOinters which starts within the 
point block. 
This string of pointers closes on itself; the last pointer 
\ 
points back to the first. Moreover, the string points both ways to make 
{ 
it easy to find both the next and the previous member of the string in 
case some change must be made to them. 
The ring structure, then, assigns two registers to each component 
in the n-camponent element. 
One is used for the direct reference shown 
in Figure 3.1; the other register is used to string similar references 
together. 
The basic ring consists of two kinds of register pairs, the 
"hen" and. ttchicken~" The hen pair is contained within a block which 
will be referred to, for example, in a point block, while the chicken 
pair is contained in a block making reference to another, for example, 
a line block making reference to the point. 
The chickens which belong 
to a particular hen constitute all the references made to the block con-
taining the hen. 
Figure 3.2 shows a typical ring; the inserting opera-
tion and ordering shown will be explained below. 
Appendix C shows how 
the hen and chicken blocks are arranged in different kinds of elements. 
BBBB 
TOP OF ELEMENT 
KEY OR HEN 
I 
0000 
AAAA 
~. BBBB 
ecce \. , 
CHICKEN V 
\ 
I 
T[P OF £lEl1ENT 
DDDD 
AAAA' 
cccc 
PUT \1 N LAST 
CHICKEN 
I 
FORWARD DIRECTION ~ 
CHICKEN 
CHICKEN 
I 
Tep OF £latENT 
I 
T\P OF ElEttENT 
~ AAAA 
DODD 
DODD 
ecce 
BBBB 
. FIGURE 3.2. 
BASIC 'RING STRUCTURE 
~ 
-42-
Figure 3.3 shows the complete structure for a line segment and two end 
points with the appropriate rings shown. 
The mnemonic for a component is taken to be the upper (lower num-
bered) of the register pair. 
The ring collecting ties, of course, are 
relative to LIST but this has been suppressed in the illustrations. 
The 
part of the upper register not occupied by the chicken pointer contains 
a number which indicates how far this particular element is from the top -, 
of the n-cOIllJ?onent element. 
'Ibis is the small negative number showing 
in Figure 3.3. It is us ed to find the top of a block when a component 
of it has been found as a member of a ring. 
HUMAN REPRESENTATION OF RING STRUCTURE 
In representing ring structures the chickens should be thought of 
as beside the hens, and perhap~ slightly below them, but not directly 
below them. 
The "reason for this is that in the ring registers, regard-
less of whether in a hen'or a Chicken, ·the left half of one register 
points to another register whose right half always points back. 
By 
placing all such registers in a row, this feature is clearly displayed. 
Moreover, the meaning of placing a new chicken "to the left of" an exist-
ing chicken or the hen is absolutely clear. 
The convention of going 
"forward" around a ring by progressing to the right in such a representa-
tion is clear, as is the. fact that putting in new chickens to the ~ 
of the hen puts them "last ," as shown in Figure 3.2. Until this repre-
sentation was settled on, no end of confusion prevailed because th~re 
was no adequate understanding of "first," "last, n "forward," "left of," 
or "before." 
DODD 1--+'+-""'-+-111~ 
CCCC~~ 
............... 
FIGURE 3.3. 
LINE SEGMENT AND END POINTS 
IN RING STRUCTURE NOTATION 
KEY OR HEN 
I 
0000 
AAAA 
AAAA 
AAAA 
TtF OF ElEt1ENl 
KEY OR HEN 
I 
0000 
AAAA 
BBBB 
BBBB 
CH I [KEN 
-43-
I 
1(1' OF ElEt1£Nl 
BBBB 
AAAA 
AAAA 
FIGURE 3.4. 
ZERO AND ONE MEMBER RINGS 
BASIC OPERATIONS 
The basic ring structure operations are: 
1. 
Inserting a new chicken into a ring at some specified 
location in it, usually first or last. 
2. 
Removing a chicken from. a ring. 
3. 
Putting all the chickens of one ring, in order, into 
another at some specified location in it, usually 
first or ·last. 
4. 
Perfor.ming some auxilia~y operation on each member of 
a ring in either forward or reverse order. 
'!hese basic ring structure operations are implemented by short sections 
of program defined as MACRO instructions in the compiler language. 
By 
suitable treatment of zero· and one member rings, that is of hens with 
none or one chicken, as shown in Figure 3.4, the basic operation pro-
grams operate without making special cases. 
As stated in the macro lan-
guage, the basic operations become trivially easy to use. 
For example, 
PUTL == LSP x a'" PLS x ~ 
puts the !.SP (Line Start Point) entry of the line block pointed to by 
index register a into the ring whose hen is the PLS (Point LineS entry) 
of the point indicated by index register ~, thus making ~ be the start 
point of Ct. 
If "XU is read as "of" and " ... " is read as "into", the macro 
statement almost makes sense in English. 
The format and function of all 
the ring manipulation macro instructions used in Sketchpad can be found 
in Appendix D. 
GENERATION OF NEW ELEMENTS 
Subroutines are used for setting up new n-component elements in 
free spaces in the storage structure. 
These subroutines place the 
-45-
distance-to-the-top numbers 'in alternate registers as required ,and 
clear out the components so that each is an· empty ring as shown in Fig-
ure 3.5. 
As parts of the, drawing are deleted, the registers which,were 
used to represent them become free, indicated by placing them in the 
FREES ring. 
Data for new n-component elements could be put into these 
free registers if sufficiently long continuous blocks of free storage 
were availab~e, but Sketchpad is not at present equipped to do this. 
Rather, new components are set up at the end of the storage area, 
lengthening it, while free blocks are allowed to accumulate., Garbage 
collection periodically compacts the storage structure by removal of the 
free blocks and relocation of the information above them (that is, infor-
mation in higher numbered registers illustrated lower on the page) as 
shown in Figure 3.6. 
Storage of a drawing on magnetic tape can be done 
much more compactly for having removed all internal free registers. 
BOOBY TRAPS 
Every system which is devised for programming on computers has lit-
tle problem areas which give' humans more trouble than other parts; the 
ring structure organization and operations are no exception. 'As was 
indicated above, the visualization of the ring as a row of element,s aids 
greatly in understanding of the basic operations. 
The use of relative 
addressing, while giving great power for data communication, gave the 
programmer considerable difficulty because the term LIST must often but 
not always be added to or subtracted from the address portion of in-
structions. It took months before all the nuances of these problems 
were learned .. 
-46-
12 
10 
POINT 
-2 
-0000 
===-
--:::E: 
-4 
0000 
PLS 
:::=:-
-=== 
-5 
0000 
===-
~ 
a 
PVAL" 
a 
FIGURE 3.5~ 
FRESH POINT BLOCK 
~47-
-
FREE 
FREE 
FREE 
? 
FIGURE 3.6. 
COMPACTING THE'RING STRUCTURE 
-48. 
By far the greatest difficulty ,'concerned 
processes which change 
the ring structure while other operations are taking place on it. For 
example, there must be two versions of the basic macro which permits aux-
iliary operations to be performed on all the members of a ring in turn. 
One version, LGORR (Leonard's GO Round the ring to the Right), performs 
the auxiliary operation on one ring member while remembering the next 
ring member so that if the auxiliary operation deletes the current ring 
member the next one has already been found. 
Another version of the basic 
macro, LGORRI (LGOHR Insertable), remembers which ring member the auxil-
iary operation is being performed on so that if the auxiliary operation 
puts a brand new member into the ,ring next to the current one, the new 
one will not be overlooked. 
Neither macro will function properly if both 
the current and the next ring members are deleted simultaneously by the 
auxiliary function. 
Early in the research the multiple sequence nature of the TX-2 was 
utilized to provide immediate updating of the ring structure when push 
button commands were given by the user. 
Trouble arose if the display 
generation program was working in the ring structure at the instant that 
it changed. It is now clear that multiple sequencing and data channels 
must be used only to transmit information into the computer and not to 
process the ring structure, a job properly left to the main computation 
stream. 
Main computation stream rt~maniPulation has implications on 
future machine design since most' of the ring manipulations can be p~r-
formed with index arithmetic alone without tying up the main arithmetic 
element which meanwhile could be of use to someone else. 
Perhaps several 
machines could share a single powerful arithmetic ·element if they did the 
bulk of their processing w.ith index arithmetico 
-49-
GENERIC STRUCTURE, HIERARCHIES 
The organization of the elements of the drawing into types has fa-
cilitated the generalization of the programs which comprise the Sketch-
pad system. 
The effort toward generality came relatively late in the 
research effort because I did not at first appreciate the power that a 
general approach could bring. 
Considerable reprogramming was done, how-
ever, to include as much generality as possible. 
Those subroutines 
which had to do with a single kind of drawing part were collected to-
gether and specifically labeled, both in the coding sheets and block 
diagrams, but most importantly in the mind, as belonging to that parti-
cular kind of entity. 
The remainder of the program was left completely 
general. 
The general part of the program will perform a few basic operations 
on any drawing part, calling for help from routines specific to particu-
lar types of parts when that is necessary. 
For example the general pro~ 
gram can show any part on the display system by calling the appropriate 
display subroutine. 
Similarly, the general program is able to relocate 
obje ets on the display, making use of specific routines only to apply a 
transformation to the various kinds of objects. 
Again, the general pro-
gram will satisfy-any numerical constraints applied to the drawing by the 
user, calling on specific subroutines only to compute the error intro-
duced into the system by a particular constraint. 
The big power of the clear-cut separation of the general and the 
specific is that it is easy to change the details of specific parts of 
the program to get quite different results or to expand the system with-
out any need to change the general parts. 
This was most dramatically 
-50-
brought out when generality was finally achieved in the constraint dis-
play and satisfaction routines and new types of constraints were con-
structed literally at fifteen minute intervals. 
In the data storage structure the separation of general and specific 
is accomplished by collecting all things of one type together as chickens 
which belong to a "generic" hen. 
rrbe generic hen contains all theinfor-
mation 1-Thich' makes this type df tl.ling different from all other types of. 
things. 
Thus the data storage structure itself contains." all the speci-
fic information, leaving only general programs for the rest of' the system. 
A typical generic block is shown in Figure 3.7. 
The generic blocks are further gathered together under super-generic 
or generic-generic blocks according to four categories: Variables, Topo-
logicals, Constraints, and Holders, as shown in Figure 3.8. All picture 
parts which have numerical information are ultimately gathered together 
under the VARIABLES block by way of their own generic blocks. 
Ideally 
the VARIABLES block should in some way indicate that there was numerical 
infOrmation, but the generality has not been carried as far as this yet. 
Space for information about the number of components of a variable (which 
is unnecessary for the topological entities) could be omitted from the 
generic blocks for lines and circles.· At present all generic blocks 
still carry space for all the information in any of them simply because 
of historical reasons. 
This accounts for the spaces seen in the Figure 
For the sake of completeness the four broad categories of things, 
the generic-generic blocks, are brought together under the UNIVERSE 
block, which, as a special case, is always located at the exact start of 
24 I 4 
VARIABLES 
-2 I 
0000 
TYPEWRITER CODE NAME 
SUBROUT I NE ENT'RY 
F I,T SCOPE AROUND IT 
APPLY TRANSFORMATION 
24 . 16 .. 
NORMAL PICTURE KIND 
FOUR COMPONENTS 
VALUE AT IVAL 
FIGURE 3.7. 
-51-
TYPE 
SPECB 
NAME 
DISPLAY 
HOWBIG 
MOVIT 
SIZE 
KIND 
TUPLE 
VARLOC 
INSTANCES GENER I C BLOCK' 
UNIVERSE 
VARIABLES 
HOLDER5 
CON5TRA"1 NT5 
TOPOS 
FIGURE 3.8. 
GENERIC STRUCTURE 
I 
\Jl 
I\) • 
-53-
the storage structur~, relative address 1. 
The UNIVERSE block belongs 
to no higher block. 
I considered making it belong to itself so that con~ 
tinued upward searching through the generic structure would appear to 
reach an unending string of UNIVERSE blocks, but I could find nO solid 
reason for so doing. 
Further work may develop one, of course. 
EXPANDING· SKETCHPAD 
Addition of new types of things to the Sketchpad system's vocabulary 
of· picture parts requires only the construction of a new generic block 
(about 20 registers) and the writing of appropriate subroutines for that 
thing. 
The subroutines might be easy to write, as they usually are for 
new constraints, or difficult to write, as for adding ellipse capability, 
but at least a finite, well-defined task faces one to. add a: new ability 
to the system. 
Before the generic structure was clarified, it was almost 
impossible to add the instructions required to handle a new type of ele-
ment. 
Chapter IV 
LIGHT PEN 
-51~-
In Sketchpad the light pen is time shared between the functions· of 
coordinate input for positioning picture parts on the drawing and demon-
strative,input for pointing to existing picture parts to make changes. 
Although almost any kind of coordinate input device could be used in-
stead of the light pen for positioning, the demonstrative input uses 
the light pen opti·cs as a sort of analog computer to remove from consid-
eration all but a very few picture parts which happen to fall within its 
field of view, saving considerable program time. 
Drawing systems using 
storage display devic·es of the Memotron type may not be practical be-
cause of the loss of this analog computation feature. 
CONSTRUCTION OF LIGHT PEN 
The light pen is a hand held photocell which will report to the 
computer whenever a spot on the display system falls within its small 
field of view. 
The housing for the photocell is about the size of a 
fountain pen and is manipulated much as a pen or pencil, hence the name. 
M~ny different varieties of light pens have been built, in~ludinglarge 
cumbersome ones in the days before miniaturization, to be replaced by 
transistorized versions, and recently by fiber optic pens connected by 
a flexible light pipe to a photocell mounted inside the computer frame. 
The particular pen used for the Sketchpad system consists of a photo-
diode and transistor preamplifier mounted in the pen housing and con-
nected to the computer bY,a length of small coaxial cable, as shown in 
-55-
the photograph of' Figure 4.1, and in the drawing of Figure 4.2.. It is 
used by Sketchpad primarily because its operation is relatively inde-
pendent of the distance it is held from the computer display, since it 
has a cylindrical field of view. 
Since spots on the display system are intensified one after another 
in time sequence, whether or not each spot is seen by the pen is indi-
vidually reported just after intensification of that spot. 
The light 
pen amplifier is designed so that the pen is sensitive only to the 
bright blue flash of the first intensification of a display spot and 
not to the dim yellow afterglow. 
The amplifier output is strobed only 
when a display spot has been intensified to minimize room light pickup. 
Although some computers require an interrogation of a pen flip-flop to 
find out if a spot was seen, TX-2 uses the interruption of a sequence 
change to indicate this fact~ Thus if a series of points are displayed 
on the scope by a set of data transfer instructions, and one of these 
points falls under the field of view of the pen, subsequent instructions 
will be performed in the light pen sequence rather than in the display 
sequence until the light pen sequence is finished. 
'!hus it is unneces-
sary to interrogate the pen specifically for each display spot, the' 
interruption of sequence changing serving automatic notification that a 
spot vlas seen. 
For pen tracking, where a program branch is made for 
every spot displayed, interruption by the pen requires more program in-
structions than would a specific bit testing instruction, but for the' 
demonstrative use of the pen where any spot of the background display 
may fall within the pents field of view but is relatively unlikely to 
do so, the interruption is a real advantage. 
* TX-2's light pen is treated as an input device separate from its 
display. 
See Appendix G. 
FIGURE 4.1. 
LIGHT PEN. 
Courtesy of MIT 
Electronic Systems Laboratory. 
{
POWER DC COUPLED } 
SIGNAL AC COUPLED 
SAME WIRE 
FOR SMALLER FIELD-OF-VIEW, 
ROTATE BARREL TO MOVE DIODE 
BACK FROM LENS 
TRANSISTOR 
PREAMPLIFIER 
FIGURE 4.2. 
CONSTRUCTION OF LIGHT PEN. 
Drawing courtesy of Electronic Systems 
Laboratory. 
This drawing was made by 
conventional methods. 
-56-
-57-
PEN TRACKING 
The light pen and its connecting cable report to the computer im-
mediately after any display spot has been shown which lies within the 
pents view. 
By displaying a cross-like pattern and noticing which 
spots fall within the light pen's view, the computer can follow the 
motions of the light pen around the screen. 
In order to follow normal 
motions of a hand held light pen I have found it necessary to redisplay 
the tracking cross about 100 times per second, taking 1 millisecond per 
display. 
When the cross is being "dragged" across the screen at. the 
maximum speed I have achieved, successive crosses are displayed about 
0.2 inches apart and the maximum pen speed is thus 20 inches per second 
which has proven quite enough for the experiments conducted. If the· 
light pen is moved faster than that, the tracking cross will fall en-
tirely outside of its field of view and tracking will be lost. 
I use 
the loss of tracking as the so-called ter.mination signal for all pen 
tracking operations. 
Early in the system development some effort was spent trying to 
reduce the computer time spent in pen tracking. It was attempted to 
have the computer predict the location of the pen based on its past 
locations so that a longer time might elapse between display of track-
ing crosses. 
The assumptions of constant velocity, 
Xt = (Xt _l - Xt _2 ) + Xt _l 
Yt = (Yt - l - Yt - 2 ) + Yt-1' 
(4-1) 
and constant acceleration, 
Xt = 3 (Xt _l - Xt _2 ) + Xt _3 
(4-2) 
where successive pen positions are denoted by subscripts, were tried. 
A pictorial representation of these assumptions is shown in Figure 4.3. 
CONSTANT VELOCITY 
CONSTANT ACCELERATION 
FIGURE 4.3. 
... 
• 
I 
o T 
o '''1 
t"2 
o 
T ... '3 
PREDICTIVE PEN TRACKING 
0 
0 
\ 
I 
0 
o 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
OCD 
co 
0 
0 
OC8 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
, 
• 
RANDOM POINTS 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
000000 
000000 000000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
FIGURE 4.4. 
'DISPLAYS FOR PEN TRACKING 
-58-
-59-
An a.ttempt llGS mode to combine various types of prediction according to 
the speed of motion of the pen, but all such efforts met with difficult 
stability problems and were interfering ,,,i th more important parts of the 
research. 
Therefore, I decided to accept. the ,ten ,per cent .of time lost 
to tracking in order to proceed to more interesting things. 
Other 
workers,notably Rolland Silvers formerly of Bolt, Beranek and Newman, 
report better success with predictive tracking giving numbers like 3% 
loss. 
Different methods of establishing the exact location of the light 
pen have been tried using many different shapes of display. 
For example, 
the displays shown in Figure 4.4 all seem to be about the same as far as 
time taken to establish pen position and accuracy. 
As far as I know, no 
one has taken into account the motion of the pen during the tracking 
display period. 
I use the logarithmic scan with four arms. 
To initially establish pen tracking the Sketchpad user must inform 
the computer of an initial pen location. 
This has come to be known as 
"inking-up" and is done by "touching" any existing line or spot on the 
display whereupon the tracking cross appears. 
If no picture has yet 
been drawn, the letters INK are always displayed for this purpose. 
DEMONSTRATIVE USE OF PEN 
During the remaining 90% of the time that the light pen and display 
system are free from the tracking chore, spots are very rapidly dis-
played to exhibit the drawing being built, and thus the lines and 
circles of the drawing appear. 
The light pen is sensitive to these 
spots and reports any which fall within its field of view by the 
-60-
interruption of a sequence change before another spot can be shown. 
The table within the computer memory which holds the coordinates of the 
spots also contains a tag on each one as shown in Fi~re 4.5 so that 
the picture part to which this spot belongs may be identified if the 
spot should be seen by the pen. 
A table of all such picture parts which fall within the light pen IS 
field of view is assembled during one complete display cycle.' At the 
end of a display cycle this table contains all the picture parts that 
could even remotely be considered as being "aimed at." During the next 
display cycle a new table is assembled which at the end of that cycle 
will replace the one then in use. 
Thus, two storage spaces are provided, 
one for assembling a complete table of display parts seen, the other for 
holding the complete table from the last display cycle so that the aim-
ing computation described below in the sections on demonstrative lan-
guage and pseudo pen location may avoid using a partiallycamplete table. 
Note that since the display of theTX-2 is independent of the computa-, 
tions gOing on, the aiming computation may occur in the middle of a dis-
play cycle. 
Due to the relatively long time that a complete display cycle for 
a complicated drawing may take, the aiming computation, by using infor-
mation from the previous complete display cycle, took excessive time to 
"become aware" of picture parts newly aimed at by the pen. 
Therefore, I 
require that any display part seen by the light pen which is not yet in 
the table being built for the current display cycle be put not only in 
that table, but also in the table for the previous display cycle if not 
already there. 
This speeds up the process of locking onto elements of 
-61-
x 
ADDRESS OF PART 
FIGURE 4.5. 
ADDRESS IN DISPLAY REGISTER 
\ 
\ 
\ 
FIGURE 4.5. 
, 
'E 
/ 
AT INTERSECTION 
AT CIRCLE 
AT POINT 
I 
OPERATION OF PSEUDO PEN LOCATION 
-62-
the drawing. 
Similarly, the infonnation from a previous display cycle 
may contain many previously seen drawing parts which are not currently 
within the light pen's field of view, especially if the light pen has 
moved an appreciable distance since the last complete display cycle. 
One might attempt to detect large pen displacements during a display 
cycle and indicate that the old light pen information is too obsolete 
to use if such displacements occur. 
However, I have often found it 
handy to slide appreciable distances along a line or curv~"in which 
case the light pen information is not made entirely obsolete. 
There-
fore, no such obsolescense-by-displacement routine has been incorporated, 
into the Sketchpad system. 
DEMONSTRATIVE LANGUAGE 
The table of picture parts falling within the field of view of the 
light pen, assembled during a complete display cycle, contains all the 
picture parts which might form the object of a statement of the type: 
apply function F to --------
e6g. erase this line (circle, etc.). 
Since the one half inch diameter 
field of view of the light pen is relatively large with respect to the 
precision with which it may be manipulated by the user and located by 
the computer, the Sketchpad system will reject any such possible demon-
strative object which is further from the center of the "light pen than 
some small minimum distance; about 1/8 inch was found to be suitable. 
Although it is easy to compute the distance from the center of the light 
pen field to a line segment or circle arc, it is not possible to compute 
-63- . 
the distance from the light pen field center to a piece of 'text or a 
complicated symbol represented as an instance~ For every kind of pic-
ture part some method must be provided for computing its distance from 
the light pen center or indicating that this computation cannot be made. 
\ 
! 
The distance from an object seen by the light pen to the center of 
the light pen field is used to decrease the size of the light pen field 
for aiming purposes. 
A light pen with two concentric fields of view, a 
small inner one for demonstrative purposes, and a larger outer one for 
tracking would make this computation unnecessary and would give better 
discrimination between objects for which no distance computation exists. 
Lack of this discrimination is now a problem. 
Design of such a pen is 
easy, and consideration of its development for any future large scale 
use of engineering drawing programs should be given serious considera-
tion. 
After eliminating all-possible demonstrative objects which lie 
outside the smaller effective field of View, the Sketchpad system con-
siders objects topologically related to the ones actually seen. 
End 
points of lines and attachment points of instances are especially impor~ 
tant, but objects on which constraints operate, or the value of a number 
as opposed to the digits which represent this value may also be consid-
ered. 
Such related objects may not specifically appear in the drawing 
but it must be possible to reference them easily. If any such object 
is sufficiently close to the center of the light pen field, it is added 
to the table of possible demonstrative objects even though it may have 
no display and, therefore, was not seen by the light pen. 
As described abov~ the aiming or demonstrative program first elimi-
nates from further consideration objects which are too far from the 
-64-
center of the light pen field to reduce the effective size of the field 
for aiming purposes. 
Next it brings into consideration unseen objects 
related to the objects actually seen. 
After these two procedures the 
number of objects still under consideration determines the further 
course of action. If no objects remain under consideration, nothing is 
being aimed at. If one object, it is the demonstrative object and the 
light pen is said to be "at" it, e.g., the pen is at a point, at (on) a 
line, at (on) a circle, or "at" a symbol (instance). 
If two objects 
~C':main, it may be possible to compute an intersection of them. 
If the 
intersection is sufficiently close to the pen position, the pen is "at" 
the intersection. 
With two or more objects remaining, the closest 
. object is chosen if such a choice is meaningful; or if not, no object is 
pointed at, i.e., there is no demonstrative object. 
The above consideration of the demonstrative program has been left 
vague and general purposely to point out that the specific types of 
objects being used in a drawing differ only in the details of how the 
various computations are made. 
For example, although the Sketchpad 
system is not now able to do anything with curves other than circle arcs 
and line segments, the demonstrative program requirements to add conic 
sections to the system, as it stands, involve only the addition of com-
putation procedures for the distance from the pen location to the conic, 
routines for computing the intersection of conics with conics, lines, 
and circles,and some indication of what topologically related objects, 
e.g. foci, need be considered. 
Figure 4.6 outlines the various regions 
" within which the pen must lie to be considered "at" a line segment, a ' 
circle arc, their end pOints, or their intersection. 
Th·e relative sizes 
-65-
of the error tolerated in the "sufficiently close to" statements above 
are indicated as well. 
The error tolerated is a fixed distance on the 
display so that confusion because objects appear too close together can 
usually be resolved by enlarging the drawing as described in Chapter V. 
The organization of the demonstrative program in Sketchpad is in 
the form of a set of special cases at present. 
That is, the program 
itself tests to see whether it is dealing with a line or circle or 
point or instance and uses different special subroutines accordingly. 
This organization remains for historical reasons but is not to be con-
sidered ideal at all. A far better arrangement is to have within the 
generic block for a type of picture part all subroutines necessary for 
it. 
PSEUDO PEN LOCATION 
The demonstrative program computes for its pwn use the location on 
a picture part seen by the light pen nearest the center of the pen's 
field of view. 
It also computes the location of the intersection of 
two picture parts. 
Thus when the demonstrative program decides which 
object or intersection the light pen is at, an appropriate pseudo pen 
location has also been computed. 
If no object has been named as demon-
strative object, the pseudo pen location is taken to be the actual pen 
location. 
The statements "at a line," "at a Circle," and "at a point" 
take on true significance, for the pseudo pen location will indeed be 
at these Objects. 
The pseudo pen location is displayed as a bright dot which locates 
itself ordinarily at the center of the pen tracking cross. It is easy 
-66-
to tel+ when the demonstrative object is a line, circle, point, or 
intersection, because this bright dot locks onto the picture part and 
becomes temporarily independent of the exact pen location. 
The pseudo 
pen location or bright dot is used as the point of the pencil in all 
drawing operations; for example, if a point is being moved, it moves 
with the pseudo pen location. 
As the light pen is moved into the areas 
outlined in Figure 4.6 and the pen locks onto existing parts of the 
drawing, any moving picture parts jump to their new locations as the 
pseudo pen location moves to lie on the appropriate picture part. 
The 
pseudo pen location at the instant that a new line or circle is created 
is used as the coordinates of the fixed end of that line or circle. 
With just the basic drawing creation and manipulation functions of 
draw, move, and delete and the power of the pseudo pen location and de-
monstrative language programs, it is possible to make fairly extensive 
drawings. 
Most of the constructions normally provided by straight edge 
~~d compass are available ,in highly accurate form. 
Most important, how-
ever, the pseudo pen location and demonstrative language give the means 
for entering the topological properties of a drawing into the machine. 
-67-
Chapter V 
DISPLAY GENERATION 
The display system, or tlscope, tI on the TX-2. is a ten bit per axis 
electrostatic deflection system able to display spots at a maximum rate 
of about 100,000 per second. 
A display instruction permits a single 
spot to be shown on the display at anyone of slightly more than a mil-
lion places, requiring 20 bits of information to specify the position of 
the spot. 
Due to the multiple sequence design of the TX-2 it is conven-
ient to permit the display system to operate at its own speed. 
The dis-
play will request memory cycles whenever they are required to transmit 
more information to it, but the time actually taken in displaying a spot 
will not be lost, for the rest of the TX-2 may be involved with other 
operations meanwhile. 
It has been found useful, therefore, to store the 
locations of all the spots of a drawing in a large table in memory and 
to produce the drawing by displaying from this table. 
The display 
I 
system, then, sees the rest of Sketchpad as 32,000 wo~s of core storage. 
The rest of the Sketchpad is able to compute and store spot coordinates 
in the display table without rega~ to the timing of the display system. 
The display spot coordinates are stored one to a memory wo~. The 
display subprogram displays each in turn, taking 20 microseconds each so 
that some time will be left over for computation. 
If instead of display-
ing each spot successively, the display program displays every eighth in 
a system of interlace, the flicker of the display is reduced greatly, 
but lines appear to be compos ed of crawling dots. 
For large displays 
made up mostly of lines such an interlace is useful. 
However, for 
-68-
repetitive patterns of short lines, the effect may be that the entire 
drawing seems to dance because of synchronization between the interlace 
and the repetitive nature of the pattern. 
The interlace may be turned 
on or off under user control by means of a toggle switch. 
Early display work with the display file led to the discovery by 
c 
the author and others that if the spots were displayed at random, a 
twinkling picture resulted which is pleasing to the eye and avoids 
flicker entirely (see Figure 5.1). 
However, small detail is lost be-
cause of' the eye's inability to separate the pattern from the random 
twinkle unless the pattern is gross. 
Twinkling, like interlace, is 
under user control by a toggle switch. 
Twinkling is accomplished by 
scrambling the order of the display spot locations in the display file. 
To do this, each successive entry is exchanged with an entry taken at 
random until every entry has been exchanged at least once. 
Needless 
to say, whether a scrambled file is displayed successively or by inter-
lace makes no difference to its twinkling appearance •. 
MARKING OF DISPLAY FILE 
Of the 36 bits available to store each display spot in the display 
file, 20 are required to give the coordinates of that spot for the dis-
play system, and the remaining 16 are used to give the address of the n-
component element which is responsible for adding that spot to the 
display. 
Thus, all the spots in a line-are tagged with the ring struc-
ture address of that line, and all the spots in an instance are tagged 
as belonging to that instance. 
The tags are used to identify the parti-
cul8,1' part of the drawing being aimed at by the light pen for demonstra-
tive statements. 
See Chapter IV, Figure 4.5, p 61. 
FIGURE 5.1. 
TWINKLING DISPLAY. 
Displaying the ~ts of a large display in random 
sequence makes the display appear to "twinkle. It 
This 
photograph was exposed only long enough to show about 
half of the spots of a twinkling display. It conveys 
the impression of a twinklings display as well as any 
still picture can. 
4 
2 
2 
2 
The curves are of the equation x 
- x + y = a 
for several values of a. 
They were drawn by another 
program rather than by Sketchpad. 
-69-
-70-
If a part of the drawing is being moved by the light pen, its dis-
play spots will be recomputed as quickly as possible to show it in suc-
cessive positions. 
The display spots for such moving, parts are stored 
at the end of the display file so that the display of the many non-
moving parts need not be disturbed. 
Moving parts are made invisible to 
the light pen so that the demonstrative and pseudo pen location computa-
tions described in Chapter IV will not "lock on" to parts moving along 
with the pen. 
COORDINATE SYSTEMS 
The coordinate system of the TX-2 display system has origin at the 
center of the scope and 
requires ten bits of deflection information 
located at the left of 18 bit computer subwords for each axis. 
Treat-
~ 
ment of these numbers as signed fractions of full scope deflection leads 
to the most natural programming because of the fixed point, Signed 
fraction nature of the TX-2 multiply and divide instructions. 
The 
scope coordinate system is natural to the ability of the TX-2 to perform 
arithmetic operations sDnultaneously on two 18 bit half words. 
It is 
not suitable for representing variables with more than two components, 
nor is the precision available in 18 bits adequate for all the opera-, 
tions for which the Sketchpad system is applicable. 
For convenience in representing many component variables and for 
more than 18 bit preCision, Sketchpad uses an internal coordinate system 
for drawing representation divorced from the representation required by 
the display system. 
This internal system is called the "page" coordi~ 
nate system. 
In thinking of the dra,.,ings in Sketchpad, the page 
-71-
coordinates are considered as fixed. 
A page to scope transformation 
gives the ability to view on the scope any portion of the page desired, 
at any degree of magnification, as if through a magnifying glass. 
The 
magnification feature of the scope window-into-the-page makes it pos~ 
sible to draw the fine details of a drawing. 
The range of magnifica~.· 
t10n of 2000 available makes it possible to work, in effect, on a 
7-inch square portion of a drawing about .. 1/4 mile on a side. 
TRANSFORMATIONS AND SCALE FACTORS 
The page coordinate system is intended for use only internally and 
will always be translated into display or plotter coordinates by the 
output display subroutines. Therefore, it is 
impractical to assign 
any absolute scale factor to the page coordinate system itself; it is 
meaningless to ask how big is the page. 
It is, however, very important 
to know how big the visible representations of Sketchpad drawings will 
be, for one must make drawings in the correct sizes if one is to communi-
cate with machine shops. 
Dimensions indicated on the drawing must cor-
respond to the dimensions of the drawing in its final form if full-size 
dravlings are to be produced. 
The computer I s only concern with the 
actual size of the page coordinate system is to know what decimal number 
should be displayed for the value of a certain distance in page coordi-
nates. 
As Sketchpad now stands, the value is such that one-to-one scale 
drawings can be produced on the plotter if dimensions are read in units 
of thousandths of an inch. 
Page coordinates, then, are dimensionless signed fractions, 36 bits 
long which are considered as fixed when considering drawing representa~ 
tions. 
In order to avoid the troubles of overflow, it is made difficult 
-72-
for the user to generate page coordinates with values in the most signi-
ficant six or seven bits of the 36 allowed. 
This is done by artificially 
limiting the maximum part of the page displayed on the scope to 1/256 of 
the page's linear dimension. 
The 29 or 30 bits of precision which remain 
are sufficient for all applications. 
The maximum magnification of the 
display is also limited so that the "grain" of the page coordinates can-
not show on the display. 
The 2000-to-one scale change mentioned above 
remains. 
A scale factor for the display controls the size of the square 
which will appear on the scope. 
The actual number saved is the half-
length of the side of the square, called SCSZ for SCope ~i~e as shown in 
Figure 5.2. 
Also saved are the page coordinates of the center of the 
scope square. 
By changing these numbers the portion of the page shownl 
on the scope may be changed in size and moved, but not rotated. 
The shaft position encoder knobs below the scope (see Figure 1.2, 
P.ll) are used to control the scale factor and square positioning 
numbers indicated above. 
Rotation of the knobs tells the program to 
change the display scale factor or the portion of the page displayed. 
In order to obtain smooth operation at every degree of magnification, 
unit knob rotations produce changes in the scope size and P9~ition 
numbers proportional to the existing scope size number, SCSZ. 
Rotation 
of the scale change knob, therefore, causes exponential increase 'or 
decrease in SCSZ and this results in apparent linear change in the view 
on the scope. 
i 
I , , 
I 
~----r----· 
I 
v 
I 
_ _ _ _ + L SC~(Qp:TE5 _ 
PAGE COORDINATES 
-73-
F I GU"RE 5.2. 
COORD I NATE SYSTEMS 
-74-
INSIDE OUT ArID OUTSIDE IN DISPLAY 
How the direction of rotation of the knobs affects the translation 
of the display is important from the human factors point of view. 
It is 
possible to think of moving the scope window above the page or moving 
the)drawing beneath the window. 
Since to the user the scope is physi-
cally there, and no sense of body mottpn goes with motion of the window, 
the knobs turn so that the operator thinks of moving the drawing behind 
his window: 
rotation to the right results in picture motion to the 
right or up. 
Similarly, rotation of another knob ·to the right results 
in rotation of picture objects to the right as seen by the user. 
No 
such convenient manner of thought for the scale knob has been found. 
Users get used to either sense of change about equally poorlyj the major 
user so far (the author) still must try the knob before being sure of 
which way it should be turned. 
The vranslation knobs were primarily used to locate a portion of 
the picture in the center of the scope so that it could be enlarged for 
detailed examination. 
To make centering easier, a special function was· 
provided"which relocates the.picture so that the immedia.tely preceding 
light pen position is centered. 
'rhe knobs are now used, for fine posi-
tioning of the picture to make the scope display all of an area which 
just barely fits inside it. The light pen could perhaps be used to con-
trol scope size and positioning without reference to the knobs at all, 
perhaps with a coarse and fine control. 
The question of what controls 
are best suited to humans is wide open for investigation. 
-75-
COORDINATE CONVERSION AND EDGE DETECTION 
The reason for having the page-scope transformation in tenus of 
the location of the scope center and the size of the scope is that this 
form makes it very easy to transform page coordinates into scope coordi-
nates. 
PAGE COORDINATE - CENTER OF SCOPE = SCOPE COORDINATE 
SCOPE SIZE 
. 
The process of division will yield overflow if the point converted does 
not:lie on the scope. 
However, one can little afford the time that 
application of this transformation to each and every spot in a line 
would require. It is necessary, therefore, to compute which portion(s) 
of a curve will appear on the scope, and generate ONLY those portiOns 
for the human to see. 
The edge detection problem is the problem of 
finding suitable end points for the port±on of a curve which appears on 
the scope. 
In concept the edge detection problem is trivial. 
In terms of 
program time for lines and circles the problem is a small fraction of 
the total computational load of the system, but in terms of program 
debugging difficulty the problem was a lulu. 
For example, the computa-
tion of the intersection of a circle with any of the edges of the scope 
is easy, but computation of the intersection of a circle with all four 
edges may result in as many as eight intersections, same pairs of which 
maybe identical, the scope corners. 
Now which of these intersections 
are actually to be used as starts of circle arcs? 
-76. 
THE SERVICE PROGRAM - LINE AND CIRCLE GENERATION 
As the Sketchpad system now exists, all displays are generated from 
straight line segments, circle arcs, and single points. 
The details of 
generating the specific display spots for each of these types of display 
is relegated. to a "service" program. 
The service program also contains 
the actual display sub~program for displaying.the spots and retains 
control over the input and output to the display file. 
The service.pro-
gram takes care of the transformation of coordinates from page coordi-
nates to scope coordinates and computes the portion of the line, Circle, 
or point to be,. shown, if any. 
Since these service functions have been 
working correctly, further programming was not required. to make refer-
ence to the details of scope Size, position, coordinate transformation, 
or display. 
For example, the routine which displays text on the scope 
uses the line and circle service programs to compose each letter. 
The independence of the bulk of the program from the specifics of 
display is a very valuable asset for future expansion and change to the 
system. 
For example, when a line drawing scope capability was added to' 
the TX-2, only the service program needed to be changed to accommodate 
it. Moreover other people can and do use the service subroutines in 
their programs. 
The attitude of independent parts divided by independ-
ence of function pervades the Sketchpad system; being forced to divide 
the program into several binary portions because it was, in toto, too 
big to handle, I divided it in the most 'nattira..I~places (:1 could' find. 
lbe actual generation of the lines and circles for the present spot 
display scope is accomplished by means of the difference equations: 
x. = x. 1 + /:s.( 
~ 
~-
(5-1) 
-77-
for lines, and 
x = x 
+ ~ (y 
y ) 
i 
i-2 
R 
i-I -
c 
(5-2) 
for circles, where subscripts i indicate successive display spots, sub-
script c indicates the circle center, and R is the radius of the circle 
in Scope Units. 
In implementing these difference equations in the pro-
gram the fullest possible use is made of the coordinate arithmetic capa-
bility of the TX-2 so that both the x and y equation computations are 
performed in parallel on 18 bit subwords. 
Including marking the points 
in the display file with the appropriate code for the ring structure 
block to which they belong (two instructions), and indexing, the program 
loops contain five instructions for lines and ten for circles. 
About 
3/4 of the total Sketchpad computation time is spent dOing these 15 in-
structions! 
CIRCLE CLOSURE 
It is an unfortunate property of difference equation approximation 
to differential equations that the tiny errors introduced by the finite 
approximation may accumulate to produce gross noticeable errors. 
Al-
though the difference equation (5-2) listed above for circle generation 
may seem more complicated than necessary, it is the small details of the 
equation that make it useable. 
Considerable effort was required to find 
an.equation which produced faithful circles and could be implemented to 
take advantage of the parallel 18 bit arithmetic available in the TX-2. 
other equations tried either generated logarithmic spirals due to 
-78-
mathematical inadequacies, required more than 18 bit precision to oper~ 
ate accurately, or required serial processing of the x and y equations, 
which would consume more t~e. 
For example, the difference equations: 
1 
xi = xi _l +R (Yi-l - Yc ) 
1 
Yi = Yi - l - R (xi _l - xc) 
(5-3) \ 
produce, a logarithmic spiral which grows about (:n x step size) in "radi-
us II each turn. 
This spiral divergence is predicted theoretically and 
is unrelated to any roundoff error. It could be avoided by using the 
equations : 
(5-4) 
but the term 
R 
is so little different from unity for the usual 
~i+ ~ 
values of R that it cannot be represented in 18 bits. 
The simple change 
from (5-3) to the equations: 
1 
x. = x. 1 + R (Yi - l - Yc) 
~ 
~-
1 
(5-5) 
y. = y. 1 - -
(x - x ) 
~ 
~-
Ric 
where a new position of x is used to generate the next position of y. 
Equations .(5-5) approximate a circle well enough and are known to close 
exactly both in theory and when implemented, but because the x and y 
equations are dissimilar, they cannot make use of TX-2's ability to do 
two 18 bit additions at once. 
Note, however, that Equations (5-5) are 
ideally suited for implementation on machines whiCh can perform only 
-79-
one addition at a time. 
In fact, Sketchpad uses Equations (5-5) to 
generate the sine and cosine functions used for rotations. 
DISPLAY PROGRAMS 
The display programs for line and circle segments are simply the 
line and circle drawing subroutines plus a small program which extracts 
the pertinent numerical information from the ring structure to locate 
the line or circle segment properly. 
As~ilar routine for drawing 
\ dotted lines and dotted circles would 1::e .use':f\ll--the :same ,'manipulations,: 
that apply to lines and circles could be applied to the dotted curves 
as well. 
To be consistent with the existing programs the dotted line 
program would use the line or circle drawing subroutine many times, 
once for each dot. 
Although this would he somewhat inefficient in that 
the values of Ax and 41 in (5-1) would be recomputed each time, it 
could be mad'e to work with the minimum programming difficulty. 
Alterna-
ti vely, a special dotted line subroutine could be written. 
This would 
be especially appropriate if output devices were used for which dotting 
could be accomplished in a special way as, for example, lifting the 
plotter pen periodically while it is tracing a curve. 
Another variation on lines and circles would permit making lines 
of various weights or with different styles of dots:, center lines ,and 
the like. 
These could each J:>e put into the system as a different type 
of line, or all could be treated as a single type with some numerical 
specification of the line characteristics. 
For example, two scalars 
might be used to indicate approximate dot frequency and the ratio of 
dot length to dot period. 
A single scalar might specify the line weight. 
-80-
It is important that the properties < of such a scalar would be the uni t-
less properties of ratios, invariant under changes to the scale of the 
drawing and the transformations of instances. 
The existing scalar with 
the dimension of length would not serve. 
Text, to put legends on a drawing, is displayed by means of special 
tables which indicate the locations of line and circle segments to make 
up the letters and numbers. 
Each piece of text appears in a single line 
not more than 36 characters in length of equally spaced characters which 
can be changed by typing • Digits to display· the value of an indicated 
scalar at any position and in any size and rotation are for.med fram the 
~ 
same type face as text. It is possible to display up to five decimal 
digits with sign; binary to decimal conversion.-.is provided, and. leading 
zeros. are suppressed. 
Whatever transformation is applied to the magni-
fication of subpictures applies also to the value displayed by the 
digits • Digits which indicated lengths when a subpicture was originally 
drawn rematin correct however it is us ed. 
Digi ts are intended for making 
size notations on drawings by means of dimension lines. 
The instance, as will be described more fully in Chapter VI, be-
haves as a Single entity. 
The. display spots which represent all the 
internal parts of instance must be marked with the addressor the 
instance block rather than with the address of the actual line or circle 
blocks which'are the indirect cause of the spots. 
The instance expan-
sion. program makes use of the line, Circle, number, and';text display 
programs and itself to expand the internal structure of the instance. 
A marker is used sq that during expansion of an instance,· display spots 
retain the instance marking. 
.81-
Expansion of instances may be a most time consuming job. 
When 
just the existence of an instance is important, but not its internal 
character, one can display a frame around the instance without having 
its internal structure show. 
The framing and expansion of instances 
are individually controlled by toggle switches. 
The instance frame is 
a square drawn around the outline of the instance, that is, the smallest 
square which fits around the master of. the instance in upright position. 
The size and location of this square are computed whenever a drawing is 
filed away, provided that no instances of the drawing exist. 
In fact, 
the drawing is relocated so that the center of the frame is always at 
the origin of the page coordinate system. 
This is done so that the 
coordinate system of an instance will have origin at about the center 
of the instance. If instances of the picture exist, the program re~ 
frains from relocating picture origin because to do so would slightly 
relocate all instances of the picture in the other direction. 
The instance expansion routine does some edge detection in a crude 
way to avoid spending inordinate amounts of time deciding that each 
line and circle in an instance grossly orf the scope is individually 
off the scope. 
Instances are not expanded unless there is a fair 
chance that some part of them will appear. 
The instance outline box 
is used fOr this purpose·:- . the instance is not expanded if its center is 
more than 1.5 times as far from the scope edge as its box size. 
Since 
the relatively new addition of avoiding box size recomputation and 
translation of a picture if instances of it exist, it is possible to 
have parts of an instance extend any distance outside their box. 
Therefore, instance parts might disappear inexplicably. 
This has, 
however, :neverbeen·observed.'. in practice. 
-82-
A more complete treatment of the size of an instance for edge 
detection which would cure the difficulties outlined above could be 
made. 
One would compute not only the size of the smallest outlining 
square each time an un-instanced drawing is filed away, but also the 
size of the smallest surrounding circle each time the drawing is filed 
away, whether or not it is instanced. The smallest circle would be used 
to detennine whether a particular instance was worth expanding at all, 
OX; if the entire circle was contained on the scope, it would indicate that 
further edge detection would be entirely unnecessary. 
In computing the 
smallest enclosing Circle, needless to say, subpictures would be con-
sidered only as objects which occupy their smallest enclosing circle; 
internal structure of instances would be ignored. 
Whereas now only the 
smallest enclosing box can be seen, in the proposed more complete treat-
ment either the smallest enclosing square or circle could be displayed. 
DISPLAY OF ABSTRACTIONS 
The usual picture for human consumption displays only lines, 
Circles, text, digits, and instances. 
However, certain very useful 
abstractions are represented in the ring structure storage which give 
the drawing the properties desired by the user. 
For example, the fact 
that the start and end points of a circle arc should be equidistant 
from the circle's center point is represented in storage by a constraint 
_block. 
To make it possible for a user to manipulate these abstraction~ 
each abstraction must be able to be seen on the display if desired. 
Not only does displaying abstractions make it possible for the human 
user to know that they eXist, but also displaying abstractions makes it 
-83-
possible for him to aim at them with the light pen and, for example, 
erase them. 
The light pen demonstratiye language described in Chapter 
IV is sufficient for making all changes to objects or abstractions 
which can be displayed. 
To make Sketchpad's J..ight pen language univer-
sal, all objects and abstractions represented in Sketchpad's ring struc-
ture can be displayed. 
To avoid confusion, the display for particular 
types .of objects may be turned on or off selectively by toggle switches. 
Rlus, for example, one can turn on display of constraints. as well as or 
instead of the lines and circles which are normally seen. 
If theirselection,;toggle switch·'.ls on, constraints are .displayed 
as shown in Figure 5-.3. 
The central::ci-rcle and letter are of fixed 
size on the scope regardless of the drawing scale factor and are . 
located at the average location of the variables constrained. 
Rle four 
arms of a constraint extend from the top, right side, bottom, and left 
side of the circle to the first, second, third, and fourt~ variables 
constrained, respectively. If fewer than four variables are constrained, 
excess arms are omitted. 
In Figure 5.3 the constraints are shown ap-
plied to "dummy variables~ft eaCh 'of' 'wh1ch shows as & ·x · 
Two difficulties are encountered with this representation of con-
straints: 
1. 
The constraint diagrams tend to overlap one another when 
a geometric figure has several constraints applied to it, 
and 
2. 
One character is not enough to display all the symbols 
and mnemonics one would like to have for his constraints. 
A'more desirable arrangement would let the user draw the constraint 
representation diagrams in the same way he makes other drawings, per-
mi tting him to invent whatever mnemonics he could draw. 
It would also 
-84-
® 
FIGURE 5.3. 
DISPLAY OF CONSTRAINTS 
------ CONSTRAINT MAkES DIGITS UPRIGHl 
-
CONSTRAINT ON SCALAR VALUE 
FIGURE 5.4. 
, 
'DISPLAY OF SCALAR AND DIGITS 
-85-
be nice to be able to relocate the body of a constraint representation 
at will to avoid the unfortunate and confusing overlapping. 
How to 
locate it without explicit instructions would, however, be a problem. 
Moreover, the constraint, having a position itself, would have to be 
treated as a variable and might be used to constrain itself, compounding 
an already messy business. 
Alternatively, instead of locating the 
circle and letter at the center of the variables one could locate them 
at random nearby. 
Any confusion of constraints could then be clarified 
by recomputing the display file to get a new set of random locations. 
Another abstraction that can be displayed if desired is the value 
of a set of digits. 
The value of a set of digits is stored as a varia-
ble separate from the digits themselves. 
Moving digits means relocating 
them on the drawing or rotating them. 
Making the digits bigger means 
just that, increasing the type size. 
But making the value bigger changes 
the particular digits seen and not the type size. 
The value of a set of 
digits, a scalar, appears as a·* connected to the digits which display 
it by as many lines as there are sets of digits: and located at the. 
average location of these sets, as shown in Figure 5.4. 
Since there is 
usually only one set of digits displaying the value of a scalar, the~ 
is usually superimposed on it and connected to it by a zero length line 
which looks like a dot. 
The major difficulty with this display is that 
values which have no digits all lie exactly on top of orie another at the 
origin. 
EMPTY DISPLAYS 
The ?rames which may be put around instances can be thought of as 
abstractions of the existence as opposed to the appearance of ·the.', 
.86. 
instance. 
Moreover, since it is possible to make an instance of a pic-
ture and then erase the lines in the master picture, it is possible to 
have an instance with no appearance at all, an empty instance. 
Before 
instance framing was possible such empty instances were inaccessible to 
the light pen and likely to be forgotten by the user because they could 
not show on the display. 
At the present time it is possible to lose 
only text; a line of text composed entirely of spaces does not show. 
THE AS YET UNDREAMT OF THINGS THAT WILL BE DISPLAYED 
The organization of Sketchpad display as a set of display subrou-
tines with identical external properties makes it possible to add new 
kinds of displays to the system with the greatest ease. 
At the present 
time the need for dotted lines and circles, including center lines, dark 
lines, etc., and the need for a ratio type unitless scalar for repre-
senting angles and proportions is clear. 
Conic sections would be useful. 
What other kinds of things may become :useful for special purposes is as 
yet unknown.;: Sketchpad attempts to be big enough to incorporate anything 
easily. 
Chapter VI 
RECURSIVE FUNCTIONS 
-87-
In the process of making the Sketchpad system operate, a few very 
general functions were developed which make no reference at all to the 
specific types of entities on which they operate. 
These general functions 
give the Sketchpad system the ability to operate on a wide range of 
problems. 
The motivation for making the functions as general as possible 
came from the desire to get as much result as possible from the progrwm-
Iil~ effort involved. 
For exampl.e, the general fun¢tion for expanding 
instances makes it possible for Sketchpad to handle ~ 
fixed geometry 
subpicture. 
The rewards that came from implementing general :functions 
are so great that the author has become reluctant to write any 
programs for specific jobs. 
Each of the general functions implemented in "the Sketchpad system 
abstracts, in some sense, same cammon property of pictures ind~pendent 
of the specific subject matter of the pictures themselves. 
For example, 
the instance expansion program is a representation of the fact that 
pictures fram many fields contain subpictures with ~elatively fixed 
appearance. It is not claimed that the general functions described in 
this chapter form a complete set, that is, abstract!2! the cammon 
properties of pictures. There is a definite need for a general purpose 
function for making topological changes to a drawing. 
Such a general 
purpose system is necessary, for example, to put fillets and rounds on 
corners, or to be able to define a vocabulary of dotted lines ~ich 
could be, "unreeled, II as it were, to any desired length. Nevertheless, 
the power obtained from the small set of g~neralized functions in 
Sketchpad is one of the most important results of the research. 
.88-
In order of historical development, the recursive functions in use 
in the Sketchpad system are: 
1. Expansion of instances, making it possible to have 
subpictures within subpictures to as many levels as 
desired. 
2. 
Recursi ve deletion, whereby removal of certain'· 
picture parts will remove other picture parts in order 
to maintain consistency in the ring structure. 
3. 
Recursive merging, whereby combination of two 
similar picture parts forces combination of simila.rly 
related other picture parts, making possible application 
of complex definitions to an object picture. 
4. 
Recursive moving, wherein moving certain picture 
parts causes the display of appropriately related picture 
parts to be regenerated automatically. 
PUSH DOWN LISTS 
A cammon method of keeping track of the recursion process is to 
use, a "push down list," a device much like a Sinking table used in 
cafeterias to hold dishes so that as a dish is removed the next is 
ready. 
Each'·of the entries of. a pushdown list references the next, so 
that if one is removed, the location of the next will be available. A 
peculiarity of the Sketchpad system is that these push down lists are 
formed directly in the data storage structure and not separately by the 
program. 
This guarantees that if' the data storage structure fits in 
memory, it may be fully recursed wi thout risk that the push down in-
formation overflow the space available for it. As far as possibie~ 
S~etchpad uses parts of the data structure otherwise. used for other 
.purposes to perform the push down function. 
Chapter III and Appendix C described the ring structure used for 
primary picture storate in the Sketchpad system and showed the relation-
ships between various kinds of blocks. 
In this section as little reference 
-89-
as possible will be .made to the exact nature of the blocks involved, 
becauSe by avoiding reference to specific' structure thelUnctions con-
sidered may be made applicable to any specific structure. 
By way of 
example, however, spme specific cases will be mentioned; bear in mind 
that these are meant only to be illustrative. 
DEPENDENT AND mDEPENDENT EL»1ENTS 
Certain picture elements depend in a vital 'way for their existence, 
display, and properties on other elements. For example, a line segment 
must reference two end pOints between which it is drawn; a: s.et·· o·f' digits:; 
must reference a scalar which indicates the value to be shown. 
In three 
dimensions it might be that a surface is represented as connecting four 
lines which in turn depend· on end points. If a particular thing depends 
on s amething else there will be in the dependent thing e . reference by 
pointer to the thing depended upon. 
In the ring st:ructure used in 
Sketchpad, there will be a ring with a "hen" pair in the thing depended' 
on and at least one "chicken" pair in a dependent thing. For example, 
a ring will connect a point with all lines which use it as an end point; 
the chicken pairs of this ring, being in the blocks for the lines in 
question, point to the point as an end point of the lines. 
Since there may be any number of rings passing through a given 
block, a particular block may depend on some other blocks and 
s imul taneously be depended on by others. Such a block contains both 
hens and chickens. 
In particular, all blocks contain at least one 
chicken which indicates by a reference ,to a generic'block.the type of 
thing represented. 
Some things are otherwise totally depended upon, 
e.g. pOints, same things are totally dependent, e.g. lines, and same 
both depend and are depende:dr1. on, e.g. instances. 
RECURSIVE DELETING 
-90-
Consistency is of course maintained if a single thing upon which no 
other thing depends is deleted. 
To accomplish this, all chicken pairs 
in its block are removed fram their corresponding rings. 
The registers 
which comprised a deleted block are declared "free" by their addition to 
the FREES storage ring. 
In the Sketchpad system, line segments are 
entirely dependent and may be deleted without affecting anything else. 
However, deleting a line may leave end points on the drawing with no 
lines attached to them. 
A special button is provided for removing all 
such useless pOints from the drawing. 
If a thing upon which other things depend is deleted, the dependent 
things must be deleted also. 
For example, if a point is to be deleted, 
all lines which terminate on the point must also be deleted. 
otherwise, 
where would these lines end? Similarly, deletion of a variable requires 
deletion of all constraints on that variable; a constraint must have 
variables to act on. 
Three dimensional surfaces might-be made to depend 
on lines which depend on points; if so, deletion of a point would require 
deletion of a line which would in turn require deletion of a surface. 
In Sketchpad, deleting a scalar forces deletion of all digits displaying 
its value, which will force deletion of all constraints holding the 
digits in position. Although the scalar-digits-constraint chain is 
the longest one in Sketchpad, the programs could handle longer chains 
if they existed. 
The recursiveness of deletion brings with it the difficulty that 
one deletion may cause any number of deletions. It may therefore be 
difficult to follow the ring structure during deletions. For example, 
suppose that everything in a particular picture is to be deleted, a 
facility which is provided. 
The program applies the delete routine to 
-91-
the fi~st thing in the picture, say a point, and then to the next thing 
in the picture, say a line which terminated on the paint. 
The normal 
macro mentioned in Chapter III for applying functions to all the members 
of a ring, LGORR, cannot be used, for at the time the next ring member 
is to be l,ocated, both it and the current ring member may be so much 
meaningless free storage. 
To delete everything in a picture, Sketchpad 
again ~d' again deletes the'fir:st ,thing in the picture, thus chewing 
~way until ~hepicture is gone. 
The push down list for recursive deletion is formed with the pair of 
registers which normally indicates what type of thing a block represents. 
As soon as it is found that a block must be deleted, it is declared 
1tdead tt by placing its TYPE pair in a generic ring, called DEADS. 
The first 
dead thing is then examined to see if it forces other things to be de-
clared dead, which is done until no more dead things are generated by the, 
first dead thing. 
The first dead 'thing is then declared "free" and the 
new first dead thing is examined in exactly the same way until no more 
dead things exist. 
The PE.All3 ring, through registers Wllicll normally in-
dicate type, serves as the push down list. 
RECURSIVE MERGING 
The single most powerful tool for constructing drawings, when com.;. 
bined with the definition copying function described in Chapter VII, is 
the ability to merge picture parts recursively. 
The recursive merge 
function makes it possible to make statements such as t~ thing is to 
be related to ~ 
thing in such and such a way.1t The relationship may 
be treated as applying to things which it relates onlY indireqtly. 
For 
example we shall soon see how one line may be made parallel to another 
even though the parallelism constraint applies only to the locations 
-92-
of their end points. Similarly, a set of digits can be forced to dis-
play the length of a line, even though the constraint involved refers 
to the end points of the line and the value of the digits rather than 
to the line or the digits themselves. 
The recursive merge function makes 
it meaningful to combine anything with anything else of the same type 
regardless of whether the things are dependent on other things or depended 
on by others. 
If two things of the same type which are independent are merged, 
a Single thing of that type results, and all things which depended on 
either of the merged things depend on the result*of the merger. 
For 
example, if two points are merged, all lines which previously terminated 
on either point now terminate on the single resulting point. 
In Sketch-
pad, if a thing is being moved with the light pen and the ter.mination 
flick of the pen is given while aiming at another thing of the same 
type, the two things will merge. 
Thus, if one moves a point to another 
point and terminates, the points will merge, connecting all lines which 
formerly terminated on either. This makes it possible to draw closed 
polygons. 
If two things of the same type which do depend on other thingS are 
merged, the thingS depended on by one will be forced to merge, respectively, 
with the things depended on by the other. 
The result* of merging two dependent 
things depends respectively on the results* of the mergers it forces. For 
example, if two lines are merged, the resultant line must refer to only 
two end points, the results of merging the pairs of end points of the 
* The "result" of a merger is a s:l.ngle thing of the same type 
as the merged things. 
-93-
original lines. All lines which terminated on any of the four original 
end points now terminate on the appropriate one of the remaining pair. 
More important and useful, all constraints which applied to any of the 
four original end points now apply to the appropriate one of the re-
maining pair. 
This makes it possible to speak of line segments as being 
parallel even though (because line segments contain no numerical in-
formation to be constrained) the parallelism constraint must apply to 
their end points and not to the line segments themselves. If we wish 
to make two lines both parallel and equal in length, the steps outlined 
in Figure 6.1 make it possible. More obscure relationships between 
dependent things may as easily be defined and applied. 
For example, 
constraint complexes can be defined to make line segments be collinear, 
to make aline be tangent to a circle, or to make the values represented 
by two sets of digits be equal. 
INSTANCES 
The most powerful tool prov!ded in the Sketchpad system for creating 
large complex drawings quickly and easily is the instance. 
Instances 
are recursively expanded so that instances may contain other,)instances 
to give an exponential growth of picture produced with respect to effort 
expended. 
Instances may have attachment pOints and therefore may 
connect points topologically much as line segments do. 
For ex~le, an 
instance of a resistor may connect two pOints pothelectrically and 
geometrically on the drawing. 
An instance also has the properties of a 
four component variable: 
numbers are stored in each instance block to 
indicate where, how big, and in what rotation that instance is to 
appear on the picture. It took some time to reconcile the topological 
properties of instances with their properties as variables. 
·A. OPERATION DEFINITION 
B. PICTURE TO CONSTRAIN 
c. DEFINITION COPIED 
D. FIRST LINE MERGED 
E. SECOND LINE MERGED 
F. CONSTRAINTS SATISFIED 
FIGURE 6.1. APPLYING TWO CONSTRAINTS 
INDIRECTLY TO TWO LINES 
-
.... '\f). ! ARALLEL 1 5M \ '0" ~QUAL LENGTH 
'" 
'" 
-95-
The block of registers which represents an instance is remarkably 
small considering that it may generate a displ~ of any complexity. 
For 
the purposes of display, the instance block makes reference to a picture 
by means of its chicken in a ring which ties a' picture to all its 
instances. 
The imtance will appear on the display as a figure geometrically 
similar to the picture of which it is an instance but at a location, 
size, and rotation indicated by the four numbers which constitute the 
"value 11 of the instance. 
An important omission as this is written is 
the ability to make mirror images. 
Right and left handed figures must 
now be treated separately, whereas the instance should indicate whether 
a right or left handed version of the master is to be shown. 
INSTANCES p,s VARIABLES 
The four numbers which specify the size, rotation, and location of 
the instance are considered numerically as a four dimensional vector. 
In certain computations, the value of a variable is changed "as little 
as possible" if there is no need to change it further. 
The distance 
measured in the case of instances is the square root of the "sum of the 
squares of the four components. 
For this reason, and for simplicity in 
the use of the fixed point arithmetic of the TX-2, it is important that 
the four numbers used to ~epresent the vector be of about the same order 
of magnitude. 
The particular numbers chosen are the coordinates of the 
center of the instance and the actual size of the instance as it appears 
on the drawing times the sine and cosine of the rotation angle involved. 
In a typical drawing these four numbers have reasonably similar ranges 
of variation. 
-96-
In our early work we attempted to use the position and the sine and 
cosine of the rotation angle times the reduction in size from the master 
picture in order to avoid the normalization of master picture size implicit 
in the above paragraph. 
This not only prevented having instances larger 
than their masters because of the fixed point arithmetic, but also made 
distance in the four dimensional space meaningless. 
No attempt was ever 
made to use the size and rotation numbers independently. 
The transformations of coordinates represented by the above 
paragraphs are: 
Poor 
-Xd!= r1 i2 
l ydJ ti2 iJ 
rl,x l ii31 
m 
, 
I 
; 
+1 
~mJ li4 
Better 
where: 
Xd'Yd = Display location in page coordinateG. 
x ,Y = Master location in page coordinates~ 
m m 
s = Size of master picture in page coordinates. 
m 
i l .• i4 = 4 vector in instance, . - 1 < ii < + 1. 
(6-1) 
(6-2) 
-97-
RECURSIVE DISPLAY OF INSTANCES 
In displaying an instance of a picture, reference must be made to 
the picture itself to find out what picture parts are to be shown. 
The 
picture referred to may contain instances, however, requiring further 
reference, and so on until a picture is found which contains no instances. 
A recursive program performs this function. 
At each stage in the recursion, 
any picture parts displayed must be relocated so that they will appear at 
the correct position, size and rotation on the display. 
Thus, at each 
stage of the recursion, same transformation of the form of ~uation (6-2)" 
is ~pplied to all pictu~e parts before displaying them. If an instance is 
'1 
enqountered, the transformation represented by its value must be adjoined 
to the existing transformation for display of parts within it. When the 
expansion of an instance within an instance is finished, the transformation 
must be restored for continuation at the higher level. 
To avoid the difficulties of taking an inverse transformation, the 
old transformation is saved in registers provided for that purpose in 
the picture block of the picture being expanded. 
Thus, the current trans-
formation is stored in program registers 
and is being used, whereas the 
previous transformation is saved in the picture block currentlY being 
expanded. 
The push down list is provided also by indicating in the 
picture block being expanded the particular instance thereof which is 
responsible for this expansion of the picture. 
The first picture to 
be displayed starts w~th no transformation at all. Thus, if it contains 
itself as an instance, one recursion is possible, saving the old trans-
formation in the picture block and saving the address of the instance 
responsible for the expansion in the picture block as well. Subsequent 
recursions will be prevented, however, because no instance is expanded 
-98-
if the picture of which it is an instance already belongs on the push 
down list. It would be possible to expand such circular instances 
further by providing same suitable termination condition such as reaching 
a level too small to show on the display. 
However, since the instances 
might get larger rather than smaller, termination conditions are far from 
simple. 
A~CHERS AND INSTANCES 
Many symbols used must be integrated into the rest of the drawing 
by attaching lines to the symbols at appropriate pOints, or by attaching . 
the symbols directly to each other as if by zero length lines. For 
example, circuit symbols must be wired up, geometric patterns made by 
fitting shapes together, or mechanisms composed of links tied together 
appropriately. An instance may have any number of tie pOints, an~con-
versely,a point may serve as tie for any number of instances. 
An 
"instance~point1! constraint block is used to relate an instance 
to each of its tie pOints. 
All instance-point constraint is satisfied only 
when the point bears the same relationship to the instance that a point 
in the master picture for that instance bears to the master picture 
coordinate system. 
Instance-point constraints are treated as a special 
case when an instance is moved so that tie pOints always move with their 
instance, and lines terminating on the tie pOints move as well. 
Each 
instance-point constraint makes reference to both the instance and its) 
tie points by means of chickens. 
To use a point os an attacher of an instance, the point must be 
designated as an attacher in the master drawing of the instance. 
For 
example, when one first draws a resistor, the ends of the resistor must 
-99-
be designated as attachers if wiring is to be attached. When an instance 
is created by pressing the "instance" button, toggle switches tell what 
picture the instance is to refer to. Along with the instance element 
are created a point ,and an instance-point constraint for each attacher. 
The~e points are bonifide pOints in the object picture but ~re not 
automatically attachers of the object picture. If they are to be used 
as attachers when the object picture is instanced, they must be designated' 
anew. 
Thus of the three attachers of a trans istor it is poss'ible to 
select one or two to be the attachers of a flip-flop. 
The entire internal structure of the instance is suppressed as 
far as the light pen is concerned except for the attachers. 
Thus even on 
a dense circuit drawing it is possible to connect elements with ease 
because at the highest level of instance only the designated attachers 
will hold the attention of the light pen program. 
Usual~y there are 
only a few attacners for each blOck no matter how complicated internally, 
and so it is generally obvious whic~ one to use. 
RECURSIVE MOVING 
At first only variables could be moved. 
Moving a variable ,means 
to change somehow the numbers stored- as the components of the variable, 
usually to make the display, for the variable follow light pen motions'. 
A moving point, for example, will be firmly attached to the pseudo 
pen position, while a moving piece of text faithfully follows light pen 
displacements so that the"part pf':the . .'text which 'WaS under the pen when 
the' "move It button was pressed remains under the pen. 
For variables 
with more than two components, moving is partly controlled by the pen 
and partly by knobs. 
For example, the moving text can be made larger or 
rotated by two of the.knobs. 
-100-
The advent of the recursive merging and the definition copying 
functions made it clear that one should be able to move anything 
regardless of whether or riot it is variable. 
To move a non~va.ri~ble,.a. re-
cursive process. is used to find whatever variables may be basic to the 
thing being moved. 
For example, if a line is to be moved, the end 
pOints on which it depends must be moved. 
All objects which are being 
moved are put in a ring whose hen is in the MOVINGS generic block. 
The 
object actually attached to the light pen is first in the ring. 
Upon 
termin~tion qnly this first object in the MOVINGS ring .may be merged 
with other objects. 
The numerical operation of moving is accomplished by the standard 
transformation procedure. 
The small transformation due to light pen 
'position . change and knob rotaticn since the last program iteration is 
converted to the form of Equation (6-2) and placed in the' standard 
location. 
Each object in the MOVINGS ring is transformed by it. The 
generic block. _for each type of object, of course, contains the subroutine 
to apply the transformation to such objects. 
The generic block for lines, 
for examp~e, indicates that : 'no transformation need be applied to the 
line because it contains no numerical values and will automatically be 
moved when its end points are moved. 
Moving objects must be invisible to the light pen. Since the light 
pen aims at anything within its field of view, it would- otherwise aim 
at a moving object and a jerky motion would result. Motion would only 
happen when the pen's field of view passed beyond the object being moved. 
Moreover, the-display for moving objects must be recomputed regularly for 
.. 
the benefit of the human user, but the unmoving background need not be 
-
recomputed. 
The display spot coordinates for objects being recomputed 
-101-
is placed last in the display file, above (in higher numbered registers) 
the fixed background display so that it.may be recomputed without dis-
turbing the rest of the displ~y file. 
The light pen program rejects any 
spots seen by the pen which come fram these high display file locations. 
Needless to s~, the entire display file must be recomputed once to 
eliminate the former traces of the newly moving objects. 
-.102-
Chapter VII 
BUILDING A DRAWING, THE COpy FUNCTION 
As experimentation with drawing systems for the computer' progressed, 
the basic drawing operations evolved into their present form. 
At the 
outset, the very general picture and relationship defining capability of 
the copy and recursive merging functions were unknown and so considerable 
power had to be built directly into the s~tem. Now, of course,. it would 
be possible to use much simpler atomic operations to draw simple pictures 
\ 
embodying many of the not~~ns now treated as atomic. 
DRAWING VS. MOVING 
An idea that was difficult for the author to grasp was that there 
is no state of the system that can be called "drawing. n 
Conventionally, 
of course, drawing is an active process which leaves a trail of carbon 
on the paper. 
\·"ith a computer sketch, however, any line segment is 
straight and can be relocated by moving one or both of ~ts end points. 
In particular, when the button "draw" is pressed, a new line segment and 
two new end points are set up in storage, and one of the line's end 
points is lef't attached to the light pen so that subsequent pen motions 
will move the point. 
The state of the system is then no different from 
its state whenever a point is being moved~ 
Similarly, to draw a circle, one creates a c·enter point when the 
-bt.~tton "circle centerlt is pressed, and creates int~e ring structure a 
circle block and its start and end points when'the button "draw" is 
pressed with a circle center defined. 
The end point of the circle arc 
-103-
is left attached to the light pen to move with subsequent pen motionS. 
Since the start and end points of a circle arc should be equidistant 
from its center point, an equal distance constraiht is created along 
with the circle but could be subsequently deleted without deleting' the 
circle. 
ATOMIC OPERATIONS 
In general, when creating new points to serve as the start of line 
segments and circle arcs or centers for circle arcs, an existing point 
is used if the pen is aimed at one when the new point would be generated. 
Thus, if one aims at the end of an existing line segment and presses 
"draw" the new line segment will use the existing point rather than 
setting up another point which has the same coordinates. 
Later motion 
of this point will move both lines attached to it; the ring structure 
storage reflects the intended topology of the drawing. 
Similarly, if 
one is moving a point and gives a termination signal while aiming at 
another point, these two points will be merged, again reflecting the 
intended dravring topology. 
vle have seen that a constraint is set up to indicate that the st'art 
and end points of a circle arc should be equidistant from its center 
whenever a new circle arc is drawn. 
Similarly, constraints to indicate 
that a point should lie on a line or circle are automatically set up if 
a point is either created while the pen is pointing to the line or circle 
or moved onto the line or circle. 
The ~onstraints, of course,do not 
apply to the line or circle itself but to the points on which it de-
pends.. If the light pen is aimed at the intersection of line segments, 
-104-
two "point-on-line" constraints will be set up for a point created or 
left there, one for each intersecting line. 
Three or more line seg-
ments may be forced to pass through a Single point by moving that point 
onto them successively to set up the appropriate constraints. 
Constraint 
satisfaction will then move the lines so that all of them pass through 
the point. 
In order to avoid cluttering up the ring structure with re-
dundant co~straints, the pOint-on-line and point-on-circle c·onstraints 
are set up only if the point is not already so constrained. 
GENERALIZATION OF ATOMIC OPERATIONS 
The atomic operations described above make it possible to create in 
the ring structure new picture components and relate them topologically. 
The atomic operations are, of course, limited to creating points, lines, 
circles, point-on-line and point-on-circle constraints. 
(The point-on-
circle constraint is the same type as used to keep the circle IS start 
and end points equidistant from its center.) Since implementation of 
the copy function it has become possible to create any comb~nation of 
picture parts and constraints in the ring structure. 
The recursive 
merging function makes it possible to relate this set of picture parts 
to any existing parts. 
For example, if a line segment, and its two end. 
points are copied into the obj ect picture, the action of the "draw" 
button may be exactly duplicated in every respect. 
Along with the copied 
line, however, one might copy as well a constraint to make the line hori-
zontal, or two constraints to make it both horizontal and three inches 
long, or any other variation on~ cares to put into the ring structure 
to be copied. 
-105-
When one draws a definition picture to be copied, certain portions 
of it to be used in relating it to other object picture parts are desig-
nated as "attachers". 
Anything at all may be designated: for example, 
points, lines, circles, text, even constraints! 
The rules used for cam-
bining points when the "draw" button is pressed are generalized so· that: 
For copying a pict~re~the last-designated attacher is left 
moving with the light pen. 
The next-to-last-designated 
attacher is r~cursively merged with whatever object the pen 
is aimed at when the copying occurs, if that object is of 
like type. 
Previously designated attachers are recursively 
merged with previously designated object picture parts, if 
of like type, until either the supply of designated attachers 
or the supply of designated obj ect picture parts is exhausted. 
The last-designated attacher may be recursively merged with 
any other object of like type when the tennination flick is 
given. 
Normally only two designated attachers are used because it is hard to -
keep track of additional ones. 
The order'in which attachers are desig-
nated is important because it is in this order that they will be treated. 
If a mistake is made in ordering·the attachers, redesignation of an at-
tacher puts it last in the order. 
As this is written there is no way 
to undesignate an attacher, except by· deleting it,an oversight which 
should be corrected. 
If the definition picture to be copied consists of a line segment 
with end points as attachers and a horizontal constraint between the 
end points, as shown in Figure 7.lA, pressing the "copy"button will 
appear to the user exactly like pressing the "draw" button. 
One end 
point of the line will be left·- behind and one will follow the light pen. 
Subsequent constraint satisfaction will, however, make the line horizon-
tal. 
v 
If the definition picture consists of two line segments, their four 
end pOints, and a constraint on the points which makes the lines. equal 
POINT. ATTACHER 21 
lPOINT. ATTACHER 1 /// 
LINE. ATTA~;~ 
----~----
----~/ 
A. 
HORIZONTAL LINE 
LINE. ATTACHER 1 
B. 
EQUAL LENGTH LINES 
POINT. ATTACHER 21 
DIAMOND IN5TANCE---. 
l 
PO I NT. A TT ACHER 1 
i 
'" ";' ... 
I 
~./'I \ 
~ 
INSTANCE-POINT CONSTRAINT-([; ~ ~ 
\..V 
CONSTRAINTS ON lN5TANCE----\Ej \E) 
. C. 
PARTLY FLEXIBLE ARROW 
INSTANCE. ATTACHER 2 
rSTANCE. A TT ACHER 1 1 
~ 
.. @----
< 
.... 
.,. 
" 
" 
...... 
,. 
as CD'® 
D. 
PRE-JOINED INSTANCES 
FIGURE 7.1. 
DEFINITIONS TO COpy 
-106-
-106-
in length, with the two lines designated as attachers as shown in Figure 
7.lB, copying enables the user to make any two lines equal in length. 
If the pen is aimed at a line when "copy" is pushed, the first of the 
two copied lines merges with it, (taking its position and never actually 
being seen). 
The other copied line is left moving with the light pen 
and will merge with whatever other line the pen is aimed at when ter.mi-
nation occurs. 
Since merging is recursive, the copied equal-length con-
straint will apply to the desired pair of object picture lines. If no 
lines are aimed at, of course, the c,opied picture parts are seen at once 
with the scale factor so reduced that the entire copied picture t~es up 
about 1/16 of the display area. 
If the picture to be copied consists of the erect constraint and 
the full size constraint, both applying to a single dummy variable which 
is the attache~, copying produces a useful constraint co~plex attached 
to the pen for subsequent application to any desired instance. 
With 
only one attacher, the instance constrained is the one the pen is aimed 
at when termination occurs. 
COPYING INSTANCES 
As we saw in Chapter VI the internal structure of an instance is 
entirely fixed. 
The internal structure of a copy, however, is en1?irely 
variable. 
An instance always retains its identity as a single part of 
the drawing; 'one can only delete an entire instance. 
Once a definition 
picture is copied, however, the copy loses all identity as a'unit; indi-
vidual parts of it may be deleted at will. 
One might expect that there was intermediate ground between the 
fixed-internal-structure instance and the loose-internal-structure copy. 
-107 
One might wish to produce a collection of picture part~ some of which 
were fixed internally and some of which were not. 
The entire range of 
variation between the instance and the copy can be constructed by copy-
ing instances. 
For example, the arrow shown in Figure 7.1C can be copied into an 
object picture to result in a fixed-internal-structure diamond arrowhead 
with a flexible tail. 
As the definition in Figure 7.10 is set up, draw-
ing diamond-arrowheaded lines is just like drawing o~inary lines. 
One 
aims the light pen where the tail is to end, presses "copy" and moves 
off with an arrowhead following the pen. 
The diamond arrowhead in this 
case will remain horizontal. 
Copying pre-joined instances can produce vast numbers of joined 
instances very easily. 
}i'or example the definition in Figure 7.lD, when 
repetitively copied, will result in a row of joined, equal size diamonds. 
In this case the instances themselves are attachers. Although each press 
of the It copy" button copi'es two new instances into 'the obj ect picture, 
one of these is merged with the last instance in the growing row. 
In 
the final row, therefore, each instance carries all the constraints which 
were applied to either of the instances in the definition. 
This is why 
only one of the instances in Figure 7.ID carries the erect constraint. 
Notice also that although the diamond is nor.mally a two~attacher instance, 
each of the diamonds in Figure 7.lD carries only one attacher. 
The other 
has been deleted so that each instance in the final. row of diamonds will 
obtain only one right and one left attacher, one from each of the copied 
instances. 
-108-
THE MECHANICS OF COPYING 
Needless to nay, when a piece of ring utructure is copied the 
definition picture used is not destroyed; the copying procedure re-
produces its ring structure elsewhere in memory. 
However, the repro-
duction is not just a duplication of the numbers in some registers. 
The 
parts of the definition drawing to be copied may be topologically related, 
and the parts of the copy must be related to each other in the same way 
rather than to the parts of the master. 
Worse yet, some parts of the 
definition may be related to things which are not being copied. 
For 
example, an instance is related to the master picture of which it is 
an instance, and the copy of the instance must be related to the same 
master picture, not to a copy of it. 
To copy a picture, space to duplicate all the elements of the pic-
ture is allocated in the free registers at the end of the ring structure. 
Each of the new elements is tied into its appropriate generic block ring 
by its TYPE component. 
Each new element is placed in this ring a.djacent 
to the element it is a copy of. 
That is, for each element in the master 
a duplicate element is set up adjacent to it. in the generic ring for 
that type of element. 
Appropriate scaled values are given to copied 
variables. 
The various references in the definition elements are then 
examined to see whether they refer to things that have been copied. 
If 
they do, the corresponding components of the copied elements are made 
to refer to the appropriate copied elements. 
On the other hand, if a 
definition element refers to something which has not been copied, its 
copy refers to the ~ 
element that its definition does. 
When the complete copy has been made, the copies of all but the 
last-designated of the attachers are recursively merged with the designated 
-109-
! 
portions of the object picture. The last-designated attacher is fastened 
to the light pen with the recursive moving function. 
T.he last-designated 
attacher may later on merge with another picture part. 
Chapter VIII 
CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION 
-110-
The major feature which distinguishes a Sketchpad drawing from a 
paper and pencil drawing is the user's ability to specify to Sketchpad 
mathematical conditions on already drawn parts of his drawing which will 
be automatically satisfied by the computer to make the drawing take the 
exact shape desired. 
For example, to draw a square, any quadralateral 
is created by sloppy light pen manipulation, closure being assured by 
the pseudo light pen position and merging of points. 
The sides of this 
quadralateral may then be specified to be equal in .length· and any angle 
may be required to be a right angle. 
Given these conditions, the com-
puter will complete a square. 
Given an additional specification, say 
the length of one Side, the computer will create a square of the desired 
size. 
The process of fixing up a drawing to meet new conditions applied 
to it after it is already partially complete is very much like the proc-
ess a designer goes through in turning a basic idea into a finished de-
sign. 
As new requirements on the various parts of the deSign- are' 
thought of, small changes are made to the size or other properties of 
parts to meet the new conditions. 
By making Sketchpad able to find new 
values for variables which satisfy the conditions impos~ it is hoped 
that designers can be relieved of the need of much mathematical detail. 
The effort expended in making the definition of constraint types as 
general as possible was aimed at making design constraints as well as 
geometric constraints equally easy to add to the system. 
To date, 
-111-
however, Sketchpad is more of a model of the design process than a 
complete designer's aid both because it is limited to two dimensions 
and because little advanced application has as yet been made of it. 
The work on constraint satisfaction has been successful as far as 
it has been taken. 
The constraint definition and satisfaction programs 
generalize easily to three dimensions; in fact, constraint satisfaction 
for instances is even now treated as a four dimensional problem. 
The 
high speed maze solving technique for constraint satisfaction described 
below works well where constraints have been specified unredundantly. 
There is much room for improvement in the relaxation process and in 
making the "intelligent" generalizations that permit humans to 
capitalize on symmetry and eliminate redundancy. 
DEFINITION OF A CONSTRAINT TYPE 
Each constraint type is entered into the system as a generic block 
indicating the various properties of that particular constraint type. 
Generic blocks for constraints need not be given symbolic programming 
names since virtually no reference is made to particular constraint 
types in the program. 
The generic block tells how many variables are 
constrained, which of these variables may be changed in order to satisty 
the constraint, how many degrees of freedom are removed from the con-
strained variables, and a code letter for human reference to this 
constraint type. 
Any number of variables may be related by a constraint, but the 
display for constraints (~ Chapter V) will be ambiguous if more than 
four variables are indicated, and so no constraints relate more than 
four variables. 
Of these variables, some may be referenced only. 
-112-
The routine which satisfies the constraint by changing the values of 
some of the variables is forbidden to satisfy the constraint by chang-
ing a 
tI for reference only" variable. 
!i'or example, a constraint could 
be implemented which ,,,auld make its first variable equal to its second 
by changing the first to match the second, but not the reverse. 
This 
kind of one-way constraint is useful because it speeds up the relaxation 
procedure by forcing re-evaluation of variables in a specified order. 
For example, the constraint which makes the value of a number equal to 
the change in length of a bridge beam, thus indicating the force 
carried by the beam, is one way. 
It would be pointless to have an 
erroneous value of the indicator affect in any way the relaxation pro-
cedure for the bridge. 
Again, the constraint which relates a point to 
an instance in such a way that the point maintains the same relationship 
to the instance that an original point in the master picture had to the 
master picture, uses the origina.l point "for reference only" to discover 
just ,,,hat the correct relationsh:Lp is. 
Thus the end terminal on a 
resistor will always stay at the end of the resistor. It would be out 
of keeping with the fixed geometry nature of instances to have the 
internal details of the instance changed to make it fit into some 
awkward position. 
The one-way type constraint, however, can lead to instabilities in 
the constraint satisfaction procedure. 
For example, if two scalars 
were each specified to be twice the value of the other, with reference 
only made to the smaller, 
(8-1) 
B .. 2A, 
-113-
both variables would grow without bound, assuming, each iteration, 
values four times as big as before. 
If, however, a similar condition 
were set up with normal two-way constraints, the values of the variables 
would approach zero, a correct and stable result. 
Since the number of 
one-way constraints is small and they are designed for and used in 
special applications only, very little instability trouble of this kind 
has been observed. 
Future users who add one-way constraints, however, 
are warned to be cautious of the instabilities which may result. 
NUMERICAL DEFINITION OF CONSTRAINTS 
After the first stumblings of trying to define a constraint type in 
terms of the equations of lines along which the constrained variables 
should lie to satiSfy the constraint, the numerical definition of con-
straints directly in terms of an error was devised. 
By using an error 
definition and considering the square of the error as an energy, one not 
only reflects directly the intent of the relaxation process, but also 
makes it easy to write the defining subroutines for new constraint types. 
The defining subroutine for a constraint type is a subroutine which 
will compute, for the existing values of the variables of a particular 
constraint of that type, the error introduced into the system by that 
particular constraint. 
For example, the defining subroutine for making 
pOints have the same x 
coordinate (to make a line between them vertical) 
computes the difference in their x 
coordinates. 
What could be simpler? 
The computed error is a scalar which the constraint satisfaction routine 
will atte~pt to reduce to zero by manipulation of the constrained 
variables. 
The computation of the error may be non-linear or time 
dependent, or it may involve parameters not a part of the drawing such 
-114-
as the setting of toggle switches, etc. 
The flexibility of computation 
subroutines for defining constraints is tremendous. 
In order to avoid overflow difficulties, the partial derivative of 
the error with respect to the value of any of the components of a con-
strained variable must be less than two. 
In order to make the constraints 
work well togethe~ it is necessary that they be balanced, that is that 
the partial derivative of error with respect to displacement be nearly 
equal for all constraint types. 
I have arbitrarily tried to make the 
) 
error subroutines compute an error about proportional to the distance by 
which a variable is removed from its proper position. 
In other words, 
many of the existing constraint computation subroutines make the partial 
derivative about unity. 
LINEARIZATION OF CONSTRAINTS 
The method of finding the least mean squares fit to·a group of 
constraints described below requires that a linear equation be given for 
each constraint. 
To find the linear equation whiCh best approximates 
the possibly non-linear constraint for the present values of the variabJe~ 
the error computed by the subroutine is noted for several slightly 
different values of the variables. 
The equation, 
I· A.E (x. - x. ) = -Eo, 
Ax'. 
1 
10 
1 
(8-Z) 
where x 
are the components of the variable, 
E is the computed error, 
i 
and subscript 
0 
denotes intial value, is used as the linear best fit~ 
Actually, the coefficients computed are 1/2 the values shown in equation 
(8-2) to permit error to be equal to displacement without generating 
overflow. 
-115-
Some constraints may remove more than one degree of freedom from 
the variables constrained. 
For example, the constraint which locates 
one thing exactly mid-way between two others removes two degrees of 
freedom. 
Such constraints must have as many error computation sub-
routines as there are degrees of freedom los~ since each subroutine 
results in a single linear equation. 
A subroutine which computes the 
distance from a variable to its correct location without regard to the 
number of degrees of freedom being removed will cause erratic results. 
A correct subroutine pair for constraining one thing to lie between two 
others computes both how far out of line the center thing is and, sep-
arately, 1/2 the difference in the distances from the center object to 
the two outer ones (1/2 is put in to meet the maximum derivative require-
ment) • 
THE RELAXATION METHOD 
When the one pass method of satisfying constraints to be described 
later on fails, the Sketchpad system falls back on the reliable but slow 
method of relaxation to reduce the errors indicated by the various com-
putation subroutines to smaller and smaller values. 
For simple construc-
tions such as the hexagon illustrated in Figure -1.5, page 15 the relaxation 
procedure is sufficiently fast to be useful. 
However, for complex 
systems of variables, especially directly connected instances, relaxation 
is unacceptably slow. 
Fortunately, it is for just such directly con-
nected instances that the one pass method shows the most striking success. 
The relaxation method of satisfying conditions is as follows: 
Choose a variable. 
Re-evaluate it to reduce the total error 
introduced by all constraints in the system. 
Choose another 
variable and repeat. 
-116-
Note that since each step makes some net reduction of total error, there 
will be monotonic decrease of error and thus stability is assured. 
Since re-evaluating a variable will change only the error introduced by 
the constraints which apply to that variable, only the changes in the 
errors introduced by these constraints need be considered. 
Other vari-
ables and therefore the errors of constraints applying only to them will 
remain constant. 
Sketchpad's ring structure makes it easy to consider 
all constraints applying to a particular variable since all such con-
straints are collected together in a ring whose "hen" is in the variable. 
It is important in the relaxation method tha~at each step,the very 
latest computed values of all variables be used for error computations. 
From the point of view of the program, this means that only one value 
for each variable need be stored, each being updated in turn. 
Former 
values not only may, but must be discarded. It is also important that 
the change in error obtained by completely satiSfYing a constraint by 
moving one of its variables be identical to to the change in error to be 
obtained by completely satisfying it by moving another of its variables. 
The error computing subroutine definition for a constraint computes the 
same error for a constraint no matter which of its variables is to be 
moved. 
My original instability troubles with constraint satisfaction 
came from insufficient care in meeting this condition. 
LEAST MEAN SQUARES FIT TO LINEARIZED CONSTRAINTS 
In implementing the relaxation method above,it is important to be 
able to find quickly a new value for a variable which reduces the total 
error introduced by the constraints on that variable. 
In particular, the 
linearized form of the constraints results in a set of linear equations 
-117-
for the variable each of which must be met as closely as possible. 
Unfortunately, there may be any number of linear equations applying to 
a particular variable and these may be either independent but incomplete, 
independent and complete, or redundant and overdefining. 
A general 
arithmetic macro, SOLVE, for finding the best value for a set of equations 
has been devised. 
SOLVE converts the given equations into an independent set of 
equations whose solution will be a point of minimum mean squared error 
for the original set. It is not always possible to solve the independent 
set of equations uniquely, and if it is not, SOLVE finds that solution 
which results in the minimum change from the existing value of the vari-
able. 
The mathematical discussion pertinent to SOLVE is given in 
Appendix F. 
I am indebted to Lawrence G. Roberts for providing me with 
the basic SOLVE program. 
Seen from the outside, then, the linearization program and SOLVE 
make it possible for Sketchpad to find a new value for any variable to 
more closely meet the conditions indicated by constraints. 
Repeated 
application of these programs to variables, in sequence, implements the 
relaxation process. Application of these programs to selected variables 
to detect the number and degree of independence of constraints is used 
as an important part of the one pass constraint satisfaction method. 
ONE PASS METHOD 
Sketchpad can often find an order in which the variables of a drawing 
may be re-evaluated to completely satisfy all the conditions on them in 
Just one pass. For the cases in which the one pass method works,it is 
far better than relaxation: it gives correct answers at once; relaxation 
-118-
may not give a correct solution in any finite time. 
Sketchpad can find 
an order in which to re-evaluate the variables of a drawing for most of 
the common geometric constructions. 
Ordering is also found easily for 
the mechanical linkages illustrated in the last chapter. 
Ordering can-
not be found for the bridge ,truss problems illustrated in the last 
chapter. 
The way in which the one pass method works is simple in principle 
and was easy to implement as soon as the nuances of the ring structure 
manipulations were understood. 
TO visualize the one pass method, con-
sider the variables of the drawing as places, and the constraints relating 
variables as passages through which one might pass from one variable to 
another. 
Variables are adjacent to each other in the maze formed by the 
constraints if there is a single constraint which constrains them both. 
Variables are totally unrelated if there is no path through the con-
straints by which one could pass from one to the other. 
Suppose that some variable can be found which has so few constraints 
applying to it that it can be re-evaluated to completely satisfy all of 
them. 
Such a variable we shall call a Hfree" variable. 
As soon as a 
variable is recognized as free, the constraints which apply to it are 
removed from further con,sideration, because the free variable can be 
used to satisfy them. 
Removing these constraints, however, may make ad-
jacent variables free. 
Recognition of these new variables as free 
removes further constraints from consideration and may make other ad-
jacent variables free, and so on throughout the maze of constraints. 
The manner in which freedom spreads is much like the method used in 
Moore's algorithm7 to find the shortest path through a maze. 
Having 
found that a collection of variables is free, Sket~hpa.d will re-evaluate 
-119-
them in the reverse order, saving the first-found free variable until 
last. 
In re-evaluating any particular free variable Sketchpad uses 
only those constraints which were present when that variable was found 
to be free. 
In the ring structure representation of the drawing all variables 
found to be free are placed in a special ring called the FREEDOMS ring. 
(Note that the FREE ring is used for empty spaces in storage and has 
nothing to do with freedom in the present sense.) Each variable placed 
on the FREEDOMS ring has associated with it, by extra ties, those con-
straints which it will be used to satisfy. 
In what order variables 
should appear in the FREEDOMS ring need only be computed when the con-
straint conditions change. 
For a given set of conditions the same 
ordering will serve for finding many satisfactory values. 
For example, 
as part of a linkage is moved with the light pen, the ordering first set 
up for the linkage serves until the conditions change. 
Chapter IX 
EXAMPLES AND CONCLUSIONS 
-120-
In the first chapter we saw, as .an introduction to the system, some 
simple examples of Sketchpad. drawings. 
In the body of this report we 
have seen many drawings, all of which, except the drawing of the light 
pen, Figure 4.2, were drawn with Sketchpad especially to be included 
here. 
In this chapter we shall consider a wider variety of examples in 
somewhat more detail. 
'!he examples in this chapter were all taken. from 
the library tape and thu, serve to illustrate not only how the Sketchpad. 
system can be used, but also how it actually has been used so far. 
We conclude from these examples that Sketchpad drawings can bring 
invaluable understanding to a user. 
For drawings where motion of the 
drawing, or analysis of a drawn problem is of value to the user, Sketch-
pad excells. 
For highly repetitive drawings or drawings where accuracy 
is required, Sketchpad is sufficiently faster than conventional tech-
niques to be worthwhile. 
For drawings which merely communicate with 
shops, it is probably better to use conventional paper and pencil. 
PA'rI'ERNS 
The instance facility outlined in Chapter I enables one to draw 
any symbol and duplicate its appearance anywhere on an object drawing at 
the push of a button. 
'!he syhlbols drawn can include other symbols and 
so on to any desired depth. 
'!his makes it possible to generate huge num-
bers of identical shapes; if at each stage two of the previous symbols 
are combined to double the number of basic shapes present, in twenty 
steps one million objects are produced. 
-121-
The hexagonal pattern we saw in Figure 1.1, p. 10, is one example 
of a highly repetitive drawing. 
The hexagonal pattern was first drawn 
in response to a request for hexagonal "graph" paper. 
About 900 hexa-
gons were plotted on a single 30 x 30 inch plotter page. It took about 
one half hour to generate the 900 hexagons, including the time taken to 
figure out how to do it. Plotting them takes about 25 minutes. 
The 
drafting department estimated it would take them two days to produce a 
similar pattern. 
The instance facility also made 'it easy to produce long lengths of 
the zig-zag pattern shown in Figure 9.1. 
As the figure shows, a single 
"zig" was duplicated in multiples of.five and three, etc. 
Five hundred 
zigs were generated in a single row. 
Four such rows were plotted one 
half inch apart to be used for producing a printed circuit delay line. 
Total time taken was about 45 minutes for constructing the figure and 
about 15 minutes to plot it. 
In both the zig-zag pattern of Figure 9.1 and in the hexagonal 
pattern of Figure 1.1 the various subpictures were fastened together by 
attachment points. 
In the hexagonal pattern, each corner of the basic 
hexagon was attached to the corners of adjacent hexagons. . The position 
of any hexagon was then completely deter.mined by the. position of any 
other. 
In the zig-zag pattern of Figure 9.1, however, only a single 
attachment was made between adjacent zig-zags. 
Additional constraints 
were applied to each instance to keep them erect and of the same size. 
A somewhat less repetitive pattern to be used for.encoding the 
time in a digital clock is shown in Figure 9.2. 
Each cross in the fig-
ure marks the position of a hole. 
The holes will be placed so that a 
binary coded decimal (BCD) number will indicate the time. 
-122-
FIGURE 8.1. 
ZIG-ZAG FOR DELAY LINE 
-+ 
+ + + + + + 
+ + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
-+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ -+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ + 
-+ 
+ 
-+ 
+ 
-+ 
+ 
~ 
-+ 
+ 
+ 
: 
-+ 
+ 
~ 
+ 
: 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
-+ 
+ 
+ + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
-+ 
+ 
-+ 
-+ 
+-+ 
-+ 
-+ 
-+-+ 
-+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ + 
+ + 
+ + -+ -+ + + + 
FIGURE 8.2. 
BCD ENCODER FOR CLOCK 
-123-
Sketchpad was first used in the BCD clock project to produce 60 
radial lines at equal 60 spacing. 
To do this a single 60 wedge was pro-
o 
duced by first trisecting a right angle to obtain a 30 wedge and then 
cutting the 300 wedge into five parts. 
The relaxation procedure was 
used in each case to make three or five sketched-in chords equal in 
length. 
Making the 60 wedge took a brand new user less than one half 
hour including instruction time. 
The author has constructed other 
wedges as small as 1/128 of a circle in five minutes. 
All such wedges 
become a part of the library. 
The 60 wedge has three attachment pOints. 
By attaching five of 
the wedges together, and then attaching three groups of five, a quadrant 
is constructed. Fitting together four quadrants gives a complete circle 
based entirely on the single 60 wedge. 
The advantage of constructing a 
full circle composed of 60 wedges is that any lines drawn in the origi-
nal 60 wedge will appear 60 times around the circle with no further 
effort on the part of the user. 
Sixty radial lines were produced in 
this way. 
Using the sixty radial lines plotted for him the BCD clock designer 
then mar}~ed vTi th pencil approximately where the crosses should be placed 
to obtain BCD coding. 
Returning to Sketchpad we put a pattern of dots 
in the 60 wedge so that in the full circl~ rings of dots appeared which 
could be aimed at with the light pen. 
It was then an easy matter to 
place a cros~ exactly on each of the desired dots. 
Total time for 
placing crosses was 20 minutes, most of which was spent trying to 1n-
terpret the sketch. 
-124-
LINKAGES 
By far the most interesting application of Sketchpad so far has 
been drawing and moving linkages. 
We saw in Chapter I the straight line 
\ 
linkage of Peaucellier, Figtire 1.6, P.20. 
The ability to draw and then 
move linkages opens up a new field of graphical manipulation that has 
never before been available. 'It is remarkable how even a simple linkage 
can generate complex motions. 
For example, the linkage of Figure 9.3 
4 has only three moving parts. 
In this linkage a central J, link is sus-
pended between two links of different lengths. 
As the shorter link 
rotates, the longer one oscillates as can be seen in the multiple expo-
sure. 
The J, link is not shown in Figure 9·3 so that the motion of fo:ur 
pOints on the upright part of the, ib may be seen. 
These are the four 
curves at tbe, top of the figure. 
To make the three bar linkage, an instance shaped like theJ, was 
drawn and given 6 attachers, two at its joints with the other links and 
four at the places whose paths were to be observed. 
Connecting the ~ 
shaped subpicture onto a linkage composed of three lines with fixed 
length created the picture shown. 
The driving link was rotated by turn-
ing a knob below the scope. 
Total time to construct the linkage 'WS·3 five 
minutes, but over an hour was spent playing with it. 
Sketchpad can make linkages that one would hardly think of con-
structing out of actual links and pins. 
For example, a Sketchpad sliding 
joint is ideal, whereas to actually build a sliding joint is relatively 
difficult. 
Again, it is possible to make two widely separated links be 
of equal length by applying an appropriate constraint, but to build such 
a linkage would be impossible. 
FIGURE 9. 3. 
THREE BAR LINKAGE 
The paths of four pOints on the 
central link are traced. 
This is a 
15 second time exposure of a moving 
Sketchpad drawing. 
FIGURE 9. 4. 
CONIC DRAWING LINKAGE 
As the "driving lever" is moved, the 
point shown with a box around it traces 
a conic section. 
This conic can be seen 
in the time exposure. 
-125-
-126-
A linkage that would be difficult to build physically is shown in 
Figure 9.4. 
This linkage is based on the complete quadrilateral. 
The 
three circled points and the two lines which extend out of the top of the 
picture to the right and left are fixed. 
Two moving lines are drawn from 
the lower circled points to the intersections of the long fixed lines 
with the driving lever. 
The intersection of these two moving lines (one 
must be extend~) has a box around it. It can be shown theoretically 
that this linkage produces' a conic section which' passes through the place 
labeled ~'point on curve" and is tangent'to the two lines marked "tangent." 
Figure 9. 4B shows a time exposure of the mOving pOint in many pos i tions • 
The straight dotted lines are the paths of other, less interesting points. 
At first, this linkage' was drawn and working in fifte'en minutes. 
Since then we have rebuilt it time and again until now we can produce it 
from scratch in about three minutes. 
. 
'. 
DIMENSIONING OJr DRAWINGS 
It is important. tha~ a Sketchpad drawing be ,made in the correct size 
for many applications. 
For example, the BCD clock pattern shown in Fig-
ure 9.2 was plotted exactly 12 inches in diameter for the actual a:pplica-
tion.' In fact, the preciSion of the plotter is such, 'that its plotted 
output can be used directly as a layout in many cases. 
But the size of 
a drawing as seen on the computer display is variable. 
To make it pos-
sible to have an absolute scale in drawings, a constraint is provided 
which forces the value displayed by a set of digits to indicate the dis-
tance between two pOints on the drawing. 
The distance is indicated in 
thousandths of an inch for "full size" plotted output. 
-127-
This distance indicating constraint is used to make the number in a 
dimension line. 
Many other constraints are used to make the arrowheads 
at the end of the line be "parallel" to the dimension line and to make 
enough space in the line for the dimension number. 
In same sense the 
dimension line is a complicated linkage; like a linkage it can be moved 
around while retaining its properties. 
For example, the arrowheads sta~ 
the same size even when the dimension line is' made longer. 
A dimension 
line with small arrowheads is a part of the libra~. This line is suit-
able for dimensions of the order of a few inches. 
A three-four-five 
triangle dimensioned with this line is shown in Figure 9.5. 
To produce the three-four-five triangle of Figure 9.5, three verti-
cal and four horizontal line segments were made to be the same length. 
After erasing these lines, the three correctly positioned corners of the 
triangle were dimensioned~ Putting in a dimension line is "as easy as 
drawing any other line. 
One points to where one end is to be left, 
copies the definition of the dimension line by pressing the "copy" button, 
and then moves the light pen to where the other end of the dimension 
line is to be. 
The size of the three-four-five triangle was adjusted so 
1: 
that even dimensions appeared. 
At other sizes, of course, the ratio of 
the. dimensions was correct but not so easy to recognize at a glance. 
Total time to produce dimensioned three-four-five triangle was three 
minutes, exclusive of time taken to produce the library vers.ion of the 
dimension line. 
The first dimension line took about fifteen minutes to 
construct, but that need never be repeated. 
o c 
~ 
4000 --------..r 
-128-
FIGURE 9.5. DIMENSION LINES 
- MEANS TENSION 
o 
FIGURE 8.5. 
TRUSS UNDER LOAD 
-129-
BRIDGES 
One of the largest untapped fields for 'application of Sketchpad is 
as an input program for other computation programs. 
The ability to 
place lines and circles graphically, when coupled with the ability to-
get accurately computed results pictorially displayed, should bring 
about a revolution in computer application. 
With Sketchpad we have a 
powerful graphical input tool. It happened that the relaxation analysis 
built into Sketchpad is exactly the kind of analysis used for many engi-
neering problems. 
By using Sketchpad's relaxation procedure we were 
able to demonstrate analysis of the force distribution in. the members 
of a pin connected truss. 
We do not claim that the analYSis 'represented 
in the next' series of illustrations is accurate to the last si-gn1:f1'cant 
digit. 
What we do claim is that a graphical input coupled to some kind 
of computation which is in turn coupled to graphical output is a truly 
powerful tool for education and design. 
In Figure' 9.6 is' shown a truss bridge supported at each end and 
loaded in the center. 
To draw this figure,one bay'of the truss (shown 
below the bridge) was first drawn with enough constraints to make it 
geometrically accurate. 
These constraints were then deleted and ,each 
member was made to behave like a bridge beam. 
A bridge beam is con-
strained to maintain constant length, but any change' in length is indi-
cated by an associated number. 
Under the assumption that e~ch bridge 
beam has a cross-sectional area proportional to its length, the numbers 
represent the forces in the beams. 
The basic bridge beam'definition 
(consisting of two constraints and a number) may be copied and applied 
to any desired line in a bridge picture. 
Each desired bridge member was 
-130-
changed. from. a line into a full bridge beam by pointing to it and. press-
ing the "copy" button. 
Using the bridge bay six times we construct the complete bridge. 
The loading line and the one missing end member are put in separately. 
'nl.e six-bay unloaded truss bridge is part of the library. It took less 
than ten minutes to draw completely. 
Applying a load where des ired and 
attaching supports, one can observe the :forces in the various members. 
It takes about 30 seconds for new force values to be computed. 
The 
bridge shown in Figure 9.6 has both outside lower corners fixed. in posi-
tion. 
Normally, of course, a bridge would be fixed only at one end and 
free to move sideways at the other end. 
Having drawn a bas ic bridge shape, one can experiment with various 
loading conditions and supports to see what the effect of ,making minor 
modifications is. 
For example, an arch bridge is shown in Figure 9.7 
supported both as a three hinged arch (two supports) and as a cantilever 
(four supports). 
For nearly identical loading conditions the distribu-
tion of forces is markedly different in these two cases. 
ARTISTIC DRAWINGS 
Sketchpad need not be applied only to engine~ring drawings. 
The 
ability to put motion into the drawings suggests that it would be ex-
, citing to try making cartoons. 
The capability of Sketchpad to store 
previously'drawn info~tion on magnetic tape means that every cartoon 
component ever drawn is available for future use~ If the almost identi-
cal but slightly different frames that are required for making a motion 
picture cartoon could be produced semi-automatically, the entire Sketch-
p'Bd syst~' could. justify 1 ts elf economically in yet another way. 
-51 
- 55 
- 49 
FIGURE 9.1. 
CANTILEVER AND ARCH BRIDGES 
-132-
One way of cartooning is by substitution. 
For example, the girl 
"Nefert-ite" shown in Figure 9.8 can be made to wink by changing wh~ch 
of the three types. of eyes is.placed in position on her otherwise eye-
less fac·e. 
Doing this on the computer'. display has amused many visitors. 
A second method of cartooning is by motion. 
A stick figUre could 
be made to pedal a bicycle by appropriate application of c~nstraints. 
Similarly, Nefert.ite's hair could be made to swing. 
This is the more 
usual form of cartooning seen in movies. 
Aside from its economics as a teaching or amusement device, car-
tooning can bring the insights which are the prime value of Sketchpad 
drawings. 
The girl seen in Figure 9.9 was traced from a photog:raph. into 
the Sketchpad system. 
The photograph was read into the computer by a 
, 8 
.. 
facsimile machine used in another project and shown in outline on the 
computer display. 
This outline was then traced with wax pencil on the 
display face. 
Later, with Sketchpad in 'the campu~er, the outline was 
made into a Sketchpad drawing by tracing the wax line with ·the light 
pen. 
Once having. the tra·cing on magnetic tape many things can be done 
with it. In particular, the eyes and mouth were erased to leave the 
featureless face which may also be seen in Figure 9.9. 
Returning to 
the tracing and erasing everything except ~he mouth ~.then everything 
except an eye we obtained features.· 
In refitting the features to the 
blank face we discovered that,although.the origina~ girl was a sweet 
looking miss, an entirely different character appears if her mouth 1s 
made larger as in Figure 9.10. 
Using a computer to partially automate 
an artistic process has brought me, a non-artist, some understanding of 
-133-
11117m 
~ 
/JIIIIII 
FIGURE 8.B. 
WINKING GIRL AND COMPONENTS 
-134-
FIGURE 9.9. 
GIRL TRACED FROM PHOTOGRAPH 
• 
-135-
FIGURE 9. 1 0 . 
GIRL WITH FEATURES CHANGED 
-136-
the effect of certain features on the appearance of a face. 
It is the 
understanding that can be gained from computer drawings that is more 
valuable than mere production of a drawing for shop use. 
ELECTRICAL CIRCUIT DIAGRAMS 
Electrical engineers are, of cou~se, interested in making circuit 
diagrams. 
It is not surprising that Sketchpad should be .applied to 
this task. Unfortunately, electrical circuits require a great many 
symbols which have not yet been drawn properly with Sketchpad and are 
not therefore in the library. 
After some time is spent working on the 
basic electrical symbols it may be easier to draw circuits. So far, 
however, circuit drawing has been a big flop. 
The circuits of Figure 9.11 are parts of an analog switching 
scheme. 
You can see in the figure that the more complicated circuits 
are made up of simpler symbols and circuitso It is very difficult, 
however, to plan far enough ahead to know what campos its of circuit 
symbols will be useful as subpictures of the final circuit. 
The simple 
circuits shown in Figure 9.11 were compounded into a big circuit involv-
ing about 40 transistors. 
Including much trial and error, the time 
taken by a new user (for the big circuit not shown) was ten hours. 
At 
the end of that time the circuit was still not complete in every detail 
and he decided it would be better to draw it by hand after all. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The circuit experience points out the most important fact about 
computer drawings. 
It is only worthwhile to make drawings on the 
DRIVER 
FIGURE 8.11. 
CIRCUIT DIAGRAMS 
-137-
-138. 
computer if you get something more out of the drawing than just a draw-
ing. 
In the repetitive patterns we saw in the first examples, precision 
and ease of constructing great numbers of parts were valuable. 
In the 
linkage examples, we were able to gain an understanding of the behavior 
of a linkage as well as its appearance. 
In the bridge examples we got 
design answers which were worth far more than the computer time put into 
them. 
If \fe had had a circuit simulation program connected to Sketch-
pad so that we would have known whether the circuit we drew worked, it 
would have been worth our while to use the computer to draw it. 
We are 
as yet a long way from being able to produce routine drawings with the 
computer. 
FUTURE WORK 
The methods outlined in this report generalize nicely to three 
dimensional drawing. 
In fact, vTork has already been begun to make a 
complete "Sketchpad Three" which will let the user communicate solid 
objects to the computer. 
A forthcoming thesis by Timothy Johnson of 
the Mechanical Engineering Department will des cri be this \fork. 
vJhen 
Johnson is finished it should be possible to aim at a particular place 
in the three dimensional drawing through two dimensiona~perspective 
views presented on the display. 
Johnson is completely bypassing the 
problem of converting several two dimensional drawings into a three 
dimensional shape. 
Drawing will be directly in three dimensions from 
the start. 
No two dinlensional representation will ever be stored. 
Work is also proceeding on direct conversion of photographs into 
line drawings. 
Roberts reports a computer programB able to recognize 
-139-
simple objects in photographs well enough to produce three dimensional 
line drawings for them. 
Roberts is storing his drawings in the ring 
structure described in Chapter III so that his results will be compat-
ible with the three dimensional version of Sketchpad. 
Much room is left in Sketchpad itself for improvements. 
Some im-
provements are minor,such as including mirror image subpictures. 
Some 
improvements should be made to suit Sketchpad to particular uses that 
come up. 
For example, it is so interesting to study the path of parti-
cular points on a linkage that Sketchpad should be able to store and 
later display the path of chosen points. 
More maj or improvements of the same order and power as the existing 
definition copying capability can be forseen. 
At present Sketchpad is 
able to add defined relationships to an eXisting obj ect drawing. 
A 
method should be devised for defining and applying changes which involve 
removing some p~rts of the object drawing as well as adding new ones. 
Such a capability would permit one to define what rounding off a corner 
means. 
Then, by pointing at any corner and applying that definition, 
one could round off any corner. 
Sketchpad cannot now do this because 
I 
rounding off a corner involves disconnecting the two lines which form 
the co~ner from the corner point and then putting a small circular arc 
between them. 
HARDWARE 
Sketchpad has pointed out some weaknesses in present computer 
hardware. 
A proposal for a line drawing display which would greatly 
surpass the capability of the spot display now in use is given in 
-140-
Appendix E. 
Such a display would not only provide flicker free display 
to the user, but also would relieve the computer of the burden it now 
carries in computing successive spots in the display. 
There are two conflicting demands made by Sketchpad on the light 
pen. 
On the one hand, the pen must have a fairly large field of view 
for ease of tracking. 
On. the other hand, it should have a small field 
of view for aiming at objects. It should be possible to build a pen 
with two concentric fields of view which would report to the computer 
separately. 
The arithmetic element of the computer is not used in doing the 
ring structure processing which forms a large part of Sketchpad. 
On 
the other hand, the index registers and their asSOCiated arithmetic are 
extensively used. 
This suggests that several users could share an 
arithmetic element if sufficiently powerful index arithmetic were made 
available to each of them. 
• 
code 
43 
T 
33 
L 
22 
C 
24 
E 
27 
H 
-141-
Appendix A 
CONSTRAINT' DESCRIPTIONS 
variable 
types 
point 
instance 
(point) 
p thing 
p thing 
p thing 
P thing 
P thing 
p thing 
4 thing 
P thing 
P thing 
4 thing 
p thing 
P thing 
description 
Point bears same relation to 
instance that (point) bears 
to its picture. 
GENERATED AUTOMATICALLY WITH 
INSTANCES 
Three things are collinear. 
Note: 
no distinction made about 
ordering of variables. 
GENERATED AUTOMATICALLY WHEN 
POINTS ARE CREATED ON LINES 
Distance from first to second 
is equal to distance from first. 
to third. 
(First is circle ·center.) 
GENERATED AUTOMATICALLY WHEN . 
POINTS ARE CREATED ON CIRCLES 
Thing is erect or on its side. 
t~t-
First thing is directly above 
or below, or. directly beside 
second thing. 
(Horizontal or 
vertical line.) 
GENERATED AUTOMATICALLY FOR ANY 
LINE BY HORV BUTTON 
4 thing is "parallel" to line 
between p things. Parallel to 
horizontal line·means upright. 
(To set angle of text.) 
M 
~ 
CB· 
* 
\ 
~ 
,/ p 
*~ 
B \~ 
cD 
r~ 
'"' 
X \i-X 
p 
® 
code 
34 
M 
42 
s 
23 
D 
21 
B 
25 
F 
47 
X 
00 
6 
'37 
p 
variable 
types 
p thing 
P thing 
p thing 
P thing 
4 thing 
4 thing 
scalar 
l' thing 
p thing 
scalar 
4 thing 
instance 
P thing 
P thing 
p thing 
4 thing 
p thing 
l' thing. 
P thing 
P thing 
-142-
description 
Distance from first thing to 
second is 1/3,1/2,1,2,3, t~es 
distance from third to fourth. 
First thing is 1/3,1/2,1,2,3 
times size of second thing. 
Value of scalar· equals distance 
between things in inches. 
Value of scalar equals size of 
thing in inches. 
Instance is full size, i.e. the 
same size as its master picture. 
First thing is at mid point of 
other two, .e.g. dimension in 
dimension line is at center of 
line. 
Thing is 1/32,1/16,1/8,1/4,1/2 
or 1 inch in overall size. 
Line from first to second would 
be parallel or perpendicular to 
line from thi~ to fourth. 
(Lines need not be there.) 
-143-
code 
variable 
description 
-1316S, 
types 
, 
~. 
36 
4. thing 
P thing will be next to 4. thing 
0 
P thing 
with enough space for 5 digit 
number, e.g. to create space in 
dimens ion line. 
Cq 
46 
p thing 
Distance between things is main-
W 
p thing 
tained what it was last time meta 
of tog 22 was down. 
USES META 
OF TOG 22. e.g. for bridges and 
linkages. 
=iF 
0-~ 
50 
scalar 
Value of scalar is equal to change 
y 
(p thing) 
in distance betweenp things since 
(p thing) 
meta of tog 22 was down, sign con-
><~ 
sidered. e.g. to display forces in 
beams • 
USES META OF TOO 22. 
BUTTON NAME 
Draw 
Circle 
center 
Move 
Delete 
Instance 
Copy 20 
Copy 21 
Copy 22 
Copy 23 
Stop 
Text 
Number 
Hold 
Garbage 
-144-
Appendix B 
PUSH BUTTON CONTROLS 
. BIT NUMBER 
1.8 
2.1 
1.3 
2.4 
1.6 
4.3 
1.1 
FUNCTION 
Create a new straight line segment or 
circle arc. 
End of line or arc left 
attached to light pen. 
Center of circle is left where pen is 
pointing. 
Next thing drawn will be 
circle arc. 
Object pOinted at moves with light pen. 
Object pOinted at removed from drawing. 
Instance of picture whose number is in 
toggle register 25 is created. 
Four buttons. 
Copy definition picture 
indicated in toggle registers 20 to 23 
respectively. 
These buttons can be set 
up to create equal length lines, di-
mension lines, etc. 
Any four functions 
can be available at once. 
Leave moving object wherever it is. 
Merge moving object if aiming at object 
of like type. 
Same as termination 
flick of the pen. 
Create line of text consisting only of 
the letter X. 
Typing while a piece of 
text is moving adds to the text dis-
played. 
Create a new set of digits and a scalar 
which is its value. 
Digits left moving. 
Following pen flick not to be taken as 
tennination signal. 
Used to set pen 
aside for typing text. 
If pen is tracking, recenter picture so 
that place penis pointing at will. be 
in the center. If pen not tracking, comp&Ct 
ring structure by removing garbage. 
BUTTON NAME 
Constraint 
Horv 
Designate 
Tie 
Fix 
Unfix 
IBM 
Library 
Library 
write 
Change 
instance 
Dismember 
Order 
Disorder 
BIT NUMBER 
2.8 
2.2 
2.6 
3.3 
4.3 
3.9 
Special· start 
point 
2.3 
4.4 
4.6 
-145-
FUNCTION 
Create a new constraint of the type 
numbered in toggle register 25. 
Dummy 
variables are created. 
Constraint 
left moving. 
Apply horizontal or vertical constraint 
to oline ·aimed at. 
Choice is based on 
45 
cutoff. 
DeSignate object. Fbr copying a definition 
picture with three or more ties. 
Object pointed at is an attacher of this 
picture. 
This object must not move during con-
straint satisfaction. Moving an object 
with the light pen unfixes it. 
All fixed and des ignated obj ects unfixed 
and undesignated. 
Read tape record. 
Number of record on 
tape given in toggle 26. 
Typewriter 
confirms successful reading or writing. 
Read a record from the TX-2 library 
tape. 
Address of record given in tog-
gle register 27. 
Typewriter confirms. 
Write a record on library tape. 
Type-
writer confirms. 
Moving instance or instance pointed at 
is changed to type indicated in Toggle 
register 25. 
Can change resistor into 
diode, etc. 
Instance pointed at is reduced one level, 
i.e., its internal structure on the next 
level becomes usable. 
Lines are put in better order for plot-
ting. 
Lines are put in worst order for plot-
ting. 
BtwrON NAl-1E 
Punch 
Plot 
BIT NUMBER 
4.7 
4.8 
-146-
FUNCTION 
Punch plotter tape for object picture. 
Plot object picture. 
The following dangerous functions only operate if "meta" button (4.10) 
is pressed as well. 
Delete 
l.2 
All constraints in object picture are 
constraints 
deleted. 
Delete 
1.4 
All unattached points in object picture 
points 
are deleted. 
Delete 
1.5 
Entire object picture is deleted. 
picture 
IBM 
4.3 
Write IBM tape record. 
Typewriter 
confirms. 
Appendix C 
STRUCTURE OF STORAGE BLOCKS 
-147-
~C) I: Chicken 
(H) = Hen 
(S) = Start of subroutine 
- = Ring part of component 
• = Spare register 
() = Data part of block 
TYPE OF 
BLOCK 
Universe 
Variables 
Holders 
Constraints 
Topos 
Frees 
Deads 
Movings 
Curpics 
Freedoms 
Fixeds 
Desigs 
Mergers 
Works 
Lines 
Circles 
Pictures 
Sca1ars 
Points 
Instances 
Texts 
Digits 
Dummies 
STRUCTURE 
TYPE 
SPECB 
TYPE 
SPECB 
NAME 
DISPIAY 
HOWBIG 
MOVIT 
SIZE 
KIND 
TYPE 
SPECB 
NAME 
DISPIAY. 
HOWBIG 
MOVIT 
SIZE 
WHERE 
KIND 
TUPLE 
VARLOC 
(C) 
(H) 
All these short generic blocks use the 
same format~ TYPE is a chicken (C) 
which connects the block to its next 
higher level in the generic structure, 
see Figure 3.8. SPECB is the hen (H) 
collecting the TYPE blocks in the next 
lower level. 
TYPE and SPECB serve this 
purpose in all blocks where they appear. 
NAME contains a four letter typewriter 
code name for each generic block. 
Counting lines, one finds that TYPE = 
0, SPECB 
:I,~, and NAME = 4. 
(C) (Generic blocks for lines, circles and) 
picture blocks. 
(H) 
(S) 
Display subroutine. 
(S) 
Fit scope around this thing. 
(S) 
Apply transformation to this thing (Degenerate) 
Length of 1ine, circle and picture blocks. 
(C) 
(H) 
(S) 
(S) 
(S) 
(S) 
Put these in PPART or PICBLKS of a picture 
b10ck. 
(Generic blocks 
variables. 
f'or various kinds Of') 
Apply transformation to this thing. 
Find position of thing on display. 
Number components in vector. 
Location of first vector component in b'l.ock. 
Hov 
Porp 
etc. 
etc. 
TYPE 
SPECB 
NAME 
(c) 
(H) 
DISPIAY 
(S) 
HOWBIG 
(S) 
MOVIT 
SIZE 
CONLET 
KIND 
COMP 
NCON 
CHVAR 
(S) 
(8) 
Picture 
TYPE 
(c) 
Line 
PICBLKS 
(H) 
PPART 
(H) 
PWHOS 
(C) 
PPARTM 
(H) 
PATAP 
(H) 
PINS 
(H) 
PSlZE 
PNAME 
PSAVE 
tI 
" 
" 
" 
TYPE 
ATATAP 
BWHOS 
VORD 
LSP 
LEP 
(c) 
(C) 
(C) 
(C) 
(C) 
(C) 
Generic blocks for various constraint 
types. 
Degenerate. 
(Does nothing.) 
Degenerate. 
Letter to appear in display. 
Error computing subroutine. 
Number degrees of freedom removed. 
Number of changeable variables. 
(Specific picture block.) 
-148. 
Abstractions in picture. 
KIND of generic 
block tells if a thing is an abstraction. 
Picture parts. 
Lines, Circles, Instances, 
Texts, and Digits in picture. 
Put into SPECB of Curpics ring if this 
is current picture. 
Moving parts 'of picture. 
Attachers of this picture. 
Instances of this picture. 
Overall size of this picture. 
36 bit "name" for this picture. 
Space to save transformation when recursively 
expanding instances. 
(Specific line block.) 
Put into PATAP of picture if this line 
is an attacher. 
Which picture this thing belongs to. 
Put into SPECB of Movings if this line 
is moving. 
Start point of line. 
Goes into PLS ring 
of point. 
End point of line. 
Circle 
TYPE 
(C) 
(Specific circle block.) 
-149-
ATATAP 
(C) 
BWHOS 
(C) 
VORD 
(C) 
CSP 
(C) 
Start point of circle arc. 
CEP 
(C) 
End point of circle arc. 
CIRCEN 
. (C) 
Center point of circle. 
[cy'AL} 
Angle of circle arc (to avoid ambiguity). 
Radius of Circle (to save recomputation). 
Point 
TYPE 
(C) 
(Specific pOint block.) 
ATATAP 
(C) 
BWHOS 
(C) 
VORD 
(C) 
Put in SPECB of Freedoms during maze-
solving constraint satisfaction. 
VFLW 
(H) 
Constraints which this variable will 
be used to satisfy. 
VCON 
(H) 
Constraints on this variable. 
PLS 
(H) 
Lines and Circles on this point 
IPCOTP 
(H) 
Instance-point constraints which use 
p;~AL) 
this point for reference only. 
X coordinate of point. 
Y coordinate of point. 
Instance 
TYPE 
( C) 
Specific instance block. 
Size of 
instance is half size of enclosing box. 
ATATAP 
(C) 
... 
BWHOS 
(C) 
VORD 
( C) 
VFLW 
(H) 
VCON 
(H) 
lWHAT 
(C) 
What picture this is an instance of. 
{~AL } 
Size times cosine of rotation. 
Size times sine of rotation. 
X coordinate. 
Y coordinat.e. 
Text 
TYPE 
ATATAP 
BWHOS 
VORn 
VFLW 
VCON 
TVAL 
" 
" 
" 
TXTS 
" 
" 
" 
tt 
tt 
" 
" 
" 
tt 
Dummy 
TYPE 
ATATAP 
BWHOS 
VORn 
VFLW 
VCON 
-{ ~AL} 
-150-
( C) (partiCUlar lines of text. Size of 
) 
text is half height of letters. Position 
(C) 
of text is center of first letter in the 
line. 
(C) 
(C) 
(H) 
(H) 
(C) 
(C) 
(C) 
(C) 
(H) 
(H) 
Size times cosine of rotation. 
Size times sine of rotation. 
X coordinate. 
y coordinate. 
Text to be shown, four letters per 
register, typewriter codes. 
(Particular dummy variable.) 
X coordinate. 
Y coordinate. 
-151-
Digits 
TYPE 
(C) (A particular set of digits. 
Size Of~ 
digits is half height of figures. 
ATATAP 
(C) 
BWHOS 
(C) 
VORD 
(C) 
VFLW 
(H) 
VCON 
(H) 
NTOSHOW 
(C) 
Scalar Whose value is to be shown. 
-
{~AL I 
Size times cosine of rotation. 
Size times sine of rotation. 
X position. 
Y position. 
Scalar 
TYPE 
(A particular scalar block.) 
ATATAP 
(C) 
BWHOS 
(C) 
VORD 
(C) 
VFINl 
(H) 
VCON 
(H) 
SSHOW 
(H) 
Digits showing this scalar's value. 
{ 
SVALl 
Value of scalar. 
j 
Constraint 
TYPE 
(C) (All constraint blocks have same format. ~ 
ArrATAP 
(C)' 
If fewer than four variables, block will 
be shorter and VARIATION will be moved 
up. 
BwHOS 
(C) 
CVTS,VORD 
(C) 
Variable used to satisfy this constraint 
in maze-solving method. 
VARl 
First constrained variable. 
VAR2 
Second constrained variable. 
VAR3 
VAR4 
-
{ ~ARIATION} 
Code for variations within a constraint 
type. e.g., horizontal or vertical. 
Appendix D 
-152-
RING OPERATION MACRO INSTRUCTIONS 
The macro instructions listed in this appendix are used to implement 
the basic ring operations listed in Chapter III. 
Only the format is 
given here since to list the machine instructions generated would be of 
value only to persons familiar with the'TX-2 instruction code. 
In each 
case the macro name is followed by dummy variables separated by non-
alphabetic symbols. 
The dummy variables XR and XR2 refer to ihdex 
registers which contain the address of the block which, contains the ring 
element being worked on. 
The terms N of XR or N x X Rmean the Nth 
element of the block pointed to by index register XR, for' example, the 
LSP (line start point) register of the line block pointed to by index 
register o. 
LTAKE-NxXR 
Take N of XR out of whatever ring it is in. 
The ring 
is reclosed. 
If N of XR is not in a ring, LTAKE does 
nothing. 
N of XR must not be a hen with chickens. 
PUTLaNxXR ... MxXR2 
PUT R. N x X R ... M x X R 2 
Put N of XR into the, ring of Which M of XR2 is a member. 
N of XR is placed to the left (PUTL) or right (PUTR) of 
M of XR2. 
M of XR2 }J1ay be either a hen or a chicken. 
N 
of XR must not already belong to a ring. 
-153-
MOVEL-NxXR ... MxXR2 
MOVER-NxXR ... MxXR2 
Combination of LTAKE and PUTL (PUTR). Assumes that both N of XR and M 
of XR2 are in the same ring. 
Intended for reordering a'ring. 
CHGRL-NxXR"'HxXR2 
CHGRRaNxXR"'MxXR2 
Combination of LTAKE and PUTL (PUTR). 
N of XR and M of XR2 may be in 
different rings. 
LGORR-NxXR-XR2"'SUBR"'LEXIT 
LGORL-NxXR-XR2"'SUBR"'LEXIT 
Go around the ring of which N of XR is the hen. 
Ex! t to subroutine 
SUBR once for each ring member. 
The address of the top of the block 
to which each ring member belongs is put in XR before starting the 
subroutine. 
XR2 is used as a working index register. 
The subroutine 
may destroy the contents of both XR and XR2. 
'nle subroutine may delete 
individual members of the ring provided recursive deletion does not 
delete additional ring members. 
The subroutine must not generate new 
ring members. 
Jump to LEX IT when finished with the ring. 
Go around 
the ring to the right (IGORR) or left (WORL). 
LGORRI-NxXR=XR2"'SUBR"'LEXIT 
LGORLI.NxXR=XR2"'SUBR"'LEXIT 
Same as LGORR except that the subroutine may generate new members in 
the ring. 
The subroutine must not delete the current member of the 
ring. 
New members will be visited if they are put in the ring later 
in sequence. 
COMBH RsNxX R"'MxX R2 
COHBHL-NxXR"'HxXR2 
The members of the ring whose hen is at N of XR are placed in the ring of 
which M of XR2 is a member. 
N of XR must not be empty. 
The new members 
are placed to the right ·(COMBHR) or left (COMBHL) of M of XR2. 
M of 
XR2 may be either a hen or a chicken. 
N of XR is left empty. 
-154-
Appendix E 
PROPOSAL FOR AN INC~NTAL CURVE DRAWING DISPLAY 
In the course of the work with Sketchpad it has became all too 
clear that the spot-by~spot display now in use too slow for comfortable 
observation of reasonable size drawings. 
Moreover, baving the central 
machine compute and store all the spots for the display is a waste of 
general purpose capacity that might better be applied to other jobs. 
As a solution to these difficulties I propose that a special purpose 
incremental 'canputer be used to generate the successive spots ,of the 
display at high speed. 
The central machine would provide only a mini-
mum of information about each curve to be drawn; e.g., end points of 
lines; start, center and arc length of circle arcs. 
The technology of incremental computers is well developed, but so 
far as I know, no one has yet applied them directly to the problem of 
computer display systems. 
Basically the increment~ computer works by 
adding one register to another successively and detecting any overflows 
or underflows which may be generated. 
Certain registers are incremented 
conditionally on the result of overflow or underflow generation. , 
In the system of Figure E.l, the x and y increment registers are 
Sdded to the'x and y remainder registers and overflows or underflows 
(dotted lines) are used to increment the beam position of the display. 
A counter (not shown) is provided to limit the length of the straight 
line generated. 
The unit would request more information from the com-
puter after the appropriate number of additions 0 
For drawing straight 
lines on a 1024' x 1024 raster displa~ the increment registers should 
-155-
X REMA I NDER ~ 
X INCREMENT------
Y ·REMAINDER 
Y INCREMENT 
FIGURE E.l. 
DDA FOR DRAWING LINES 
-156-
contain 10 bits plus sign, 11 bits in all each; the remainder registers 
should contain 10 bits with no sign; and the counter should contain 10 
bits. 
To understand how the system of Figure E.l operates consider that 
its x increment regist'er contains the largest possible positive number 
and that its y increment contains one ha.lf that value. 
The x addition 
would result in overflow nearly every iteration, whereas. the y addition 
would result in overflow only on alternate additions, and so a line 
would be drawn up and to the right with a slope of 1/2. 
The usual practice in incremental computers is to be able to step 
the increment registers by a single unit up or down according as over-
flow or underflow is produced in another addition. 
In the system of 
Figure E.2, the ~: is 'an adder-subtractor which can increase or de-
crease the increment register by the amount stored in the curvature 
register. 
The. @ adds or subtracts if overflow or underflow is gen-
erated in the other addition. 
OVerflow or underflow is signalled to 
the ~ adder along the dotted paths in Figure E.2. 
Use of the conditional adder pennits a curvature to be specified 
so that curves can be drawn. 
The system of Figure E.2 will draw straight 
lines if the numbers in the curvature registers are zero, circles if the 
numbers are equal and opposite in sign, ellipses if the numbers are un-
equal and unlike in sign,and hyperbolas if the numbers are like in sign. 
The ellipses and hyperbolas are generated, however, with axes parallel to 
the coordinate axes of the display. 
Theory and simulation show that just as in the incremental equation 
used for generating circles (see Chapter V), the latest value of incre-
ment mus,t be used if the curve is to close. 
Therefore, the additions 
-157-
X SCOPE 
- --
Y SCOPE 
-----------
X REMA 1 NDER 
-------,--~ 
X INCREMENT 
, 
I 
~-~ 
_____ I 
X' CURVATURE 
y 
REMA 1 NDER 
, 
------- .. ~--> 
Y INCREMENT 
Y CURVATURE 
FIGURE E.2. 
DDA FOR UPRIGHT .CONICS 
-158-
cannot all occur at once; the order shown in Figure E.2 by the numbers 
1-4 next to the adders makes the circles and. ellipses close. 
In a serial 
device it is possible to do the four additions in just two add t~es by 
having only a one bit time delay between the two additions for each 
coordinate, i • e -:r, @ just before <£). 
Circles can be drawn with radii from about one scope ,unit to a 
straight line according to the numbers put in the curvature registers. 
Simulation shows that if the increment and curvature registers contain 
17 bits plus sign, 18 bits each in all, and the remainder contains 17 
bits without sign, the largest radius circle that can be drawn is just 
noticeably different from a straight line after having passed fully 
across a 1024 x 1024 raster display. 
The simulation program f9r this 
test is less than 100 instructions long and requires, of 'course, no 
multiply or divideo 
Simulation of larger incremental computers on"small 
general purpose digital computers should be a powerful way to get·complex 
numerical answers quickly and easily. 
If the system of Figure E.2 is duplicated twice as shown: in Figure 
E.3, a general Conic Section drawing capability is obtained. 
I am 
indebted to Larry M. Delfs for pointing out that the display incrementing 
outputs of the two systems should be added together. 
The full f;lystem of 
Figure E.3 can draw not only arbitrary conic sections but a host of 
interesting cycloidal curves. 
Fbrdrawing the simple straight lines 
and Circles, the two halves of the system would be loaded with identical 
numbers to gain a two-fold speed advantage. 
A trial design using 20 megacycle serial logic and 36 bit delay 
lines available commercially showed that the full system would be able 
-159-
A. ~--T---------------------------
~--------------l-------------------------
, 
' 
Xl CURVATURE 
Y 1 CURVATURE 
, , , , 
. 
t 
I , , 
-------,--~ 
, 
I 
------, 
, 
I 
I , 
t , 
I , , 
----------, 
FIGURE E.3. 
X2 CURVATURE 
Y2 CURVATURE 
DDA FOR THE GENERAL CON"IC 
-160-
to g~nerate new display points at 0.9 microseconds each for lines and 
circles and slightly slower (but not half speed)" for complicated conics. 
This corresponds to a writing rate of about 10,000 inches per second. 
Same saving in cost could be expected if longer delay lines were used 
and a correspondingly slower operation speed were tolerated. It appears 
possible to get similar performance from a parallel scheme. 
-161-
Appendix F 
MATHEMATICS OF LEAST MEAN SQUARE FIT 
The result quoted in this appendix is well known and is repeated 
here only for reference. 
Suppose we have P equations in N unknowns: 
N L 
8ij Xj = ci 
1 ~ i ~ P; 
j=l 
or 
(F-l) 
If P is larger than N there would in general be no exact solution. 
We 
wish to find the values for the unknowns which minimize the sum of the 
squared errors of the equations. 
The error in the ith equality is given 
by: 
N 
Ei =L (8ij Xj -
ci ), 
j=l 
and the total squared error, 
(F-2) 
(F-3) 
We wish to minimize Et , and so we take partials with respect to each Xj 
and set ail these equal to zero. 
For a particular Xj called ~, 
P 
N 
2 
~ =~ L [I (8ij Xj ) -
ci]· 
~ 
~ i=1 j=l 
(F-~) 
Since the partial of a sum is equal to the sum of the partials, 
-162-
(F-5) 
or since 
Now the last part of (F-6) is a sum of tenns like s12x2 ••• only one of 
which involves ~ at all, namely aik~. Therefore, 
(F-7) 
which, when set equal to zero gives: 
(F-8) 
or 
(F-9) 
Changing the order os surmnat10n, 
(F-lO) 
which in matrix notation becomes: 
(F-ll) 
-163-
T 
A A is a square matrix of order N. 
Thus a system of any number of 1in-
ear equations can be reduced to a simpler system whose solution is the 
value of the variables for least square fit to the original set of equa-
tions. 
If the original equations are equations in two unknowns, a plot of 
(F-2) with error squared in the upward direction is a parabolic valley. 
Since any vertical section of a parabolic valley will be a parabola, and 
the sum of any two parabolas in likewise a parabola, a plot of (F-3) can 
at most be an eliptic paraboloid. 
The Equations (F-IO) and (F-ll) re-
suIting fram the method described here represent the locus of locations 
where contour lines of the eliptic paraboloid are parallel to the axes. ) 
The intersection of these loci, the solution of (F-lI), is the lowest 
point in the eliptic paraboloid, the least mean squares fit to (F-I). 
-164-
Appendix G 
A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF TX-2* 
At first glance, TX-2 is an ordinary single-address, binary digital 
computer with an unusually large memory. 
It is an experime~tal machine-
many of its in-out devices are not commercially available. 
On closer 
inspection, one finds it has same important innovations-at least they 
were innovations at the time TX-2 was built (19'56). 
The distinctive features of TX-2 are: 
1. 
Simultaneous use of in-out machines through 
interleaved programs. 
2. 
Flexible, "configured" data processing. 
Some other virtues include: 
IN-OUT 
1. Autanatic memory and arithmetic overlap. 
2. 
A "bit" sensing instruction (i.e., the operand 
is one bit!). 
3. 
Addressable arithmetic element registers. 
4. 
Especially flexible in-out. 
5. 64 index registers. 
6. 
Indirect--i.e. deferred addressing. 
7. 
Magnetic Tape Auxiliary Storage 
The phrase "simultaneous use of in-out machines It should be taken 
quite literally. It does not mean simultaneous control. 
Each unit has 
* By Alexander Vanderburgh 
-165-
its own buffer register and only ~ 
of these can be processed by TX-2 
at any given instant. It is the relative speed that is important. 
For 
example, the in-out instruction that "fills" the display scope buffer 
takes no more than 10 microseconds, but the display itself takes from 
20 to 100 microseconds, i.e., up to ten times as long. While the display 
is busy, the computer can compute the next datum of course, but it can 
also initiate other in-out transfers. 
In practice, since most in-out 
units are much slower than their associated programs, the computer 
spends a significant percentage of the time just waiting (in "Limbo"), 
even when several devices fare in use. 
Interleaved initiation of in-out 
data transfers is partly automatic and partly program controlled. 
Each 
in-out routine is independently coded and is operated by TX-2 according 
to its "priority .. '"~ 
Each unit has a ttFlag Flip-Flop" to indicate to con-
trol that it is ready for further attention. 
When a unit is ready for 
further attention its routine will be operated unless another unit of 
higher priority also needs attention. An index register is reserved 
for each in-out unit and is used as a "place-keeper" when its routine 
is not being operated. The sharing among in-out routines of storage, 
index memory, and the arithmetic element is the programmer1 s responsibi-
lity. 
ftCONFIGURED" DATA PROCESSING 
The "normal" word length for TX-2 is 36 bits. 
For many applica-
tions 18 or 9 bits would suffic~and in some cases each piece of data 
requires the same processing. 
Coni'iguration control permits Ufracture" 
of the normal word into two 18 bit pieces, four 9 bit pieces, or one 27 
-166-
bit and one 9 bit. These lIsubwords" are completely independent-for 
example, there are separate overflow indicators. 
In addition to 
Iffracture" there is "activity" and "quarter permutation". 
Any quarter 
word can be made tlinactive" i.e., inoperative. The 9 bit quarters of 
a datum from memory may be rearranged (permuted) before use. There 
are 8 standard permutations-for example, the right half of memory 
can be used with the left half of the arithmetic element. 
Nine bits 
are required for complete configuration specification. Since only 
5 bits are available for bit thin film memory is addressed by each 
instruction word, a special 32 word, 9 bit thin film memory is 
addressed by each instruction that processes data directly. A 
c~mplete change to any of 32 configurations is therefore possible 
from instruction to instruction. 
THE SMALLER VIRTUES 
Overlap: TX-2 has two core memories-" Stl memory, a vacuum tube 
driven 65,536 word core memory, and "Tn memory, a transistor driven 
4096 word core memory about 20% faster. Instruction readout can be 
done concurrently with the previous data readout if program and data 
are in separate memories. 
The use of the arithmetic element is also overlapped. Instructions ' 
that follow a multiply or divide operation will be done during the arith-
metic time if they make no reference to the arithmetic element. The 
overlap is entirely automatic and may be ignored if the programmer 
chooses. A careful programmer can gain speed by doing indexing after 
multiply or divide and by putting program and data in separate memories. 
-167-
Bit Sensing Instruction: One instruction--SKM--uses a single bit of 
any memory word as its operand. 
Control bits provide 32 variations of 
skipping setting, clearing, and/or complementing the selected bit. 
This 
instruction can also cycle the whole word right one place if desired. 
Addressable Arithmetic Element: Seventeen bits of the TX-2 instruc-
tion word are reserved for addressing an operand. 
This would allow a 
131,072 word memory. 
TX-2 has only 69,632 registers of core storage. 
The toggle switch and plugboard m~ories, the real time clock register, 
the knob register (shaft encoder), and the arithmetic element registers 
use 55 of the remaining addreSSing capability. 
The arithmetic element 
registers are therefore part of the memory system and can be addressed, 
e.g., one can add the accumulator to itself. 
Flexible In-Out: The TX-2 user must program each and every datum 
transfer. 
The lack of complex automatic in-out controls may seem to be 
a burden, but the s implici ty of the system gives the programmer ,much 
more precise and variable control than automatic systems provide. 
For 
example, coordination of separate in-out units such as display and light 
pen is possible. 
Moreover, it is relatively easy to attach new in-out 
machines as they become available. 
Index Memory and Indirect Addressing: Of the 64 index registers, 
one must.devote a few to each in-out unit's program. 
With all 21 in-out 
devices concurrently in use, each program would have two index registers 
for normal programming use. 
In practice, one seldom uses more than half 
a dozen in-out units, and each routine would then have 9--clearly a luxu-
ry. 
Indirect addreSSing provides a means for indexing normally nonindex-
able instructions, or for double indexing normal instructions. 
-168-
Magnetic Tape Auxiliary Storage ,: Each TX-2 magnetic tape unit stores 
ab,out 70 million bits, 34 times the capacity of the core memory system. 
, 
, 
Like a'magnetic drum the tape is addressable. It can be read in either 
direction at any speed from 60 to 600 ips, and can be searched at a maxi-
mum 'of 1200 i~s. It is used at present primarily for program storage. 
'---, 
"Turn ar.ound tinie"-i~e. the time required to save one program and. read ... · 
in a different one is se1dom more than 2 minutes and often less than 30 
seconds. 
(The" read-in time, once the desired section of the tape 'is 
found., is about 12 seconds for 69,632 words.) A standard IBM 729 tape 
'i 
'unit is also available. 
SUMMARY OF VITAL STATISTICS--TX-2--DECEMBER 1962 
Word Length: 
Memory: 
.Auxiliary Memory: 
Tape Speeds: 
IN~OUT EQUIPMENT 
Input: 
36 bits, plus pari ty bit, plus debugging tag bit 
256 x 256 c9r e 
64 x 64 core 
,Toggle switch 
Plugboard 
65, 536 words 
, 4,096 words 
16 words 
32 words 
6.0 JJ.sec cycle time 
4.4 JJ,sec cycle time 
Magnetic Tape 2+ million words, 70+ million bits per 
~nit (2 units in use, total of 10 planned) 
selectable 60-300 inChes/sec, search a.t 1000 
-
, 
inches/sec' (i.e. about 1600 to 8000 36 bit wOrds/secr 
Paper Tape Reader: 
400-2000 6 bit lines/sec 
2 keyboards-Lincoln writer 6- bit c'odes 
-169-
Input: 
Random number generator--average 57.6 ~sec per 9 bit number 
IBM Magnetic Tape (Model 729 M5) 
Miscellaneous pulse inputs--9 channels--push buttons or 
other source 
Analog input--Epsco Datrac--naminal 11 bit sample 
--27 kilocycle max. rate 
2 light pens-work with either scope or both on one' 
Special memory registers: 
Real time clock 
4 shaft e~coder knobs',. 9 bits each 
592 toggle switches (16 registers) 
37 push buttons -any or al~ can be pushed at once 
OJ.tput: 
Paper tape punch--300 6 bit lines/sec 
2 typewriters-10 characters per second 
IBM Magnetic Tape (729 M5) 
Miscellaneous·pulse/light/relay contacts-9 channels 
(low rates) 
Xerox printer--1300 char. sec 
2 display scopes-7 x 7 inch usable area, 1024 x 1024 raster 
Large board pen and. ink plotter-29" x 29" plotting area 
15 in/sec slew speed. 
Off line paper tape control 
as well as direct computer control. 
4-thing 
Aim 
Atomic 
Attacher 
Balance 
Block 
Chicken 
Circle 
Constraint 
Constraint 
satisfaction 
GLOSSARY 
-170-
A four component variable: text '. digits, or instance. 
To place the light pen so that light from the picture 
part aimed at falls on the photocell and so that the 
center of the light pen field of view is sufficiently 
close to the picture part. 
Axiomatic, fundamental, built in. 
The atomic con-
straints are listed in Appendix A. 
The atomic---
operations are each controlled by a push button 
listed in Appendix B. 
For instances, a particular point designated in the 
master for which in the instance the light pen will 
have a particular affinity. Also the related point 
created in the )picture containing the instance when 
the instance was created. 
For copying, any drawing part designated in the 
definition picture. Attachers may be recursively 
merged with object picture parts when the definition 
is copied. 
The property of equal weight among constraints 
obtained by making error in a constraint equal to 
displacement. 
-----
A set of consecutive registers used to represent a 
picture part. 
An n-component element. 
A subordinate ring member, composed of two registers 
one of which references the block containing the 
hen for this ring, the other references the next 
and previous chickens in the ring. 
A circle arc 0 
A full circle is a circle arc 3600 
or more in length. 
A specific storage representation of a relationship 
between variables which limits the freedom of. the 
variables, i. eo, reduces the number of degrees of 
freedom of the system. 
Also, constraint is some-
times used to mean a type of constraint, as in 
"there are seventeen atomic. constraints." 
The process of moving variables so that all the 
conditions on them embodied in the constraints are 
met. 
It is not always possible. 
Copying 
Definition 
Delete 
Digits 
Dismembering 
Dummy variable 
Error 
File 
Free 
Garbage 
Hen 
-171-
Duplication in storage the ring structure of a 
definition picture. A copy is not to be confused with 
an instance. 
Any instance may be changed into a 
copy by dismembering. 
A master picture. Especially a picture to be used 
for copying, usually containing a combination of 
atomic constraints. 
Also the error computation 
routine associated with a constraint. 
To erase. 
Deleted blocks become garbage. 
A set of five decimal digits plus sign, leading 
zeros suppressed. 
As a variable digits "may be moved, 
rotated, or made larger on the display. 
The 
particular value displayed is that of an associated 
scalar and may be changed only by moving the scalar. 
The process of changing an instance into a copy by 
creating in the ring structure a duplicate of the 
internal structure of the instance's" master and re-
moving the instance. 
A dismembered instance becomes 
a group of lines, etc., which may be individually 
moved, deleted, etc. Dismembering peels off oilly one 
layer of instance at a time. 
A particular two component variable used to locate 
the arms "of a constraint when it is first created. 
Dummy variables may merge with any other kihd of 
variable leaving any attached constraints applying 
to that variable. 
Display for a dummy variable is 
aX· 
" 
The number computed by the definition subroutine for 
a constraint. Error is zero if the constraint is 
satisfied and grows monotonically as the constrained 
variables are moved. 
A storage structure. A file may be in either list 
form or table f,orm. 
Also a collection of magnetic 
tape records. 
A variable which has so few constraints on it that 
it may be moved to satisfY all of them. 
Such a 
variable will be in the FREEIXJ.ffi ring. 
Free storage inside the range of storage addresses 
being used to ~epresent the drawing. 
A pair of registers in a block used to indicate the 
first and last references made to that block by the 
chickens belonging in the hen's ring. Also called 
a key. 
Instance 
Key 
Line 
Line segment 
List 
Location 
Master 
Merging 
Moving 
-172-
A fixed geometry subpicture represented very compactly 
in· storage by reference to a master and indication 
by four numbers of the size, rotation, and location 
of the subpicture. 
Internal structure of an instance 
is visible and may contain other instances, but since 
it is identical in appearance to the master it cannot 
be changed without changing the master. 
Except for 
size, rotation, and location, all instances of one 
master look the same. 
See hen. 
A line segment. 
No representation for an infinite 
length line exists in Sketchpad. 
A topological thing connecting two points. 
Contains 
no numerical information. 
Sometimes called a line. 
A particular form of storage structure in which each 
element stores not only the information pertinent 
to it but also the address of the next element. 
Not 
to be confused with a table. 
A position in the coordinate system represented by 
a pair of coordinates. 
Not to be confused with a 
point which has .a location. Also the address of a 
particular piece of information in storage. 
A picture which is used to define the visible 
internal structure of an instance. 
Combination of two storage blocks to identify two 
picture parts, which must be of like type, permanently. 
The result of a merger of variable~ takes on the . 
value of the historically older variable. In the 
ring structure, merging makes one block out of two, 
reducing the other to garbage. 
In certain oases 
merging is recursive. 
. 
Changing the numerical information stored in a 
variable. Moving a point stores a new coordinate 
location over the previous one. 
Moving an instance, 
text, or digits includes size change and rotation. 
Moving a scalar implies changing its value but does 
not change the position of its display. Moving is 
also the state a thing is in when it is attached to 
the light pen; it may be stationary on the display. 
Moving is not to be confused with relocating .. 
N-component 
element 
Numbers 
Ob~ject 
picture 
Older 
Picture 
Point 
POinter 
Pseudo.pen 
location 
Relocating 
Result 
Ring 
-173-
A particular form of storage in which various 
properties of· each i.-object repres.ented are stored 
in consecutive registers. Also the block of 
registers representing an object. 
See scalamand digits. 
Number: often refers to 
digits and scalars collectively. Also the binary 
numbers stored for a variable. 
A particular picture currently being worked on. 
Especially a camplicatedpicture of particular 
interest to a user as opposed to a definition or 
master picture which is to be used as a portion 
of the object picture. 
. 
The older of two blocks is the one with the lowest 
numbered address, illustrated higher on the page. 
Since new blocks are taken fram the free space in 
addresses higher numbered than the drawing storage, 
an older block was usually created sooner. 
A storage device to collect together related drawing 
parts. A "sheet of paper". Also the lines, points, 
instances, and constraints, etc., that are drawn 
. in the picture, collectively.: Pictures are numbered 
so that anyone may be called to appear qn the dis-
play.. 
Wi thin the limits of storage, as many 
pictures as desired may be set up and used . 
. -
. 
A specific representation in the ring structure used 
as an end point for a line segment. 
Not to be 
confused with location or spot. Also as a verb, to 
aim at something with ~helight pen. 
A storage register which contains the location of 
another storage register rather than numerical data. 
Such a register is said to point to the register 
whose address it contains. 
A location near the axis of the light pen which is 
used as the ff point of the pencil n • 
The pseudo pen 
location lies exactly on an existing point or line 
or circle or at the intersection of lines i~ the pen 
/is aimed at them. 
Changing the address at which a particular block is 
stored in memory. 
Not to be confused with moving. 
The single thing which remains after two things 
have been merged. 
A set of pointers which closes on itselfo 
pad all rings point both forward and back. 
is composed of one hen and many chickens. 
In Sketch-
A ring 
Ring structure 
Satisfy 
Scalar 
Spot 
Table 
Terminati on 
Texts 
Tie 
Value 
Variable 
-174-
The type of storage structure used to represent the 
drawing • s topology. 
See riilg. 
See constraint satisfaction. 
A one component"vector whose value can be dis-
played bya set of digits. For display of the 
scalar itself al is used. 
One of the bright dots on the display. 
Not to be 
confused with point or location. 
A form, of storage structure in which successive 
pieces of information are stored in successive 
registers in memory. 
Tables are the. "conventional" 
form of storage. 
See also list and ring 
structure. 
-
-
The process of taking things out of the moving 
state. Termination is usually done by giving a 
flick of the light pen. 
Pressing "stop" also 
terminates. 
Upon termination, merging may take 
place. 
Lines of textual material typed in and appearing in 
a standard type style on the picture. Text is 
treated as a four component variable. 
An attacher. 
The particular infor.mation stored in the numerical 
portion of a variable. E.g., the location of a 
pOint. Especially the value of a scalar as o:p~sed 
to the location of the set of digits displaying 
this value. 
A picture part which contains numerical informAtion. 
Scalars, points, instaa.cea, texts, dig! ts an<l.:~ 
variables are the only variables at present.. '·'Also 
used to denote a type of' variable. 
-175-
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
1. Clark, W. A., Frankovich, J. M., Peterson, H. P., Forgie, J. W. 
Best, R. L., Olsen, K. H., "The Lincoln TX-2 Computer," Technical 
Report 6M-4968, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Lincoln 
Laboratory, Lexington, Mass., April 1, 1957, Proceedings of the 
Western Joint Computer Conference, Los Angeles, California, February, 
1957 .. 
2. Coons, S. A., Notes on Graphical Input Methods, Memorandum 8436.M-17, 
Dynamic Analysis and Control Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Cambridge, Mass., 
May 4, 1960. 
. 
3. Johnston, L. E., A Graphical Input Device and Shape Description Inter-
pretation Routines, Memorandum to Prof. Mann, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Cambridge, Mass., 
May 4, 1960. 
4. 
Lickleder, J. C. R., ItMan-Computer Symbiosis," I.R.E. Trans. on Human 
Factors in ElectroniCS, vol. HFE, pp. 4-10, March 1960. 
5. Lickleder, J. C. R., and Clark, W., Hen-Line Man-Computer Communica-
tion," Proceedings of the Spring Joint Computer Conference, san Fran-
CiSCO, California, May 1-3, 19?2, vol. 21, pp. 113-125. 
6. LoomiS, H. H. Jr., Graphical Manipulation Techniques Using the Lincoln 
TX-2 Computer, Group Report5lG-0017, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Lincoln Laboratory, leXington, Mass., November 10, 1960. 
7 .. 
Moore, E. F., tt On the Shortest Path Through aMaze, n Proceedings of the 
International Symposium on the Theory of Switching, Harvard UniverSity, 
Harvard Annals, vol. 3, pp. 285-292, 1959-
' .  
8. Roberts, L. G. , Machine Perception of Three Dimensional Solids, Ph.D. 
TheSiS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Electrical Engineering 
Department, Cambridge, Mass., February, 1963. 
9. Southwell, R. V., Relaxation Methods :t.n Engineering Science, Oxford 
Un:lver~ity Press, 1940. 
. 
" 
10. Vanderburgh, A. Jr., TX-2 Users Handbook, Lincoln Manual No. 45, Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology, Lincoln Laboratory, leXington, Mass. 
July, 1961. 
11. Walsh, J _ F., and Smith A. F., nComputer Utilization, ff Interim 
Engineering Report 6873-IR-10 and 11, Electronic Systems Laboratory, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., pp. 57-70, 
November 30, 1959. 
' 
12. Handbook for Varip10tter Models 205S and 205T, PACE, Electronic Associ-
ates Incorporated. Long Branch, New Jersey, June 15, 1959-
-176-
Biograptjcal Note 
Ivan Edward Sutherland was born on May 16, 1938 in Hastings, 
Nebraska. 
After an early childhood near Chicago, he moved to Scarsdale, 
New York where he graduated from Scarsdale High School. 
Mr. Sutherland 
was a George Westinghouse Scholar during his four years at Carnegie 
Institute of Technology, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania where he received the 
Bachelor of Science degree in Electrical Engineering in June 1959. 
While at Carnegie he twice won the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers Student Prize Paper Contest for District 2 (1958 and 1959). 
As a graduate student he held a National Science Foundation Fellowship 
for three years (1959 to 1962). 
He received the Master of Science degree 
in Electrical Engineering from California Institute of Technology, 
Pasadena, California in June 1960. 
From September 1960 to December 1962, 
Mr. Sutherland was associated with the Research Laboratory of Electronics 
at Massachusetts Institute of Technology first as a full-time doctoral 
student and then as a research assistant during the fall semester of 
1962. 
During the summers of 1960, 1961 and 1962 he was a Staff Member 
of the MIT Lincoln Laboratory. 
Mr. Sutherland is a coauthor of "An ElectrO-Mechanical Model of 
Simple Animals," (Computers and Automation, February 1958) and is the 
author of "Stability in Steering Control," (Electrical Engineering, 
April 1960). 
He is a member of Sigma Xi, Tau Beta Pi, Eta Kappa Nu, 
and Pi Mu Epsilon. 
Mr. Sutherland belongs to the Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers and the American SOCiety of Mechanical 
Engineers. 
