The Cedar Programming Environment: 
A Midterm Report and Examination 
Warren Teitelman 
The Cedar Programming Environment: A 
Midterm Report and Examination 
Warren Teitelman t 
CSL-83-11 
June 1984 
[P83-00012] 
© Copyright 1984 Xerox Corporation. All rights reserved. 
CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: D.2_6 [Software Engineering]: Programming 
environments. 
Additional Keywords and Phrases: integrated programming environment, experimental 
programming, display oriented user interface, strongly typed programming language 
environment, personal computing. 
t The author's present address is: Sun Microsystems, Inc., 2550 Garcia Avenue, Mountain 
View, Ca. 94043. 
The work described here was performed while employed by Xerox 
Corporation. 
XEROX 
Xerox Corporation 
Palo Alto Research Center 
3333 Coyote Hill Road 
Palo Alto, California 94304 
1 
Abstract: 
This collection of papers comprises a report on Cedar, a state-of-the-art programming 
system. Cedar combines in a single integrated environment: high-quality graphics, a 
sophisticated editor and document preparation facility, and a variety of tools for the 
programmer to use in the construction and debugging of his programs. The Cedar 
Programming Language is a strongly-typed, compiler-oriented language of the Pascal family. 
What is especially interesting about the Ce~ar project is that it is one of the few examples 
where an interactive, experimental programming environment has been built for this kind of 
language. In the past, such environments have been confined to dynamically typed languages 
like Lisp and Smalltalk. 
The first paper, "The Roots of Cedar," describes the conditions in 1978 in the Xerox Palo 
Alto Research Center's Computer Science Laboratory that led us to embark on the Cedar 
project and helped to define its objectives and goals. Important decisions had to be made 
about what facilities and features were essential versus simply desirable, both with regard to 
the programming language as well as tools and packages. This section not only presents 
these decisions, but also describes the process by which we reached them. These deliberations 
are especially interesting in light of the fact that three communities with diverse programming 
languages (Mesa, lisp, and Smalltalk) and very different programming styles, met to discuss 
the merits and drawbacks of their individual systems and religions, with the purpose of 
reaching some sort of consensus that would allow the construction of a programming 
environment that would be satisfactory to all of them. 
The second paper, "A Tour Through Cedar," is essentially a travelogue through the 
current Cedar environment (as of September, 1983) in the form of a transcript of an actual 
session. This transcript consists of numerous snapshots of the display screen interspersed 
with dialogue and commentary. The intent is to produce an effect similar to that of the reader 
sitting down with a user in front of a display terminal and being given a live demonstration of 
the system, while an expert comments on some of the why's and wherefore's. During the 
course of this demonstration, the reader is introduced to most of the salient features of the 
Cedar Programming Environment as they come up and are used. In many cases we will 
digress from this demonstration to discuss some aspect of these features, such as why we 
did it this way, how important this particular facility actually turned out to be, etc. 
The final paper, "Cedar: The Report Card," discusses and attempts to evaluate how well 
we have succeeded in reaching our objectives and goals, to what extent the original objectives 
. and goals were changed or evolved during the course of the project, and what remains to be 
done. 
A version of the paper "A Tour Through Cedar" appeared in IEEE Software, April 1984. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
INTRODUCTION 
1 
Introduction 
A major activity in the Computer Science Laboratory (CSL) of the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center 
(PARC) is the production of prototype systems that provide interactive, personal computing services. 
Some of these systems are short-lived experiments to test novel ideas, and some are solid systems that 
are used by many people. The ability to conduct such experiments quickly, and at low cost, is thus of 
paramount importance to CSL: "The software that we can produce, and the rate at which we can produce 
it, are too often limiting factors in our research .... We believe that it is increasingly desirable, feasible, 
and economic to use computers to directly assist the process of experimental programming. [by which 
we meanJ ... the production of moderate-sized systems that are usable by moderate numbers of people 
in order to test ideas about such systems. We believe that it will be important to conduct future 
experiments more quickly and at lower cost than is possible at present" [8J. 
This belief provided much of the initial impetus for Cedar, a major project now under way in CSL 
to develop an advanced, integrated programming environment. Cedar is a programming environment 
designed to help programmers build experimental systems. It is the software equivalent of the kind of 
machine shop needed by an engineering laboratory, but unlike a machine shop, it does not represent a 
known technology: Cedar is itself an experimental system, and a very large one. 
The main goal of Cedar is to increase programmer productivity, specifically the productivity of the 
programmers in CSL, by reducing the cost of solving a problem by software and by improving the quality 
of the solutions. The improvement will come from three main sources: a programming language that 
takes more responsibility for certain programming tasks, programming tools that make program 
development and debugging faster, and a package library that allows programmers to build upon one 
another's work. [21J We intend for Cedar to be the basis for most of our programming during the next 
several years. Cedar will also provide the platform for these experimental applications themselves, i.e., 
the applications that we develop will not only be constructed using Cedar, they will run on top of Cedar. 
Cedar will also support non-programmers, and programmers when they are not programming, by 
providing various office-related facilities such as an electronic mail system, a sophisticated editor and 
document preparation system, and a high-quality typesetter. 
This report consists of three papers on Cedar, a system which is now in its adolescence: while there 
are approximately thirty serious users of the system, most of whom are extremely satisfied and view the 
environment as a vast improvement over the way they used to operate, a number of the facilities that 
we envision have not yet been provided, and others need significant improvements. Nevertheless, we feel 
that Cedar is a state-of-the-art programming system. It combines in a single integrated environment: 
high-quality graphics, a sophisticated editor and document preparation facility, and a variety of tools for 
the programmer to use in the construction and debugging of his programs. The Cedar Programming 
Language is a strongly-typed, compiler-oriented language of the Pascal family. What is especially 
interesting about the Cedar project is that it is one of the few examples where an interactive, experimental 
programming environment has been built for this kind of language. In the past, such environments have 
been confined to dynamically typed languages like Lisp and Smalltalk. (Not surprisingly, we have drawn 
heavily on our experiences with these latter two environments in the design of Cedar.) 
XEROX PARe, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
2 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Figur>:.> 1 is Ii ~lll'IpSh()1 of the Coalil'l.f nisplay which l11ustrate-s some of its capabilities At tile 
b()It~:m 01 tile screell ~re icons ro:-presenting: a mail lacHity, Ii spelJing tool \Ior use as a proofreader), 
Ii printer, a remote lile 6erver, plus various documents Iltat thE:' user is editIng or simply examining 
In the center portion 01 Ihe screen Cr:>dar's integration is rea~i1y apparent. A tool ~or momtormg 
~~~f~r~c!~~e~:~\:::eC1~~~Vs~a~:~:~;~~ aw~~i~e:~a~~epara!ion system (editing tillS vety ~, 
The first paper, "The Roots oi Cedar," describes the conditions in cSr!\in1978 that led us to 
embark on the Cedar prllje.;I, and that helped us to define itS' objectives ami goals. Important 
decisiO:M had to be mad,.,. about What facilities anlt features were essential versus simply desirable, 
both with regara to ~he programming la,nguage as well as tools and packages, This section not only 
presents these decislOns, t.ut also descnbet: the proces~ by which we reached them These 
delil)erati~n~ are especiall}' interesting In the light 01 the tact that thtfe communities with dlVffSf 
programltung la!'lguages (Mesa, LISP, Bma1,tlalll.l. and very different prC"J~ramm!ng !Jlyl~s, met Ie. 
discus~ the ml?;'rlts and drawbacks of their indiVidual systems and religlOns. With the purpose of 
reaching some sort of C'Jnsensus That would allow the construction of a programming E'nvironment 
tltat would be satisfactory to all of them. Thf pragmatic nature of thesE' discussions forfsta!ied the 
religious discussions that frequently ensued when such communities intertlcteo:1. in the past. We had 
to reach ctecision~ about whether leature A was preferable, and cost-effective, as compared with 
fe.amrE' B, e.g, tight, compilf-time type checking versus complete rull-time flexibility, '=,r whether 
there wu a com!Jromi~e position that permitted both 
The second paper, "A Tour Through Ceil&r," present$ the current state of the Cedar 
environment (a$ of September, 1983) in the form 0/ a transcript of an actual session This transdpt 
consists 0/ numerous snap$hots of the display screen interspersed with dialogue and commentary 
The intent is to produce an effect similar to that of the readfr sitting down with a user in front of a 
&6<--l/Q 
SIGNAL Traps.ZeroDivisor from Traps.ZeroDivisorTrap 
cfJmpu.u"fJon suspendNi, sll'lu,hmg /ZI Aclwn Are;;: S, 
Word~ 911150 
CPU Load 
The Cedar Display 
The above snapshot of the Cedar display illustrates some of Cedar's capabilities. At the bottom of 
the screen are icons representing: a mail facility, a spelling tool (for use as a proofreader), a printer, a 
remote file server, plus various documents that the user is editing or simply examining. In the center 
portion of the screen Cedar's integration is readily apparent. A tool for monitoring performance, an 
executive, a debugger, a document preparation system (editing this very sentence), and a scanned image 
all share the same working space. 
The first paper, "The Roots of Cedar," describes the conditions in CSL in 1978 that led us to 
embark on the Cedar project, and that helped us to define its objectives and goals. Important decisions 
had to be made about what facilities and features were essential versus simply desirable, both with regard 
to the programming language as well as tools and packages. This section not only presents these decisions, 
but also describes the process by which we reached them. These deliberations are especially interesting 
in the light of the fact that three communities with diverse programming languages (Mesa, Lisp, and 
Small talk) and very different programming styles, met to discuss the merits and drawbacks of their 
individual systems and religions, with the purpose of reaching some sort of consensus that would allow 
the construction of a programming environment that would be satisfactory to all of them. The pragmatic 
nature of these discussions forestalled the religious discussions that frequently ensued when such 
communities interacted in the past. We had to reach decisions about whether feature A was preferable, 
and cost-effective, as compared with feature B, e.g., tight, compile-time type checking versus complete 
run-time flexibility, or whether there was a compromise position that permitted both. 
The second paper, "A Tour Through Cedar," presents the current state of the Cedar environment 
(as of September, 1983) in the form of a transcript of an actual session. This transcript consists of 
numerous snapshots of the display screen interspersed with dialogue and commentary. The intent is to 
produce an effect similar to that of the reader sitting down with a user in front of a display terminal and 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
INTRODUCfION 
3 
being given a live demonstration of the system, while an expert comments on some of the why's and 
wherefore's. During the course of this demonstration, the reader will be introduced to most of the salient 
features of the Cedar Programming Environment as they come up and are used. In many cases we will 
digress from the demonstration to discuss some aspect of these features, such as why we did it this way, 
how important this particular facility actually turned out to be, etc. A somewhat condensed version of 
this paper appears in the Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering, 
March, 1984, Orlando, Florida, as well as in the April 1984 issue of IEEE Software. 
The final paper, "Cedar: The Report Card," discusses and attempts to evaluate how well we have 
succeeded in reaching our objectives and goals, to what extent the original objectives and goals were 
changed or evolved during the course of the project, and what remains to be done. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
THE ROOTS OF CEDAR 
5 
"Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it." . - George Santayana 
The Roots of Cedar 
In 1978, the computing community at PARC consisted of three distinct cultures: Mesa, Interlisp, 
and Smalltalk. Both the Smalltalk and Mesa communities programmed primarily on the Alto, a small 
personal computer that had been developed at PARC [32]. The Interlisp programmers continued to 
operate on a time-shared, main-frame computer called MAXC, a home grown machine that emulated a 
PDP-lO and ran Tenex. (An existence-proof implementation of Interlisp on the Alto had been completed, 
but performance problems, aggravated by the small size of the machine, were so severe that no one 
actually used this system to get serious work done.) Each of these communities was beginning to run 
into the limits imposed by the size of memory, both real and virtual, and by the computational power 
that the corresponding machine provided. CSL decided to solve these problems by designing and building 
a much more powerful personal computer, rather than by obtaining additionaL more powerful time-shared, 
main-frame machines. To understand this decision, one must understand the unique (at that time) 
commitment at PARC to personal computing that began with the Alto computer. 
Personal Computing at PARC 
During early 1973, members of CSL, in consultation with others at PARC, designed the Alto 
computer system as an experiment in personal computing: "to study how a small, personal machine 
could be used to replace facilities provided only by much larger shared systems." Although the original 
design of the Alto was modified several times between 1973 and 1978 in order to increase its memory 
capacity and reduce its cost, the basic capabilities of the machine remained essentially the same. 
The primary goal in the design of the Alto was radical (remember this was 1973): "to provide 
sufficient computing power, local storage, and input-output capability to satisfy the computational needs 
of a single user" [32]. The standard Alto system consisted of an 808 line bit map display, a keyboard 
and mouse pointing device, a 2.5MByte disk, an interface to the Ethernet, a microprogrammed processor 
that controlled input-output devices and allowed a number of instruction sets to be emulated, and 64K 
16 bit words of memory. 
As an experiment in personal computing, we considered the Alto a success.t1 The combination of 
high-resolution display and mouse pointing device provided a high-bandwidth, comfortable user interface. 
The Alto provided extremely reliable service as part of a distributed system: if one Alto broke, the user 
simply took out his disk pack and moved to another machine. The capabilities provided to the user by 
his personal Alto were supplemented by a large number of services available over the network, such as 
printing, electronic mail, and access to bulk file storage devices. This also led us into developing expertise 
in distributed computation, which was to become an integral part of our milieu. 
The introduction of time-sharing in the early 1960's provided not only an economic way of utilizing 
the computing power of the large, expensive main-frames, but also produced a qualitatively different way 
of computing. Similarly, the introduction of the Alto significantly changed not only the way we used 
computers, but the way we thought about how computers should be used. For example, it was wryly 
observed that one of the best features of the Alto was that "it did not run faster at night." In other 
words, users of a time-shared machine encountering the tremendous competition for cycles during rush 
tl In fact. CSL almost suffered a success disaster. The Alto was so successful that other organizations within Xerox clamored for 
them, resulting in increased demands for CSL to provide support and software maintenance that threatened to interfere with our 
ability to do research. By the time the experiment was over, the number of Altos in use within Xerox had exceeded the original 
estimates of its designers by nearly two orders of magnitude! 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-1l, JUNE 1984 
6 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
hours often responded by working at odd hours of the night. These same users now found that they 
could get just as much work done on their personal machine during the day. Having everyone around 
at the same time is of considerable benefit to a research laboratory where chance interactions in the halls 
often lead to serendipity. 
Another advantage of the Alto over a time-shared machine was that its personal nature made it 
socially acceptable for applications to devote the entire machine to interacting with a single user. This 
enabled a variety of real-time, interactive applications and tools to be built, such as illustrators and 
What-Y ou-See-Is-What-You-Get text editors. 
But there were aspects of the Alto design that did not work out well. In particular, the limitations 
on the size of the address space and on the amount of real memory were serious. t2 As a result, a great 
deal of time was spent squeezing software into the limited space available. However, we did not take 
this as an indictment of personal computing, but merely an indication that we had to think bigger. 
The Dorado 
By 1976, there were many hundreds of Altos in use within PARC and elsewhere. In CSL, Altos 
comprised the lion's share of our hardware base. But, it was evident that "a large and rapidly increasing 
amount of effort was going into surmounting the Alto's limited speed and storage capacity, rather than 
trying out research ideas in experimental systems" [15]. After much painful deliberation, we decided to 
design a new machine, the Dorado, to overcome these obstacles.t3 We intended that the Dorado would 
provide the hardware base for the next generation of computer system research at PARe. 
Our requirements were that the Dorado had to rapidly execute programs compiled into a sequence 
of byte codes and also support high-bandwidth input/output. "In particular, color monitors, raster scanned 
printers, and high-speed communications [were] all part of the computer research activities; these devices 
typically have bandwidths of 20 to 400 million bits per second. [Such] fast devices must not excessively 
degrade program execution, even when the two functions compete for many of the same resources. 
Relatively slow devices, such as a keyboard or an Ethernet interface, must also be supported cheaply, 
without tying up the high-bandwidth i/o system" [7]. Furthermore, the Dorado had to be physically 
small and quiet enough so that it could sit in a user's office, and cheap enough that we could acquire 
them in significant numbers. (Cheap is a relative notion: the Dorado is still the most expensive personal 
computer ever built!) 
These requirements resulted in a machine with a 60ns microcycle and an input/output bandwidth 
of 530 megabits/sec. (By comparison, the Alto had a 170ns microcycle and an input/output bandwidth 
of 32 megabytes. t4) Most Dorados currently have 2 megabytes of main storage expandable to 8 megabytes. 
(The Alto had 128K bytes of memory, later expanded to 512K via additional memory banks.) Dorado 
configurations range from our current 24-bit virtual address space (the addressable unit of the Dorado 
t2 It is only fair to add, in the designers' defense, that these limitations became severe only after the Alto system had outlived 
its planned lifetime, 
t3 The reason this decision was a difficult one was that designing and building the Dorado would require the full-time commitment 
of a number of our scientists for whom such activity would be a significant departure from their research interests. Tn effect, we 
were asking these individuals to sacrifice their opportunity to do interesting research for several years in order that the majority of 
the laboratory might benefit 
t4 Comparing the microcycle times of the Alto and Dorado may be misleading. The Alto was a lot less suited than the Dorado 
for interpreting the Mesa instruction set: the Dorado could execute a macroinstruction such as load or store in a single microcycle 
whereas on the Alto it might take a dozen microcycles. Furthermore, the Dorado had an instruction fetch unit that fetched 
instruction bytes from a stream and decoded them in parallel with, and independently of, the execution unit. The Dorado also had 
a hardware stack and hardware virtual memory. All of this resulted in an effective speedup of between a factor of ten and twenty 
over the Alto for strictly compute-bound programs (i.e., not accessing the disk). 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
THE ROOTS OF CEDAR 
7 
is a 16-bit word) with two million bytes of main storage on up to the ultimate 28-bit virtual address with 
32 million bytes of storage. A rough approximation is to think of a Dorado as having the power of an 
IBM 370/168 processor, dedicated to a single user. Although so powerful a machine could easily support 
several users and still give each much more computing power than had been provided by the Alto, we 
steadfastly resisted acting on this observation. The Dorado was designed and intended to be a powerful 
but personal computing system: as a workstation, it would support a single user. 
In 1977, implementation of the laboratory prototype for the Dorado was begun. In the summer of 
1978, this prototype successfully ran (by emulation) all of the Alto software. In the spring of 1979, 
Dorado Modell was pronounced operational. Currently, 75 Dorados have been built In CSC we have 
25 personal Dorados and 6 pool dorados. By mid-1984, all CSL research scientists will have their own 
personal, dedicated Dorados. 
Why Yet Another Programming Environment? 
The arrival of the Dorado in 1978 resolved our immediate hardware problems; execution speed, 
memory size, and address space would not be issues for the foreseeable future. Thus, our ability to 
experiment with computer systems was now limited only by our programming capabilities, of which the 
principal component was the programming environment. 
At this point in time, CSL had two major programming environments, Interlisp on MAXC [30] and 
Mesa on the Alto [20]. (Smalltalk [13] was also available, but its user community inside CSL was quite 
small.) Interlisp was a teletype-oriented environment, although an experimental window-oriented system 
had been designed and implemented [29]. Furthermore, the Interlisp model was of a single thread of 
control: there was no scheduler or support for concurrent operations. t5 Mesa, on the other hand, having 
evolved on the Alto, was display oriented. It also provided support for concurrent operations. But Mesa, 
had been severely stunted, much like a bonsai tree, by the nature of the Alto, particularly its hardware 
limitations. Thus, neither of these environments could really exploit the capabilities of the Dorado without 
a lot of work. At the same time, we were becoming increasingly concerned that having two programming 
environments was leading to duplication of effort and an inability to share results, especially programs. 
We saw the arrival of the Dorado as a golden opportunity to remove many of the limitations of our 
existing environments, while at the same time unifying our programming activities, by providing a single 
programming environment for the entire laboratory. 
To explore this possibility, the first CSL Experimental Programming Environment (EPE) Working 
Group t6 was chartered and met intensively for a month during the summer of 1978. The results of this 
group are detailed in [11] and [8] from which much of the following material has been extracted. 
The First EPE Working Group - Should We Do It? 
Each of the members of the EPE Working Group had experience with only one of our environments: 
Interlisp. Mesa, or Smalltalk. Given our diverse backgrounds, we needed to decide on a common measure 
for evaluating programming environments. What makes one programming environment better than 
another, and under what circumstances? (For example, a feature that facilitates rapid prototyping may 
actually be detrimental to the development of robust, long-lived software.) 
t5 The two issues of concurrency and use of the display are subtly related. It is hard for a user to monitor and control several 
parallel operations in an environment where he interacts with the system in a linear. teletype-oriented fashion. It is only with the 
flexibility provided by a display-oriented system that concurrency becomes an attractive and useful feature. 
t6 Peter Deutsch. James Horning. Butler Lampson. James Morris. Edwin Satterthwaite. and Warren Teitelman. with the occasional 
participation of Alan Perlis. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
8 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
We decided to restrict our attention on the foreseeable needs within CSL in the next few years, 
paying particular attention to what we called experimental programmin. by which was meant "the 
production of moderate-sized systems that are usable by moderate numbers of people in order to test 
ideas about such systems" [8]. Underlying all of our discussions was the belief that we had to be able to 
perform such experiments more quickly and with less manpower than was possible with our existing 
environments. 
Having agreed to focus on experimental programming, we then decided to proceed by producing a 
catalogue of programming environment capabilities that are desirable for experimental programming, 
guided by our experience with the three previously mentioned environments - both their strengths and 
weaknesses. The catalogue would also include an estimate of the value, cost, and priority of each proposed 
capability. We would then use this catalogue as a basis for deciding whether it was feasible to build a 
single environment which included all or most of these capabilities. 
Note that the existence of the Dorado meant that we were considering capabilities for a 
computationally rich environment: many of the capabilities on the list that we generated are feasible only 
when each programmer has substantial computing power available at all times. 
Catalogue of Programming Environment Capabilities 
To facilitate discussion and evaluation, we divided the capabilities of a programming environment 
into four categories: virtual machine/programming language, tools, packages, and other. Virtual 
machine/programming language was the most basic category and referred to those capabilities that were 
primitive concepts in the programming language, or in the virtual machine on which the programming 
language runs. Examples of such capabilities include object management (garbage collection), statically 
checked type system, abstraction mechanisms (explicit notion ofinterface),t7 adequate runtime efficiency, 
large virtual address space (~ 24 bits), run-time availability of all information derivable from source 
programs, good facilities for processes, monitors, interrupts, t8 and exception handling. t9 A total of 31 
items were generated in this category. 
The Tools category referred to capabilities employed by the user in dealing with his programs. 
Examples of tools are a prettyprinter, a source-language debugger, a cross-reference capability, and an 
available interpreter. Packages referred to programs that could be used by other programs. Examples of 
packages are a generalized cache mechanism, menus and other standard user interfaces, remote file 
storage, and a message transmission system. (The division between Tools and Packages was admittedly 
somewhat arbitrary since, in a good environment, the capability provided to the user by the tools would 
also be available to the programmer in the form of packages.) The Other category included documentation 
as well as non-technical considerations. 
We then arrived at a priority ranking for these capabilities by giving each member of the working 
group 100 votes to be divided among the list Each item was also rated as to how fundamental it was, in 
the sense of how difficult it would be to add that capability if it were not allowed for in the initial system 
design. We also estimated the difficulty of providing each capability in Mesa, Interlisp, and Smalltalk. 
(All of this information can be found in [8].) 
t7 The importance and role of a statically checked type system and the explicit notion of an interface are discussed further in 
the subsection entitled "If We Start With Mesa" (page 14). 
t8 Many members of the group felt that synchronization between logically asynchronous processes would be necessary for many 
of the applications we wanted to build, either for functional reasons or for efficiency, and that the programming language should 
provide mechanisms that would help the programmer to write such programs. 
t9 Similarly, our experiences with Mesa suggested that an integrated mechanism for handling exceptional conditions aided the 
construction and debugging of robust programs by clearly distinguishing between normal and exceptional algorithms. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
THE ROOTS OF CEDAR 
9 
The complete catalogue of capabilities may be found in Appendix 1. It is interesting to note that 
there are very few surprises on this list: Despite our diversity, we were pretty much in agreement about 
what programming capabilities were desirable. The principal differences of opinion related to priorities 
(or difficulty of implementation). Appendix 2 contains the catalogue ranked according to priorities. 
Fundamental Principles 
In addition to the catalogue of specific capabilities shown in Appendix 1, in the course of our 
deliberations we also identified a few principles that were not captured as features, or else were so 
fundamental in our deliberations that they are worth repeating here: 
Automatic storage deallocation is an absolute necessity. It produces a qualitative 
improvement in the ease of programming and the reliability of the results.tlO This need 
not preclude another class of variables with progrfU;l1mer-managed deallocation, but the 
latter must not be able to destroy the data structures necessary for the former. 
Easy use of programs as data underlies many other facilities in the system. Implementing 
this seems to require having Lisp-style atoms, a run-time type system, and universal 
pointers (pointers that carry a type with them). 
Editing facilities closely coupled with the compiler and the executive interface to the 
system are essential, both to reduce the turnaround time for minor changes, and to allow 
easy construction of tools that interact with these facilities. 
Capabilities for precisely defining interfaces, and restricting the communication between 
modules to those interfaces, are essential to reliable and readable programming. This 
includes, as a special case, the ability to restrict the use of types and names to a local 
lexical context. 
The ability to perform static checking ... over designated program regions is necessary 
for both security and efficiency reasons. 
The present Lisp, Mesa, and Smalltalk programming styles all must be supported in a 
satisfactory way. The same packages, and tools of equivalent power, must be available in 
all styles. In particular, the Lisp capabilities for embedded variant languages and for 
programming entirely without type declarations must be supported. 
Both large, multi-person and small, single-person styles must be supported well. Bringing 
a wider range of experiments within the scope of a single person's effort is an important 
EPE goal. 
The EPE must support a wide range of binding times, including the Mesa and Smalltalk 
extremes [compile-time binding for Mesa and run-time binding for Smalltalk], in a way 
that allows changes in binding time without structural changes in the program. Different 
choices of binding time by the programmer may lead to different turnaround times for 
apparently minor changes, and to different execution efficiencies, but the functional 
behavior of programs must not depend on such choices. 
[8] 
tID It is not surprising that those members of the group with experience in the Lisp world would consider garbage collection 
non-negotiable. However, those from the Mesa community. which did not have garbage collection. were also becoming increasingly 
aware of its importance. Storage leaks, i.e .. inappropriate retention of explicitly allocated storage. and the inverse problem of 
premature deallocation were the cause of some of the most pernicious bugs in Mesa programs. and some of the most difficult to 
find. Furthermore. many Mesa programs would become considerably simplified with the availability of automatic storage 
management and. for applications that employed parallel processing. a lot of synchronization issues would disappear. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-ll. JUNE 1984 
10 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Conclusions of the First Working Group 
The EPE working group recommended that "CSL should launch a project on the scale of the 
Dorado tll to develop a programming environment for the entire laboratory starting from either Lisp 
[Interlisp] or Mesa" [H].t12 
We also concluded that the laboratory could support only one major 
programming environment. If a new programming environment were to be developed, "then other work 
on the existing systems must be kept to a minimum during this development, and support for these 
systems must be phased out as the new environment became viable" [H]. Finally, we observed that there 
did not seem to be any reason to attempt a multi-language programming environment. If we succeeded 
in constructing an environment with all or most of the capabilities in our catalogue, that environment 
would certainly support any existing style of programming. Furthermore, although the result might not 
satisfy everyone, an attempt to do so might cause the system to collapse under its own weight (cf. Lisp 
2 and Algol 68). 
The Second EPE Working Group - Where To Start? 
From its creation in 1970, CSL had always been willing and able to take a long-term approach in 
planning and building for its future. We all felt that the laboratory as a unit, as well as most of the 
individuals that comprised it, were not merely transients; we were comfortable with investments in 
software and hardware that might take years to come to fruition. Mesa is a good example of the former, 
and the Alto and the Dorado examples of the latter. Thus, it is not surprising that the laboratory accepted 
the recommendation of the first EPE working group to develop a new programming environment for 
the Dorado starting from either Interlisp or Mesa.· A second working group was formedt13 and met 
weekly for almost three months, exploring in more detail the "probable consequences of the alternative 
starting points." The results of this group are detailed in [H] from which much of the following material 
has been extracted. 
The discussions of the second working group focused on four areas: 
What are the key technical issues that arise from each of the possible starting points? 
What differences in the ultimate system would necessarily follow from each choice of 
starting point? 
How much effort would be required to reach various levels of result from each starting 
point? What people would be available to do the work? 
What other non-technical considerations should play a significant role in our decision 
about what to do? 
[H] 
tll i.e .. around 20 man years. We were a little optimistic; the current estimate of man years spent on the Cedar project, as of 
June 1983, is 45. 
t12 Fairly early in our discussions we decided that either Interlisp or Mesa would be sufficiently preferable to Smalltalk as a 
starting point that we did not consider Smalltalk further. This decision was based on the following: (1) The Smalltalk 76 
implementation was written in Alto assembly language and could not support more than 128K of real memory or 64K addressable 
objects without a major redesign and reimplementation. (Note that this was in 1978. Smalltalk 80, which was in fact a major 
redesign and reimplementation of Smalltalk, has removed these limitations [10].) (2) Many members of CSL were familiar with 
either Interlisp or Mesa. whereas there was no corresponding user community within CSL familiar with Smalltalk; and (3) the 
direction of Smalltalk evolution was towards smaller machines, whereas we wanted to take significant advantage of the Dorado's 
capabilities. 
t13 Daniel Bobrow, Peter Deutsch. James Horning, Butler Lampson. RoyLevin, Larry Masinter, Gene McDaniel, James Mitchell, 
James Morris. Edwin Satterthwaite, Nori Suzuki, and Dan Swinehart. Many other members of CSL also attended some or most 
of the meetings and/or provided written material for the group. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-8Hl, JUNE 1984 
THE ROOTS OF CEDAR 
11 
Technical Issues 
Most of our discussions centered around the first area: the technical issues that arose from the choice 
of starting with either Interlisp or Mesa. We addressed this question by taking the catalogue of 
programming environment capabilities and examining each of them in terms of the amount of effort 
required to provide the corresponding facility in Interlisp or Mesa. In many cases, the corresponding 
environment already provided that facility, so the effort would be minimal. For example, Interlisp already 
provided automatic storage management, and Mesa already had a statically checked type system. 
Conversely, adding automatic storage management to Mesa or adding encapsulation mechanisms to 
Interlisp was considered to be hard. Our discussions focused primarily on those key facilities missing 
from each environment. The next two sections examine each of the two environments in turn. 
Mesa Facilities Needed in Lisp 
The following capabilities from our catalogue were identified as being present in Mesa but not 
adequately available in Interlisp: statically checked type system, abstraction mechanisms (Le., the explicit 
notion of interface), adequate run-time efficiency, encapsulation/protection mechanisms, consistent 
compilation, and user ability to pack data. A proposal was made to provide each of these facilities as 
follows: 
Static type checking -- by making types be objects and checking that all users of a 
declared variable refer to identical type objects. 
Explicit interfaces -- by defining an object called a dictionary that generalizes the notion 
of parameter list, record, and interface, and by requiring that such an object be associated 
with every defined or imported function. 
Greater run-time efficiency, packed data -- by making the internal representation of a 
quantity be one of its attributes in the type system, and extending the instruction set to 
allow more efficient execution when more tightly bound representations are used. 
Encapsulation/protection -- by associating protection information with entries in 
dictionaries. 
Consistent compilation -- by extending the notion of type identity and compatibility into 
the permanent filing system, through an object called a permanent pointer. 
[11] 
In the Lisp tradition, the method proposed to provide these facilities was to define new objects, e.g., 
for representing types, interfaces, name scopes, and then to define functions for manipulating them. For 
example, the following plan was set forth for implementing the statically checked type system. Types 
would be objects, just like integers or lists. There would be three kinds of types: interface, which describe 
how objects behave in general, descriptive, which specify predicates that hold true of objects in particular 
situations, and representation, which describe the bit patterns used to represent objects inside the machine. 
Interface types would be built up from elementary types by (possibly recursive) applications of various 
operators such as: ANYOF[tl...tn: Type], which produces a type for objects that can be of any of the types 
tl...tn; FUNCTIoN[argT,resultT: Type], which is a type for functions that take arguments of type argT 
and return result of type resultT; READONLY, UNIQUE, etc. Interface types could also be defined as 
structures, where a structure was a type that had named components, each of which may have type 
declarations. For example, an interface type in the Mesa sense is simply a structure type with fields that 
are of various function types. Under this scheme, type checking, conformity, and coercion could all be 
dealt with straightforwardly. The remaining missing facilities were dealt with in a similar manner. [11] 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
12 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Lisp Facilities Needed in Mesa 
The group distinguished two different kinds of facilities available in Interlisp but missing from Mesa: 
Foundations: basic. low-level facilities needed to match the functionality of Lisp .... 
Features: equivalents for the Lisp Masterscope. tI4 file package. programmer's assistant. 
Helpsys. and similar features. in a more general setting. together with improvements to 
the [Mesa] debugger and editor. facilities for specifying the construction of complex 
systems. and other "environmental" capabilities. 
[11] 
In general. the group felt that those capabilities from our catalogue that fell under the features 
category presented no serious technical problems. i.e., were straightforward albeit non-trivial. We did 
observe that the right set of facilities for the EPE we were considering might look substantially different 
from existing facilities. given that we had the opportunity to redesign the user interface to take advantage 
of the high-bandwidth display. In fact, some of the new experimental applications being developed in 
our existing environments were already demonstrating this, such as the Smalltalk browser, DLisp, and 
the Mesa Tools environment. Thus. these capabilities might need a great deal of additional design work 
once the EPE project was under way. But there was no compelling reason why their absence from Mesa 
and presence in Lisp mitigated strongly in favor of the latter. 
With regard to foundations capabilities. more detailed consideration and planning would be required. 
We identified the following as being present in Interlisp but not available in Mesa: automatic storage 
deallocation. fast turnaround for minor program changes. run-time type system and self-typing data. 
runtime availability of all source program information. compiler/interpreter available with low overhead 
at run-time. and program-manipulable representation of programs. 
The group proposed a plan for adding each missing facility. For example. to provide for automatically 
deallocated objects. the plan was to use the Deutsch-Bobrow scheme for incremental garbage collection 
[9]. This required "knowledge of the location and type of every pointer to an automatically deallocated 
object, but the techniques are well-known and straightforward" [11]. Similarly, the Mesa compiler already 
built symbol tables that included a mapping between source identifiers and internal. unique identifiers 
for an individual module. Implementing the Lisp atom capability would simply require a global map 
into which each module's map would be merged when it was loaded. 
Character of the Result 
As a result of these deliberations. the working group concluded that the advantages accrued by 
choosing Interlisp over Mesa or vice versa were insignificant. In other words, the choice between Interlisp 
and Mesa could not be made "solely on the basis of technical considerations" [11]. 
To within the uncertainty of estimation. both starting points present challenges of 
comparable difficulty. and would lead to systems of comparable utility, with comparable 
investments. over comparable time spans. [11] 
Regardless of which system was chosen as the starting point, the group reaffirmed the goal of 
supporting the programming styles of both communities: 
t14 Masterscope is an interactive program for analyzing and cross-referencing user programs. It contains facilities for analyzing 
user functions to determine what other functions are called. how and where variables are bound. set, or referenced. as well as 
which functions use particular J'ecord declarations. It maintains a database of the results of the analyses it performs, which the user 
may interrogate via a simple command language. Masterscope is interfaced with both the editor and the file package so that when 
a datum is changed or loaded, Masterscope knows that it must be re-analyzed [17], [14]. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-ll, JUNE 1984 
THE ROOTS OF CEDAR 
We are agreed that it is necessary and feasible for an EPE based on either system to 
support comfortably the programming styles currently associated with Lisp and Mesa .... 
The final system would provide all the facilities that present Lisp and Mesa users value 
highly: from Lisp, tools similar to the existing array of tools in the current Interlisp, and 
the ability to support integrated sublanguages and to delay bindings; from Mesa, the 
provisions for modularization with explicit interfaces, and the amenability to static 
checking. However, the system would probably retain some of the "flavor" of its starting 
point. 
[11] 
13 
This last sentence deserves further elaboration. What the group was saying was that depending on 
the system chosen for the starting point, there would be differences in the "character of the result." In 
fact. it was "the value judgments placed on these differences [that] generated most of the heat in our 
discussion" [11]. 
What would these differences be? The following two sections contain some of what the group 
thought the flavor of a Lisp-based or Mesa-based EPE would be, and the strengths and weaknesses that 
would result from starting from each. tls 
If We Start With Lisp 
To understand the flavor of a Lisp-based programming environment, one has to look at how such 
systems developed, and how they are typically used. 
Lisp systems have been used for highly interactive programming for more than a decade. 
During that time, special properties of the Lisp language have enabled a certain style of 
interactive programming to develop, characterized by powerful interactive support for 
the programmer, nonstandard program structures, and nonstandard program development 
methods .... 
Lisp is used almost entirely as a research tool. '" The average Lisp user writes a program 
as a programming experiment, i.e., in order to develop the understanding of some task, 
rather than in expectation of production use of the program. The act of developing the 
program, not the act of running it (even for test data), constitutes the experiment. As a 
consequence. the program is likely to be large and complex. to undergo drastic revisions 
while it is being developed. and to be thrown away before it has been "completed" by 
conventional programming standards since it will already have served its purpose before 
then. [25] 
Beau Sheil [27] calls this style of use: 
exploratory programming. the conscious intertwining of system design and implementation . 
... Some applications are best thought of as design problems, rather than implementation 
projects. These problems require programming systems which allow the design to emerge 
from experimentation with the program. so that the design and program develop together. 
Current Lisp implementations (and especially Interlisp) evolved in response to the need for 
programming environments that facilitated the exploratory programming style of use. The following 
aspects of Interlisp are especially relevant for supporting this style: 
Incremental: Small changes require only a small amount of work (both mental effort and 
real time). This is true for both ordinary Lisp programs and programs written in embedded 
languages. (Current implementations, unfortunately, have relatively weak tools for 
discovering whether one's changes are consistent.) 
tls At times in the discussion, it may seem that we are comparing the Mesa language with the Interlisp environment, This is 
appropriate: most of the focus of energy and effort in Interlisp has been on its environment, whereas Mesa's great strength is its 
language, We expected that if we started with Mesa, most of our efforts would be in environmental-related areas, whereas if we 
started with Lisp. a lot more of our effort would have to be devoted to language-related issues, 
XEROX PARe, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
14 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Open: The basic facilities of Lisp are open to change at a very low level; one can modify 
the operation of the entire system from a user program. There is no distinction between 
system and user code, variables, name spaces, etc. (This is also a weakness, in that it is 
not uncommon to find that parts of the system make assumptions about each other that 
casual modifications violate.) 
Integrated: The user can slip relatively gracefully from procedures written in an embedded 
language back to procedures written in Lisp itself, and vice versa. Since the parser and 
interpreter are packages, code (in a variety of languages) can be stored in data structures 
and executed when retrieved. 
Aware of user activities: Standard packages in Lisp [Interlisp) keep track of new objects 
added to the system by the user on-line, and changed objects, and help the user keep 
track of his complex environment Because all transactions with system objects (such as 
editing, creating new variables, etc.) are handled through an active intermediary and a 
set of functional interfaces, it is easy to provide all the "hooks" for complex assistants 
like Masterscope. 
Abstraction-based: The user is completely freed from concern with basic questions like 
the representation of integers and symbols, and the management of storage. (Most Lisp 
implementations, including the present Interlisp, have a related weakness in that they 
provide few mechanisms for attaining better efficiency even when the user knows full 
generality is not needed.) 
[11) 
We expected that an EPE based on Interlisp would support the exploratory programming paradigm, 
i.e., facilitate rapid changes, better than one based on Mesa. 
If We Start With Mesa 
Mesa evolved in response to an entirely different need: producing reliable, robust systems, developed 
by large teams of programmers, t16 and the ability to maintain such systems over a fairly long period, 
often by programmers who were not the original implementors. The second EPE report described the 
Mesa style as follows [11): 
The "Mesa style" tends to place greater emphasis on structure than on unconstrained 
flexibility. Probably its two most important aspects for an EPE are its emphasis on static 
checkability and its provision for explicit interfaces. Both are important in speeding up 
the programming process and in improving the quality of the result; they become even 
more so if the units that programmers manipulate are large (packages or subsystems), 
rather than small (statements or functions). The advantages will be small for programs 
whose "characteristic times" (design, programming, checkout, existence, total execution) 
are all measured in minutes, large if they are measured in weeks or months. In an 
environment where programs are undergoing rapid change, however, mandatory checking 
mechanisms tend to introduce unnecessary overhead by requiring complete internal 
consistency at every step of the development process. 
Note that in sharp contrast to adherents of the Lisp style, proponents of Mesa are perfectly willing 
to accept the greater inertia to change imposed by the mandatory checking mechanisms. In fact, many 
would consider this to be a feature of Mesa, just as the fact that amending the Constitution of the United 
States is an extremely difficult and lengthy process is a feature because it tends to ensure that only well 
thought out and mutually agreed upon changes are implemented. 
t16 It is unusual for a programming project in Lisp to involve more than three or four programmers. whereas there were as many 
as 35 programmers at work at one time on the Star project developed at Xerox. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
THE ROOTS OF CEDAR 
15 
Static Checkability. On the issue of static checking versus run-time checking. arguments about the 
advantages and disadvantages of both have raged back and forth for some time. The proponents of Mesa 
argue that it is better to locate faults by static checking than via run-time errors because [11]: 
Many faults can be identified in a single run of the checker. rather than surfacing one 
at a time in debugging runs. 
There is experimental -- as well as anecdotal -- evidence for the proposition that program 
faults located statically are diagnosed and removed more quickly than those located 
dynamically. 
Passing the static test ensures that all faults in a given class have been removed; in 
generaL no finite set of test cases gives such assurance with dynamic checking. 
"Correctness" is a static property of the program text; it is hard to ensure that a program 
that relies heavily on dynamic properties actually does what is intended .... 
The belief that this style actually speeds programming. measured as problem solutions 
per unit time. is closely tied to the observation that most programmers spend more time 
worrying about the possibility of programming errors --
and coping with their 
consequences -- than they spend actually writing new code. This style does require more 
planning before a running program is created -- some would consider this a disadvantage. 
A definite weakness of this approach is that it will be relatively difficult to add flexibility 
that was not anticipated in the program design. thus restricting the range of experiments 
that can be easily performed. 
The importance of detecting faults earlier rather than later is captured in an aphorism attributed to 
James Morris: "There is no debugger in Peoria." If a program is to be run by unsophisticated users at 
sites distant from its implementors. encountering problems at that time is simply not acceptable. On the 
other hand. most Lisp programs are written as experiments: they may never be run in Peoria (though 
this is beginning to change). Thus. it is of no consequence that there may be bugs lurking in as yet 
untried portions of such a Lisp program; the Lisp programmer is happy to defer dealing with those 
problems until he encounters them. In fact. it is a feature of Lisp that programs can be run when they 
are only partially complete. 
Another aspect of the issue of when it is best to detect errors is that because it is relatively hard to 
change Mesa programs (edit, recompile, reload. etc.). it is important to detect as many faults as possible 
in a program before it is run, and to fix them all at once. In other words, precisely because the 
consequence of encountering a problem is more serious in the Mesa environment than in Lisp. it is more 
important to find at one time as many problems as possible. By contrast, when a problem is encountered 
in a Lisp program. e.g .. a type conflict, it is usually a simple matter to fix it immediately and even to 
continue with the computation. (Sometimes the programmer may have to backtrack the computation to 
get to a consistent state, but most Lisp debuggers provide such facilities.) Thus, encountering problems 
as a sequence of isolated, individual events during the course of testing a program is perfectly acceptable 
to the Lisp programmer. 
Explicit Interfaces. Much of the original motivation behind the development of Mesa was to facilitate 
a modular style of programming. Thus, a great deal of thought has been placed on the issue of explicit 
interfaces in its design. The separation of Mesa programs into interfaces and implementations of these 
interfaces enable implementors and clients to work independently, and to make changes independently, 
as long as they respect the interface. As stated in the first EPE report [8]: 
Abstraction mechanisms are important because they make explicit the logical 
dependencies of one part of a program on another, while concealing implementation 
choices irrelevant to the communication between such parts. Thus, these mechanisms 
enable the system architect to factor the development, debugging, testing, documentation, 
understanding, and maintenance of programs into manageable pieces, while leaving 
individual programmers the appropriate freedom to design those pieces. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-ll. JUNE 1984 
16 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Of course, Gust as with static checkability) the need to specify interfaces in advance can be viewed 
as either a strength or weakness of Mesa, depending on one's point of view.t17 
. 
Early versus late binding. The combination of static checkability and explicit interfaces encourages, 
indeed, often requires, relatively early binding of many aspects of Mesa programs that in Lisp are 
typically bound during execution. This is in sharp contrast to the approach taken by Lisp and other 
programming languages designed for exploration: 
The key property of the programming languages used in exploratory programming 
systems is their emphasis on minimizing and deferring the constraints placed on the 
programmer, in the interest of minimizing and deferring the cost of making large-scale 
program changes .... [These] languages make extensive use of late binding, i.e., allowing 
the programmer to defer commitments as long as possible. [27] 
Note that the Lisp programmer is not necessarily adverse to the availability of explicit interfaces or 
static checkability. He just wants them to be optional.tl8 
. 
The bottom line is that we expected that an EPE based on Mesa would emphasize robustness, 
reliability, and maintainability at the expense of the ability to make rapid changes. 
The Decision to Start With Mesa 
The principal conclusion of the second working group was that the choice between Interlisp and 
Mesa as the starting point for Cedar could not be made solely on the basis of technical considerations. 
Thus, social and political factors, including the availability of people to fill key roles in the project, as 
well as our concern for relations with both the computer science research community and the rest of the 
Xerox Corporation, became decisive concerns. These considerations could be divided into the categories 
of importation and exportation - of ideas, people, and code. In many cases, symmetry prevailed: there 
were roughly the same kinds of advantages and disadvantages for Interlisp as Mesa. However, where 
there was an edge, it tended to go to Mesa. For example: 
• The rest of Xerox had a fairly large and growing commitment to Mesa, and none to Interlisp. 
Remaining largely compatible with the rest of the corporation had both advantages and disadvantages, 
but the advantages predominated. With respect to research communities outside of Xerox, either choice 
would reduce communication with important (but different) research communities in the outside world: 
Lisp favors the AI community, Mesa favors the programming language and systems programming 
community. 
• Although the efforts required were about the same, a somewhat larger number of qualified people 
were available to work on a Mesa-based EPE. It was noted, however, that if Mesa were chosen, some 
effort would be needed to ensure that those members of the Lisp community concerned with programmer 
assistance, programs as data bases, and integrated sublanguages were able to provide enough input to 
ensure that Cedar would be of use and attractive to them. 
t17 The present need for recompilations of a large number of files whenever a fundamental interface is changed. even in an 
upwards compatible fashion. has to count as a weakness. But. it is simply an artifact of the current implementation, can certainly 
be reduced. and probably eliminated .. 
t18 For example. the Oed package developed by Ron Kaplan and Beau Sheil extends Interlisp to allow the user to declare the 
types of variables and expressions. "It provides a convenient way of constraining the behavior of programs when the generality 
and flexibility of ordinary Interlisp is either unnecessary. confUSing or inefficient" [14]. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
THE ROOTS OF CEDAR 
17 
• We wanted to keep abreast of developments in computer science in the world at large. Most of 
the knowledge representation. expert systems. automatic programming, and programmer's assistant type 
of work is done in various Lisp dialects. However, much of the formal specification and verification work 
was directed towards Pascal dialects, and would therefore be more easily applicable to Mesa. Also Ada 
being based on Pascal. is much more similar to Mesa than to Lisp, so that work on Ada environments 
would be highly relevant. t 19 
• We wanted to move implementorsinto the project easily, and were even more concerned that it 
be easy for users to convert to the use of Cedar. t20 Within CSL, there were roughly comparable numbers 
of hard core users in each camp. so that the issues of migration seemed roughly symmetric. However. 
within Xerox. Mesa was much more widely known and used. Outside of Xerox. generic Lisp was more 
widely known than Mesa, but generic Pascal was more widely known and used than Interlisp. 
As a result, the decision was made in early 1979 to launch a project to build Cedar, an experimental 
programming environment. starting with Mesa. 
First Steps 
1979. Work began on Cedar in 1979 with the creation of seven committees to investigate and propose 
implementation strategies for various components of the system: Language Features, User Facilities, 
Communications. Data Base Package. Text and Figure Displayer; Filing and Consistent Compilation, and 
Programmable Scanner Capabilities. However. with so large a system and so many diverse components 
(many of which involved research problems themselves), it was important that we did not simply disperse 
into independent efforts and then try to fit everything together at the last minute. We needed to define 
various points along the way when we would try to put together a working system in order to provide 
us with feedback. and also (hopefully) provide us with interim environments that would allow us at each 
stage to be more productive than before. Dependency was another issue; some components could not 
effectively proceed until others were in place or at least designed. Thus. the order in which we attacked 
various issues would be extremely important. 
At this point in time. there was no integrated Mesa programming environment. Users composed and 
edited Mesa programs using a separate, stand-alone editor (Bravo), compiled them using the stand-alone 
Mesa compiler. and then loaded and tested them using the Mesa debugger. When problems were 
encountered. the user had to exit from the debugger, return to the editor, load the source files, make the 
changes. leave the editor. recompile the programs, and then reload and resume testing. 
We decided that there would be sufficient short-term payoff in our productivity while building 
Cedar to spend some initial effort at bootstrapping ourselves into a better environment. Therefore, we 
constructed the Interim Mesa Environment (lME) specifically as a tool for building. Cedar. IME's aim 
was to reduce the delays experienced in developing Mesa programs by providing support for the edit, 
compile. and load phases in a single environment. By the end of 1979, IME was in place and was being 
used seriously by about six people. 
t19 Five years later, it now appears that the converse of this statement is going to be of greater importance, i.e .. the fact that 
Cedar is built on top of Mesa makes Cedar highly relevant to Ada environments. 
t20 CSL programmers have a wide range of goals and styles: system programming, mathematics. hardware design. artificial 
intelligence. etc. Most of them are permanent employees who can be expected to invest effort in learning how to use a programming 
system, but an appreciable fraction are visiting scientists or computer science students who can be productive only if they' can 
quickly assimilate the basic system. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
18 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Meanwhile, we worked on specifying a subset of the Mesa language in which it was possible to do 
automatic storage deallocation. By the end of 1979, the design was complete and implementation begun. 
In the area of user facilities, we held substantial design discussions about the Cedar document metaphor 
(DOCs), which was intended to provide a standard mechanism by which data structures were displayed 
and changed. These discussions led to a detailed implementation design and we started the actual 
implementation of a number of document types.t21 We also designed, implemented, and tested a 
collection of graphics-oriented algorithms that would form the basis for the Cedar Display facilities. 
These included geometric transformation routines that implement arbitrary scaling, rotation, and 
translation, and clipping algorithms for text, lines, and curves. 
1980. Up to this point, we had been using the Alto operating system, and emulating the Alto 
instruction set on our Dorados. Not only did the emulation cause performance inefficiencies, but the 
Alto operating system contained no support for virtual memory, and its file system was inadequate for 
our purposes (it only enabled addressing of about one fifth of the Dorado's 80 megabyte disk). We were 
faced with the choice of either implementing our own operating system or adapting the existing Pilot 
operating system [24]. We chose the latter course because of our limited manpower resources. (We 
revisited this decision in 1983.) By the end of 1980. we had modified the Pilot operating system to enable 
it to run on the Dorado, had produced an initial version of the Cedar kernel built on top of Pilot, and 
had succeeded in transferring all of our code to run on top of this kernel. We replaced IME by a system 
called Cascade. which allowed the user to edit, compile, bind, execute and debug Mesa programs under 
Pilot. i.e. without resorting to Alto emulation. 
In the area of language development, 1980 saw many of the changes required for Cedar Mesa 
incorporated into the Mesa compiler and runtime system, including: reference-counted assignments, type 
equivalence, run-time type checking, and LISP-like atoms and lists. The incremental garbage collector, 
which would be the most critical component of the Cedar Mesa runtime system, was thoroughly tested, 
and its performance improved via special microcode. A trace-and-sweep garbage collector had been 
designed and an initial implementation tested. 
In 1980, we also began work on the Cedar data base facility and system modeling. Much of the 
data base storage system and the lower levels of the system were implemented and extensively tested. A 
design document specifying the system modeling language was written. An interim facility was developed 
to create systems from their configuration files by performing all of the necessary file transfers, 
compilations, and bindings automatically, Besides its immediate usefulness, this facility contained many 
building blocks for the eventual system model implementation. 
The design for a document preparation system called Tioga progressed significantly during 1980. 
Tioga would consist of a coordinated editor and typesetter to aid users in creating documents with 
high-quality typography. An implementation of the Tioga editor was begun. 
We also investigated how the Cedar debugger, compiler, and run-time support would interact to 
enable evaluation of expressions at run time (Le .. an interpreter), to provide a powerful breakpointing 
facility. and to access/display values using the run-time type system. This investigation resulted in a set 
of interfaces for these tasks. We also began implementation of the base-level software for providing input 
events from the user (keystrokes. mouse positions and selections) to higher level software. 
t21 DOCs proved to be too ambitious an undertaking for the time scale and resources available. and was subsequently abandoned 
in favor of the Viewers Window Package. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-ll. JUNE 1984 
THE ROOTS OF CEDAR 
19 
First Usable Systems Appear 
1981. In January, we held a week-long review of the Cedar project by a panel drawn from various 
groups in the Xerox Palo Alto community. The reviewers' basic conclusions were that a significant 
amount of good work had been done on the many building blocks and it was time to pull a system 
together that could be used by programmers. Partly as a result of this recommendation, we spent 
significant effort during 1981 on integrating the useful pieces of Cedar, so that by mid-1981, approximately 
ten programmers were using the core facilities and five of them had begun to use the tools. By the end 
of the year, approximately 20 programmers were using Cedar, several of them for projects other than 
Cedar itself. 
During 1981, we improved the performance and robustness of the allocator, garbage collector, and 
basic run-time type system. Critical parts of the allocator and run-time type discrimination machinery 
were microcoded on the Dorado, completing the planned Dorado microcode support for Cedar. We also 
developed software tools for measurement, and used them to make changes to improve system 
performance, including refinements to strategies for balancing allocation and collection activity, and to 
improve that part of the run-time that deals with the virtual memory allocator. 
In the language area, the typed-value part of the Cedar abstract machine interface (for performing 
operations at run-time on the types of values) began to be used extensively. A facility for inserting break 
points into user programs was designed and implemented. We also identified a subset of the Cedar 
language, the Safe subset, in which incorrect programs could not interfere with the garbage collector, 
and implemented compiler-enforced restrictions for guaranteeing that programs remained in this subset. 
In 1981, the Cedar Interim File System (CIFS) was designed and coded. A client of CIFS used a 
single mechanism to access the diverse set of storage facilities at PARe. The implementation of Tioga 
progressed substantially; we decided to use it as the program editor for Cedar. We began the design and 
implementation of Viewers, a high-performance, general-purpose window package for uniform screen 
management. BugBane, the Cedar debugger, was released for alpha testing. BugBane provided facilities 
for expression evaluation, stack display, uncaught signal handling, and breakpoints. Since it ran in the 
same address space as the program being debugged, user interaction was significantly faster than with 
previous debuggers. t22 
The first version of the system modeler was completed and testing begun. Description Files (OF 
files), an interim file management tool for describing system components, was implemented and used for 
maintaining virtually all Cedar programs. By mid-1981, Cedar had grown sufficiently large and 
complicated that we implemented the Release Tool, a facility for automating the process of releasing 
Cedar. Based on an extension to OF files that permitted automatic consistency and completeness 
verification of an entire system, the Release Tool validated a candidate release and stored it in a safe 
repository. It made it possible for new releases of Cedar to occur at a rate of about once a month and 
greatly increased the dependability of the system. Cedar 2.0, the first release of Cedar using the Release 
Tool, took place in October 1981, and consisted of 22 components and approximately 1800 files. 
t22 up until this point debugging in Mesa had been performed via a world-swap debugger. World-swap debugging is a debugging 
system that works by writing the real memory of the target system (the one being debugged) onto a secondary storage device. and 
reading in the debugging system in its place. The debugger then provides its user with complete access to the target world, mapping 
each target memory address to the proper place on secondary storage. This somewhat clumsy style of operating allows very low 
levels of a system to be debugged conveniently, since the debugger does not depend on the correct function of anything in the 
target. except for the very simple world-swap mechanism. However, it requires writing and reading all of real memory (2 megabytes) 
each time control is transferred from the client to the debugger, or vice versa. Thus, the availability of Bugbane meant that a 
simple operation like hitting a breakpoint and proceeding was reduced from on the order of ten seconds to on the order of one 
or two seconds. 
XEROX PARe. CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
20 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
The First Real System 
By the end of 1981. we had set for ourselves the immediate goal of creating an environment that 
would be preferred to the Mesa/Cascade system (Tajo). This configuration, Cedar 3.0, would not initially 
dominate the Tajo environment in all respects; but the temporary lack of certain features would be 
overcome by other aspects of Cedar: garbage collection, run-time types, graphics facilities, system 
modelling, and fast turnaround for small program changes. We decided that other Cedar goals would be 
deferred until this goal was met. 
1982: 1982 saw furious activity and growth in the Cedar project. Cedar 2.2 containing BugBane, the 
Cedar debugger, was released in January. Cedar 2.2 consisted of 26 components and was followed quickly 
by Cedar 2.4 (40 components) in February, which was the first Cedar release to include Viewers and 
Tioga. This marked the first release in which the hardy user could edit, compile, load, and run programs 
entirely within Cedar. In March, we demonstrated Cedar to approximately 150 attendees of the Symposium 
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems. Their extremely favorable 
reaction provided us with a much needed morale boost. Cedar was becoming real. 
Cedar 2.5 (48 components) was released in March and included the UserExec, an Interlisp-style 
executive complete with history and spelling correction. Finally, in May, Cedar 3.0 was released marking 
our official break with Tajo, which was eliminated entirely from the release. Cedar 3.0 involved 62 
components, over 300,000 lines of source code, and over 4000 files (including both source and object 
files). By the end of 1982 when Cedar 3.5 was released, Cedar had grown to 96 components, 4800 files, 
450,000 lines of code, and 300 pages of documentation. 
During 1982, the Safe Subset of the Cedar language began to come into general use, thereby making 
programs less subject to hard-to-diagnose errors. The trace-and-sweep garbage collector was implemented; 
it was designed to recover unreferenced circular data structures and to serve as a reliable backstop for 
the incremental collector. The use of collectible storage was pushed lower in the system to support a new 
loader based on interface records. The abstract machine was extended to deal with breakpoints, processes, 
paving the way for the use of Cedar for both world-swap debugging and tele-debugging. t23 During 1982, 
the Safe Subset of the Cedar language began to come into general use, thereby making programs less 
subject to hard-to-diagnose errors. 
Meanwhile, we made significant improvements to BugBane, thereby allowing many users to avoid 
the use of world-swap debugging altogether for diagnosis of simple bugs. By the end of 1982, most Cedar 
users were using BugBane entirely for their debugging: world-swap debugging was used primarily by 
developers of the lower levels of the system. The interfaces between Bugbane and the User Executive 
were overhauled and the two facilities unified, yielding major improvements in the smoothness and 
robustness of the system. Bugbane was simplified to use the abstract machine implementation exclusively 
for access to symbols and system data structures. The UserExecutive was extended to incorporate a 
separate action area for each pending action (breakpoint, uncaught signal, etc.). All symbol and source 
files associated with a release system were made accessible to the debugger, whether or not copies resided 
on the local disk. 
Version 1.0 of Tioga was released, marking the completion of a reliable, high-quality editor and 
page formatter that was now in general use. The Viewers Window Package was largely completed and 
also in general use. We had reached the stage where we had the luxury of beginning work implementing 
various experimental creature comforts, such as automatically generating and updating change logs when 
the user edits a file. 
t23 Tele-debugging is a slight variation to world-swap debugging in which the debugger runs on a different machine with a small 
nub in the target world which can interpret ReadWord. WriteWord, Stop. and Go commands arriving from the debugger over a 
network. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
THE ROOTS OF CEDAR 
21 
Cedar 3.0 marked the first time that users could send electronic mail without leaving their Cedar 
environment. Cedar 3.3 contained the full Walnut mail system which allowed users both to send and 
receive mail. sorting their incoming messages into message sets stored in a data base which could be 
interrogated in various ways. 
By the end of 1982. the catalog of Cedar packages included: graphics. data bases. performance 
measurement, screen management. lists. priority queues. symbol tables. remote procedure calls. random 
numbers. and file comparison. Documentation was under way. Applications were beginning to appear. 
Cedar was rapidly becoming an environment. 
Today 
1983. In March. we released Cedar 4.0. the first release in which Cedar facilities were used for both 
client and world-swap debugging. Having reached this plateau. we decided to embark on a project to 
design and implement the Nucleus. a replacement for the remaining major piece of software in Cedar 
which had not been implemented as part of the Cedar project itself. namely the Pilot operating system. t24 
At the time of this writing. that project is nearing completion. and the next major release of Cedar. 
Cedar 5.0. will be built upon the Nucleus. 
Meanwhile 
Lest the reader get the mistaken impression that Cedar was the only programming environment 
(experimental or otherwise) being developed at PARe from 1978 to 1983. while CSL was engaged in 
developing Cedar. work on both the Interlisp and Smalltalk environments continued in other laboratories 
within PARC.t25 This was fortunate. for as discussed in "Cedar: The Report Card." the third paper in 
this report. Cedar did not achieve its initial goal of providing support for the Lisp and Smalltalk 
programming styles. and therefore never became an attractive alternative to these communities. 
Smalltalk 
In 1978. Small talk had finally completed the transition from the proof-of-concept provided by the 
Smalltalk-72 system to a mature programming environment. Smalltalk-76 [13]. Smalltalk-76 was the first 
system to introduce to the PARC community the notion of windows and menus. It featured a mouse-driven 
code browser capable of accessing the source code of all the procedures in the system. either locally or 
via Ethernet access to remote servers. Code and any other text could be easily modified by a point-and-type 
modeless text editor. Smalltalk-76 included a debugger that was fully integrated with the window system. 
gave immediate access to source code and variable values, and allowed in-place editing of code and 
resumed processing from the point of suspension. Owing to the modularity of Smalltalk's message-passing 
model (callers do not depend on callee). the total turnaround time for making a change to the system 
was under five seconds. Note that most of these features of Smalltalk were also goals of Cedar. 
t24 There were two major reasons why it was important to eliminate Cedar's dependence on Pilot. both stemming from the fact 
that Pilot had as its primary purpose and orientation the support of a product First. the maintainers of Pilot could not afford to 
be as responsive to our needs as we would like. since their software was tied to a product release cycle. Second. since the typical 
Cedar work station was so different from product work stations, both in terms of hardware, software. and style of use, many 
engineering decisions and tradeoffs appropriate for one application were simply wrong for the other. A good example is the 
demands placed on an operating system by the presence of garbage collection, a key component of Cedar. 
t25 Although further work on the Mesa environment in CSL stopped, another organization within Xerox developed an integrated, 
interactive programming development environment for Mesa called Tajo. Somewhat less ambitious in its goals than Cedar, Tajo 
nevertheless included a number of EPE-related features: large virtual address space, emphasis on integration and consistency of 
user interface. support for concurrent operations. a uniform screen manager and window system, and a variety of packages and 
tools. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
22 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
From 1978 to 1983, the Smalltalk group concentrated on taking Smalltalk to the world outside 
Xerox, both as an exercise in portability, and so that it could be shared and built on by other groups 
with similar views about system design. There were several aspects of this work: redesigning the system 
for available microprocessors, specifying and publishing a standard virtual machine definition, refining 
and licensing a portable standard virtual image of the Smalltalk programming environment, and 
publication of a series of books documenting the results of the Smalltalk work. This effort culminated in 
1983 with the public release of the system in the series of Smalltalk-80 books from Addison Wesley, and 
licensing by the Xerox Corporation of the complete Smalltalk-80 programming environment. By the close 
of 1983, Smalltalk had been successfully ported to the DEC V AX, the Intel 8086, and several machines 
based on the Motorola 68000. 
In the process of documenting and releasing the Smalltalk system, the system itself was rewritten 
almost from scratch. A number of EPE-related facilities were also developed during this period, including: 
a new "Model-View-Controller" framework that enabled separation of computational models from viewing 
mechanisms and became the basis of the entire user interface, a version management system, a document 
editor for text and graphics, and an integrated mail system. Browsing capabilities were enhanced with 
access to callers, callees and class inheritance paths. Interactive correction of common coding errors was 
also considerably simplified, further reducing development turnaround time. 
Interlisp 
During the same period, the bulk of the Interlisp effort was also devoted to non-EPE related 
activities, namely the transferring of Interlisp from a time-shared, teletype-oriented system for the PDP-10 
to a display-oriented system for high-performance, personal computers. Interlisp was totally re-engineered 
during this process. All of the operating system functions provided by Tenex or TOPS-20, were rewritten 
in Interlisp, as well as device controllers and networking facilities. All of these capabilities were 
implemented in the Lisp language itself, so that the entire system was made significantly more portable 
and easier to maintain. The user interface to all of the existing Interlisp packages, such as Masterscope, 
the programmer's assistant, and the Interlisp editor, was redesigned to take advantage of the 
high-resolution display. 
In addition, the following EPE-related facilities were also added to the system: a process mechanism, 
support for object oriented programming [3], a uniform screen manager and window system. a high-quality 
text editor combining graphics and text. an integrated mail system, and performance tools. 
A Tour Through Cedar 
The next paper in this report, "A Tour Through Cedar," shows the state of Cedar (as of September, 
1983). It contains a highly visual presentation of the current Cedar system in the form of a demonstration 
of the system during which many of the components of Cedar discussed earlier, including Tioga, Viewers, 
the Userexec, and Walnut, are presented and discussed. A somewhat condensed version of "A Tour 
Through Cedar" appears in the Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Software 
Engineering. March, 1984, Orlando, Florida, as well as in the April 1984 issue of IEEE Software. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
23 
A Tour Through Cedar 
Introduction 
This paper introduces the reader to many of the salient features of the Cedar Programming 
Environment. a state-of-the-art programming system that combines in a single integrated environment: 
high-quality graphics, a sophisticated editor and document preparation facility, and a variety of tools for 
the programmer to use in the construction and debugging of his programs. The Cedar Programming 
Language is a strongly-typed, compiler-oriented language of the Pascal family. What is especially 
interesting about the· Cedar project is that it is one of the few examples where an interactive, experimental 
programming environment has been built for this kind of language. In the past. such environments have 
been confined to dynamically typed languages like Lisp and Smalltalk. 
The paper attempts to give the reader the feel of the Cedar system by simulating a live demonstration. 
The demonstration is actually taken from a video tape of such a live demo; the sequence of events, as 
well as the dialogue, is fairly close to what a viewer of this tape would see and hear. Numerous snapshots 
of the display taken at various points during the session simulate the visual information contained in the 
tape. Text that would actually appear on the display during a demonstration-either because the user 
typed it or the system printed it-will appear in this paper in a distinguished font. The explanations that 
the demonstrator would give will be in the normal font. Observations and comments that would be 
distracting during a live demonstration, but are appropriate for a paper, are included as footnotes. t26 
Now let's begin our tour. 
The Display 
You are looking at (see Figure 1) a bitmap display connected to my personal computer, a Dorado. t27 
The figures you see at the bottom of the screen in Figure 1 are called icons. They represent objects that 
are of potential interest, but not currently in active use. Some of them represent text documents, scanned 
images, or other data structures that I can look at and manipulate. Others represent tools or services that 
I can use. Their shapes are meant to be suggestive of their functions. For example, the icon on the lower 
right that looks like a mail box represents my mail reader, called Walnut. The fact that the flag on the 
mail box is up indicates that I have new mail. The icon next to the mailbox that looks like a stack of 
envelopes represents my active message set. We will use both of these later in the demonstration. The 
icon next to my messages is used for sending hardcopy to the printer whose name is Clover (located 
t26 These footnotes contain a lot of information about Cedar: why we did things certain ways, how useful a particular feature 
turned out to be, etc. For some readers of this paper, the footnotes will contain the most interesting material. However, the reader 
who is unfamiliar with Cedar and simply wants to get an overview might find the footnotes distracting to the flow of the 
demonstration. Therefore, a good way for him to read this paper might be to ignore the footnotes on the first reading (especially 
the long ones). and then come back to them later. 
t27 All Dorados use as a display a high-resolution television monitor, 1024 pixels wide by 808 high. The physical dimensions of 
the display are 12" x 9". Figures in this paper that show the entire display are about 112 scale (but full resolution). Dorados 
originally used a narrower monitor. 608 by 808, but we have found that for both editing and programming tasks the extra width 
was extremely desirable. In fact. many users feel that they could make effective use of even more screen real estate, and would 
like to be able to connect more than one monitor to the same machine. We think that this is feasible, both from the software and 
human engineering aspects; the hardware is certainly capable of supporting it. In fact, those researchers with applications involving 
color already operate in a configuration consisting of a wide-screen black-and-white display adjacent to a lO00-line color monitor, 
both connected to the same Dorado and maintained by the same software. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
24 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
down the hall), and the icon in the left corner of the display that looks like a file cabinet views the 
FileTool, a facility for obtaining files from remote servers.t28 
Figure 1 
Initial Cedar screen layout showing various icons 
Viewers Window Package 
The Viewers Window Package provides the basic display paradigm for Cedar [19]. It allows users 
and programs to create, destroy, move, and resize rectangular individual viewing areas called viewers. (To 
a first approximation, a viewer corresponds to what is called a window in many other systems.) Some 
viewers present textual or graphical data to the user; others provide the user with various forms of 
control, such as access to facilities or the ability to invoke procedures. Viewers that provide access to a 
t28 In a traditional time-sharing environment, users share files straightforwardly since all files reside in the same place. In our 
distributed environment, files that are created by a user on his personal machine can only be shared if they are stored on another 
machine called a file-server. a computer with a large disk dedicated to the task of storing and retrieving files, to which all of the 
personal machines have network access. For files that are part of the standard system, such as sources, documentation, and fonts, 
the user need not be aware of where the files are stored. or whether they have already been retrieved onto his local disk-the 
system takes care of this automatically for him using a version map that is built when the system is released. However, the user 
must explicitly store. retrieve. and keep track of files that are not part of the standard system (but there are packages to aid him 
in this task). 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
25 
facility are called tools. and viewers that simply invoke a procedure are called buttons.t29 The FileTool 
and the Walnut Mail Reader shown at the bottom of Figure 1 are examples of tools, and the nine small 
boxes labeled Idle, Clean, New, et al, at the upper right in Figure 1 are examples of buttons. 
The icons at the bottom of Figure 1 are also viewers, namely viewers in their iconic form. Opening 
an iconic viewer tells the Viewers Package to allocate screen real estate to the viewer in the center portion 
of the display (see Figure 2), thereby allowing the viewer to present its contents in a more detailed and 
comprehensive fashion. Conversely, closing a viewer releases the space that the viewer currently occupies, 
and causes it to be displayed in iconic form at the bottom of the screen. 
The user can open an icon by pointing at it using a device called a mouse [32]. Pointing is 
accomplished by sliding the mouse along a horizontal surface to position a mouse-controlled cursor on 
the display. (In Figure 1, the cursor is displayed near the center of the screen as an arrow.) When the 
desired location is reached, the user depresses and releases one of the three buttons located on top of 
the mouse. We use the verb click to describe this act of positioning the cursor and pressing and releasing 
a button. Let's open the icon for the Clock and for the FileTool. This produces the configuration shown 
in Figure 2 in which both the Clock and the FileTool viewers now occupy large, rectangular areas whose 
height is nearly the height of the entire display. 
Most top-level viewers (viewers that are themselves not contained as part of another viewer) include 
a collection of buttons for invoking various operations associated with that viewer. For example, the 
FileTool viewer includes buttons for retrieving, storing, and listing files. The user clicks a button to make 
the corresponding operation happen. Often, these buttons are arranged in a horizontal array called a 
menu that is displayed just below the viewer's caption, the black area at the top of each opened viewer 
that contains the viewer's name. For example, if you look at Figure 2, you will see that the Clock has a 
menu that includes the buttons SwapColor and ChangeOffset. t30 More elaborate menus are associated 
with text viewers, as shown in Figure 7. 
t29 The principal difference between tools and buttons is in the number of operations and degrees of freedom they provide to 
the user. Tools typically allow the user to specify a number of parameters (and retain these parameters between invocations), 
whereas a button may take an argument. but essentially performs the same operation each time. 
nO The Viewers Window Package directly supports the horizontal arrangement of buttons into menus and the positioning of 
such menus below the caption: the implementor simply calls a procedure specifying a viewer and a button, and the Viewers 
Package does the rest. Since this is so convenient. most simple, data-presentation viewers use this facility when providing buttons. 
For ,example. the Cedar Documentation Browser shown in Figure 5 provides a menu including the buttons Reset. Freeze, New Box. 
For viewers that represent tools. such as the FileTool shown here in Figure 2 and the WatchTool shown in Figure 15, each viewer 
typically provides access to a different and unique service, requiring a different display interface. Thus, the implementor of a new 
tool has to design and implement the display interface that seems appropriate for that particular task. Since the implementor is 
explicitly specifying the display of the viewer anyway, he often will explicitly position within the viewer the buttons provided by 
the tool. rather than using the default arrangement of menus below the caption. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
26 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Update " 
Up(Ja1e ' 
[IFGet! 
~ 
['fG",tBc'11,! 
Fief! el€ [.L"f 
Figure 2 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Same screen layout after opening the FileTool and Clock viewers 
• 
• 
• 
• 
In addition to buttons specific to particular classes of viewers, buttons for various operations that 
apply to all viewers regardless of their class, such as Destroy, Close, and Switch columns, are contained 
in a menu that is hidden under the caption. This caption menu is only displayed when the mouse is 
actually in the caption area (it can be seen in Figures 4 and 11). Other buttons for invoking system-wide 
activities, such as creating a new viewer, performing a checkpoint, and booting, are not contained in a 
particular viewer but instead are included in the message area at the top of the screen (see Figure 2). 
For example, the button PS (PrintScreen) is used to produce hardcopy images of portions of the screen 
and was used to generate the figures in this paper. The remainder of the message area is used for 
displaying various comments about the system's status and behavior. The bottom portion of the screen 
is used for displaying icons. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
27 
The large, middle part of the screen that, in Figure 2, is occupied by the FileTooland Clock viewers, 
is divided into two columns. t31 When more than one viewer is created or opened in the same column, 
the viewers automatically share the available space. Conversely, when a viewer is closed or destroyed, 
the screen space that it occupied is then shared among the remaining viewers in its column. If a viewer 
is grown. i.e .. given the full column to itself. then any other viewers in that column are automatically 
closed.t32 To show you how this works, I'll open the remaining icon on the left side of Figure 2, the 
one labeled "Cedar" that looks like a chalkboard with erasers on its ledge. This produces the arrangement 
shown in Figure 3. 
t 31 Both the width and height of these columns can be easily adjusted by the user using the mouse. 
t32 This strategy of placing viewers adjacent to one another with no overlapping and no blank space is called tiling the screen. 
It is one of the most widely discussed aspects of the Cedar user interface. and often leads to heated. religious debates between its 
adherents and advocates of overlapping windows such as those employed in Interlisp and Smalltalk. However. regardless of how 
they resolve them. each of these screen management systems deal with the following issues: (a) provide for some form of default 
window placement so that the user does not have to be involved in specifying the position and size of windows if he does not 
wish to: (b) allow the user flexibility with regard to screen layout (in particular. some way of overriding default window placement); 
(c) strive to make maximal use of the screen real estate: (d) give the user a predictable and intuitive model about what will happen 
to the display when he performs a given operation. With regard to this framework. the two screen management algorithms have 
different advantages and disadvantages. For example. overlapping windows give the user a lot of flexibility with regard to screen 
layout. but can lead to wasted. i.e .. unused. screen space. Also. the extra degrees of freedom provided by overlapping windows 
require that the user (or program) must specify additional information in placing a window. On the other hand. overlapping 
windows are more economical in that no window need be larger than the information it contains. Overlapping windows also have 
the advantage that the working set of active windows can be quite large. since only a small portion of a window has to be visible 
for the user to have access to the window. (This effect of using the corners as handles for those windows that the user might want 
access to is provided for iii Cedar through icons.). However. users wind up spending a fair amount of time ensuring that the 
desired corners are always visible. and even so. overlapping windows seem to have an uncanny knack for getting lost. Something 
that is sometimes good and sometimes bad about overlapping windows is that changing the size or position of one does not change 
any of the others. 
Similar arguments can be made about various schemes for menus. Pop-up menus are more economical with screen real estate as 
compared to fixed menus: they require screen space only when they are being used. However. pop-up menus do not allow the 
user to know ahead of time exactly where the menu will appear. and therefore require visual feedback before the operation can 
be completed. Pop-up menus also do not permit buttoning ahead. which can be annoying when system response falls behind the 
user. because it requires the user to wait for the system to catch up before he can input the corresponding operation. (The hidden 
caption menu in Cedar is a form of pop-up menu. When it was first introduced. users complained about the need to scan the 
menu to find the desired button. and the inability to button ahead. In response to their complaints. the two most common 
operations. Grow and Close. can now be invoked by simply clicking anywhere in the caption area with the middle or right mouse 
button respectively. Thus. the user does not have to wait for the hidden menu to be displayed and then visually find the Grow 
and Close buttons.) 
Thus. there is room for considerable disagreement. It is. however. interesting to note that Interlisp is beginning to experiment with 
icons. while the use of pop-up menus is being discussed for Cedar. 
XEROX PARC, CSL~83-11, JUNE 1984 
28 
Whiteboards 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Update al 
Update ;. 
E:tportsOnly 
Po!.SSwc>rd: 
"erity 
DFGo!'l', 
~ 
DFGetBoth! 
Re ate Belate. 
Figure 3 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Viewers for the FileTool and Documentation Browser share the left column 
• 
The viewer that I just opened is an example of a class of viewers called whiteboards. A whiteboard 
is simply a viewer consisting of a two-dimensional area in which viewers and text can be inserted. 
removed. or repositioned. t3} The whiteboard at the bottom of the left column in Figure 3 serves as a 
documentation browser for Cedar. Notice that not all of the information on the whiteboard is visible in 
the viewer: the bottom of the viewer clips off additional information. This particular class of viewers. 
whiteboards. elects to simply clip information that is not visible. rather than scaling the .display to fit the 
amount of screen space available. as the Clock does in Figure 5 (upper right). 
t 33 Whiteboard viewers attempt to provide a spatial way of organizing data. They resulted from one person's observation that he 
liked to arrange material on his desk spatially. and could usually remember where he placed something more easily than remembering 
under what category he filed it in a filing cabinet. or the name of the electronic file in which he stored it Whiteboards appeared 
in Cedar the following week. courtesy of John Maxwell. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-ll. JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
29 
In order to see more of this whiteboard viewer, let's move the FileTool from the left column to the 
right column using the appropriate button contained in the menu that is hidden under the FileTool's 
caption. We do this by moving the mouse into the caption area of the FileTool, which causes the caption 
menu to be displayed as shown in Figure 4 (the bullseye shape in the menu is the cursor), and then 
clicking the button labeled "--)". This produces the screen layout shown in Figure 5.t34 
DesU'oy Adjust Top 
(--
--) 
Grow Close 
(:) 
Stop! VFT of 4-May-83 16:12:58 PDT 
SwapColor 
Directory: 
FHeName(s): 
Update a> 
Local: 
Update ) 
DF File: 
ExportsOnly 
Connect-: 
Password: 
Verify 
Retrieve! 
Local-List! 
List-Options! 
DF-Get! 
beeal Belele! 
Store! 
Remote -List! 
Close! 
DF-GetBoth! 
Reftlele Belele! 
• 
......... 
Reset Freeze NewJ:jox 
NewWJ:j 
AddSelected HELP ShowLines Grid: I 
Store 
Cedar 4.4 Documentation Browser 
Last edited by: Jim Donahue July 26, 1983 4:24 pm, Jim Horning May 23, 19831:43 pm 
Figure 4 
The caption menu becomes visible when the mouse is moved into the caption area 
t 34 Note that we could have accomplished the same result by growing the whiteboard using the Grow menu button in the same 
caption menu to give the whiteboard the whole column. Or. we could have simply closed the FileTool. which would also have 
caused the whiteboard to get the entire column. since it would have been the only viewer that remained in that column. Alternatively. 
without changing the current arrangement of viewers. we could have viewed other parts of the whiteboard viewer by simply 
scrolling it. the same as we would a text document. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H. JUNE 1984 
30 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Last ediled by: Jim DonahuE' July 26. 1963 4:24 pm. Jim Horning May 23.1983 1 :43 pm 
This database gives II. very preliminary vet'9ion ot online documentation for Cedar It consists of 
several W:hiteboartts.. each 01 which contains references to alMr Whiteboarcls. to various files Ihat 
contain important information and to tools that you will find usefut. To 'browse around in it. just 
MlDOl[ cHe). the icons to "open" Ittem .- displaying the me or whiTeboard Of ~tllrting the too1 
The T",,[Box whiteboard below C'ontain:!= II. (growing) number 01 Cedar tools for your enjoyment 
Also. check out the Bli«tingBlllrl! below for the :;:coop. on PARe and Cedar <,compliments of Lyle 
Rlllltshawl, The enTire Cedar documentation is descnbed in tile Mar/uul.af fIle, which contains II. 
number 01 component .dt fi1~ with information on particular <\Spects of Ceclar; much (but Mf all) 
. 
... 
. 
. 
hese I'I'hiteboard.~ 
ThE' truth about PARC and ('eclar (from Lyle Ramshaw) --
everythini you want to know about the local environment 
(Including some hints ror graciou:'! Hvin.~!. The gIOS!laTY 
provides: all the "PARC'spE'ak" that you will need to 
L.;..i.:!T Hist.(>lY 
E]
.;;; ........ ':; . 
• du 
.: ........................ . 
Figure 5 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Local-List.! 
Remole~Llst! 
The Cedar documentation browser 
Online Documentation 
• 
L· 
• 
• 
Pa5sword: 
Llst-O}JIJonsl 
'::lose! 
DFGet l 
DFGetBot;h! 
The Cedar Documentation Browser shown in Figure 5 uses a whiteboard viewer to display a data 
base for the online documentation for Cedar [5]. About halfway down this whiteboard is a row of icons 
for seven other whiteboards: Basics. Language. Components. Tools. Interfaces. ToolBox, and Games. We 
can find out more about any of these aspects of Cedar by browsing the corresponding white board. To 
do this. we follow the instructions displayed in the lower right corner of the whiteboard: we move the 
mouse into the corresponding icon and click the middle button. This will cause a new viewer for the 
corresponding whiteboard to be created and displayed. t35 For example, let's open the Components 
whiteboard. which includes whiteboards for various important components of Cedar such as the Viewers 
Package. the Tioga editor. and the UserExecutive. The Components whiteboard in turn contains an icon 
for the Viewers Package whiteboard. If we middle-click this latter icon. we get the configuration shown 
in Figure 6. t36 
t35 The system will automatically obtain the necessary information from the corresponding data base, which is stored on a 
file-server. All of this happens reasonably quickly (a few seconds). 
t36 In order to obtain the screen layout shown in Figure 6, I also moved the Viewers whiteboard to the right column, made it 
full size. and slightly readjusted the width of the columns. Having already explained how viewers are moved and changed, I will 
refrain from itemizing each and every such operation for the remainder of the paper. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-8H1, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
Tne- C'OtIIponents oj CelJar Iltat you arl!' Hkely to 1UiIe most frequently 
Viewertl (the Cedar 'I'l'Indo,," manarer). 
TiOf& (the Cedar edilor), 
Ute UserExec, 
Cyprea: (tho!! databatl'!! system), 
For each 01 !hNe componenttl. we give Ihe DF tile containing al1 01 
references 10 other whiteboarcl6 with turther information on the . 
components provide. 
The ViE'wen= Window Packll.gl!' is the arbiter of tlte urer input lind display 
hardware in the Cedar prorrammini environment. It provicle$ the illusion to thl!' 
pt'Oirammer that there is a private display. mouse and keyboard associated with each 
application. while aUowlng the user to simultaneously interact with many such 
applications. 
The 'basic: object manipulated by client programs and virib!e to the Utlet' is the 
I'it:wer: a rectangular area with a*,itruy colltentll which may be made visible on the 
user display. A viewer takes its name in Ihat it aUo...,s the human user 10 view and 
interact wilh the data associated with a Cedar application. The underlying 
applications si)ftware has complete control over Ih!!' displayed contents of a viewer 
and has availal.lle II rich user lnterla~ lor user input, The screen position anlJ size of 
a viewer may be modified by the user as welt as unlJer program control. 
Tne dQcument IlndigvICeflrlrlDof.l1mentatiotr.IView8rDoc .t!'oga is written lor tM 
programmer intendin, to use the Viewer~ Window Packa,e to tl1l1lJ a ne .... 
applicati01l .. It is organised alon, the broalJ ~reas 01 lunctionaHty Ihat the Viewers 
system provllJeG and a1temp!~ 10 explain de9L,n theory and some prallmatics. For 
example:i1 of ut:ae:e. see tlte references witltin eacn section, anlJ for exact details 
cons::utt the- interfaces lJirecUy. Below we give some of the batlic Viewer interfaces. 
Figure 6 
Browsing the documentation using white boards 
31 
The whiteboard for the Viewers Package that appears on the right in Figure 6 includes icons for the 
various public interfaces of the Viewers Package, as well as an icon for the Viewers Package online 
documentation contained in the file ViewerDoc.Tioga. We can cause this documentation to be displayed 
using the same method as we did to display the whiteboards, namely by simply moving the cursor into -
the icon and clicking. t37 
t37 We have placed a great deal of emphasis in the design of Cedar on uniformity of command interface. In fact, "Uniformity 
in Command Interface" was one of the items in our catalogue of desired programming environment capabilities (see Appendix 2 
of this report). "What is important about a standard user interface package is that the user' be able to confidently predict the 
general manner of interaction with a program that lIses the package, even though he hasn't experienced it yet: and that by and 
large. the user will be right. This has been called the Law of Least Astonishment" [8]. Here is -a testimonial from a new user 
regarding the user interface in Cedar taken from an electronic message sent to the Cedar implementors (the user has used the 
word "integration" where the author would have used "consistency" or "uniformity"): "r can't praise you all enough for the way 
that integration -helps a beginner when he encounters it. I've started using Clean and wanted to throw away some stuff from my 
MRU cache. How to do that? Well. what works other places? Control ... control-left-click. Got it in one. Ahhh, wonderful. 
Novice user feels smart. happy. wishes to learn more. More integration. please." 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
32 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
To 
Cedar Interest 
Date 
December 21. 1982. 
From 
SCo~ McGregor 
LocaTJon 
Palo Alto 
Subj9ct 
The Viewers Window Package 
Orranizauon 
PARCIISL 
XEROX 
Flied on: 
{IndlrO](Cedar>DocumentaUon>ViewerDoc,Tloga and ViewerDoc.Press. 
Documents: 
[lndigo]<Cedar)Viewers)Vlewers.CIf, as exported by !he Cedar boot. t11e, 
The Viewers Window Package 
Disclaimer 
Introduction 
Screen Layout 
Viewer ClassE'S 
Vh,wn Instances 
Predefined Viewer Classes 
Implementation Guidelines. 
Figure 7 
Online documentation for the Viewers Package 
The Tioga Editor and Document Preparation System 
The text viewer that appears in the left column of the display in Figure 7 is the on-line documentation 
for the Viewers Package itself. in the form of a Tioga document. Tioga is both the editor for Cedar 
programs as well as its document preparation system. t38 t39 In Tioga. a document is a tree 
t38 It is worth pointing out that the Viewers Package documentation shown in Figure 7, as well as all Cedar documentation, was 
prepared using the Tioga editor. as was the paper that you are now reading. When hardcopy is needed, the Tioga typesetter 
(represented by the printer icon shown at the bottom of Figure 7, fourth icon from the right) is used to generate high-quality 
hardcopy from the document and send it to the corresponding printer. 
t39 In many environments, document production systems are frequently de-coupled from text editors, e.g., Scribe, T EX, Pub. 
"One normally takes the text that one wants to include in a document, wraps it in mysterious commands understood by a document 
processor. feeds it to that processor, and puzzles over the resulting jumble of characters on the page. In short, one programs in the 
document processor's language using conventional programming tools-an editor, a compiler, and sometimes even a debugger. 
Programmers tend to think this is neat; after all, one can do anything with a sufficiently powerful programming language. However, 
document processors of this' sort frequently define bizarre and semantically complex languages, and one soon discovers that all of 
the time goes into the ediVcompile/debug cycle, not into careful prose composition" [23]. 
At PARC, we favor the WYSIWYG (pronounced whiz-ee-wig) approach to document preparation systems. WYSIWYG is an 
acronym for What You See (on the screen) Is What You Get (on paper). A single program provides both, the usual editing 
functions and a reasonable collection of formatting tools. You can't program a WYSIWYG editor as you would a document 
compiler. but you can get very tolerable results in far less time. 
Strictly speaking. Tioga is not a WYSIWYG editor: there are various operations performed by the typesetter in producing hardcopy 
that are not faithfully reproduced on the screen, such as filling and justification. (Mostly, this is a performance issue.) However. 
Tioga certainly inherits the spirit of WYSIWYG editors. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-ll, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
33 
structure of nodes rather than a list of paragraphs so that a hierarchical structure can be 'explicitly 
represented. Successive levels correspond to greater levels of detail, and the viewer of a Tioga document 
can be instructed to suppress the display of all nodes deeper than a certain level. For example, in Figure 
7 only the top level of nodes are shown, thus effectively providing a table of contents. 
In combination with scrolling, the use of levels in Tioga makes it easy for the user to browse through 
a document or program source and quickly find the part that interests him. For example, let's scroll to 
the section entitled "PreDefinedViewer Classes"t4o and click the MoreLevels menu button at the top of 
the viewer. t41 This allows us to see one more level of detail, the titles of subsections, as shown in Figure 
8. 
Listed tlelow is a SE't 01 viewer classes lor client use with implementations l:.rovicte(1 in the -:'eo1a1 
boo! tile 
Buttons 
La.bels 
Rules 
Tut 
Implementation Guidelines. 
Ttlt;' 'Procedures and \f:'lriables in a viewer wer;: d",signNt to SllppOrl a ~'artkular style <:,1 
implementaTion lor new clas,;:,,":;:. Many 01 me proc'C'ctllres and variables were el.l::lr:1ed specilically to 
Jlelp s'Jlve some genE-ttl! problem 01 o:ol1Gutrenq' IJf user interaction, Implementor,;: are nOI required 
to llSo:' these procedures. but they sn'Julrt only ,iepart from them wh"m they have g'oo(i reasons 
ThE' bE'S! way to writ", a lIs".r applkaTioll that us"':;: Vi",wE'rs is W first write 11 appticatie,ns f,a.::1<..agl;' 
acce~~ibl'" to ,~lienl programs a",~ then mal;", a thin "'I;'nl;'",r over it lot urers, It is tempting to taile,r 
y,=,ur implementation 10 lh'" user inlerla.::"" but thi::: temptation ~hould be resisted. No matt""r how 
user-oriented your program is, some user some day will want to write a program Ihat U$o;'S ye,ur 
application directly. It is be~t IMt y')U I)repare lor thaI eventuality now. 
Ther€' aro;' lour dilterl;'nt ways thaI a particular lunction in your program could be 1I1v,)l>.ed 
notitkalion 01 an us€,r €'vent thr,:.ugh thl;' llTotilyProc. a I~all on a prp'-,jefin€'ct junction in the Vi€,wers 
class isuch as set. get. an(1. savei. ijl1Jokation througl\ a ~~utt"n or menu itF;'m on the viewl;'!. and a 
<:lient call on an inletlac", you export. If you use more than one of these paths to invoke a Junction 
you should be absolutely certain that they all have exactly the same semantics, The best way to dc, 
this is to haw' them all ,~al! 11Ie same pr.xecture. Thus the NotilyProc that handles spO!'dal user 
actions shoulct do no mot€' than g-ath€'r parameters anct (!ispatch to proc~dure~ that are ctelined in an 
interlace exported by ye,ur pro~raJn, The sallie shouh11..1e true 01 procedures that are invoke(t with 
bUllons an(1 menus. 
The fUnctions ·create' and ·(lestroy· are special/unctions in the Viewers worW. All 01 the 
creation an(l de:::trnction that is nece~~ary lor a particular Viewers cl<lSs shOUld happen itt the class's 
InitProc and DestroyProc. In partkulat it is very importallt that all 0/ the menu construction, 
~Il\:l-viewer '~r€'ati')lI and tHh'at€' data initialization happ€'n in Ihe InitPro,~. Tllis all.)ws thO? Viel'ters 
package to create an(l ,:fesUoy instances 01 a class without having to know about inl~r/aces exported 
by the class's implementatto;ln, TIllS IS important since opening a desktop rometim€'s requires the 
re-creation of a viewer that IhE' user had aeslroyed, All that the Viewers pa'~ka?e can .10 is ca!! 
Viell'er,Jj.ls.CrealeViewer[vil;'werFlavot, inlo: [name: vj~werNart1ell and hope thaI thi& is ~ujfid",nt 
10 crF.'ale ana initiali;::", tll€' viewer. Applicatie.n tools shOUld create their own vi",wer's cla~s just SQ 
thE':,' call ha\'e their own InitProc. E'ven itlhere is never more than one install'::>:! 01 thE' tool 
Sinlilarly. Viewet('ps,ro",stroyViewer[viewer] should lJe al! thO? ViewO?rs pa(\tagO? neeas I,=, mak€' sure 
Ilia! the viewer has GIE'~ne(1 up all 01 its internal data structures, 
(Cl€'anin~ up irtternal data 
slruo:lure~ ino:lUl1.es bre~king circular links so) 0-1'" garlJage c01l",ctcor will recl~im thE' ~tcorage.:' 
Figure 8 
Browsing a Tioga document using level clipping to suppress detail 
t40 Scrolling is accomplished by moving the mouse into the scrollbar. a vertical area at the left side of a viewer, and then clicking 
the mouse. The cursor (the double vertical arrow) is in the scroll bar in Figure 8. causing it to be displayed as a grey bar. The 
darker part of the scroll bar represents the part of the document that is currently visible. The user scrolls the viewer up by an 
amount equal to the distance from the mouse to the top of the viewer by clicking the left button on the mouse, and scrolls down 
a like distance by clicking the right button. Clicking the middle button scrolls the viewer by an amount proportional to the position 
of the cursor in the viewer. For example, if the cursor is 1/3 of the way down from the top of the viewer. scroll to 1/3 of the way 
from the beginning of the document. 
t41 The more advanced user can perfonn this same operation with a single action by holding down the SHIFT key while scrolling. 
This is an example of our concern for an efficient interface for experts, Many systems that boast of being extremely easy to use 
have the drawback that they do not allow the experienced user to become much more proficient with the system than the novice 
user. For experts. the desire for common operations to require a minimum of effort can be more important than the desire for the 
greatest possible simplicity in the user interface. However, in order to protect novice users from accidentally invoking an esoteric 
operation and becoming confused, each user of Cedar specifies in his user profile his user category: Beginner. Intermediate. or 
Advanced. For users that are Beginner or lntennediate. certain commands and operations are disabled, 
XEROX PARe. CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
34 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Clicking the MoreLevels menu button again would show yet further detail, Le., the contents of the 
subsections entitled Buttons, Containers, etc. Now let's scroll back to the beginning of the document and 
I'll briefly demonstrate how the Tioga editor works. 
The Tioga editor allows the user to select individual characters, words, or entire nodes or branches 
(a branch is a node plus all of its children). For example, I can select the word "environment" in the 
first paragraph of the introduction (see Figure 9) by pointing at it and clicking the middle button of the 
mouse. This does two things. First, it establishes the input focus, i.e., tells the Viewers Package that any 
characters that I type should be seen and interpreted by this viewer, not by some other· viewer also 
waiting for input. Secondly, clicking the mouse in a Tioga document tells the Tioga editor the location 
of the current insertion point, in this case, immediately following the word "environment."t42 Tioga 
indicates the current insertion point on the display by the appearance of a blinking caret. (The caret can 
be seen in the third line of the first paragraph, just after the word "over.") Basically, what all this means 
is that to use Tioga, you simply point and type and the characters are inserted into the document at the 
place where you pointed. Figure 9 shows the state of this document after I pointed at the word 
"environment" in the second line of the first paragraph and typed "Here I am in the process of inserting 
material: the quick brown fox jumps over." 
. 
. . 
may be able to find a more recent version on [Indigo]< CedarViewers) Viewers)ViewerDoc.tioga, 
Introduction 
The Viewers Window Package is the arbiter of the user input and display hardware in the Ced 
programming environment Here I am in the process of inserting material: the quick brown fox 
jumps over. It provides the illusion to the programmer that there is a private display, mouse and 
keyboard ~sociated with each application, while allowing the user to simultaneously interact with 
many such applications, 
The basic object manipulated by client programs and visible to the user is the viewer; a 
rectangular area with arbitrary contents which may be made visible on the user display, A viewer 
takes its name in that it allows the human user to view and interact with the data associated with 
Cedar application. The underlying applications software has complete control over the displayed 
contents of a viewer and has available a rich user interface for user input, The screen position an 
size of a viewer may be modified by the user as well as under program control. 
This documentation is written for the programmer intending to use the Viewers Window Packa 
to build a new application. It is organised along the broad areas of functionality that the Viewers 
system provides and attempts to explain design theory and some pragmatics. For examples of usa 
see the references within each section, and for exact details consult the interfaces directly. One 
point of notation: used throughout this document, client refers to a program calling the Viewers 
:: .. 1.,11111111":::: 
Efr====;( :::: 
~m 
:::: 
.... 
',', 
:::; 
.... , 
cedar 
: Components 
Illlllll~IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII!I!ll!I!II~i!II~!lli!I!I!I!1!11!1!11!1!1~!III!~!III!lllill!II!I!lii!I!1111!1!1!1!111!1111!llllI111!1!1!lllil~I~~ili'i[illllili 
Figure 9 
Inserting characters into a Tioga document 
t42 When the user selects the space between two characters. the insertion point is unambiguous. For other selections, e.g., 
character. word. node. etc .. the insertion point is taken as the end of the selection closest to the actual position of the mouse when 
the selection was made. For example. if I selected the word "environment" by pointing at the "0" or any character to its left, the 
insertion point would be at tne beginning of the word. whereas if I selected the second "n" or any character to its right, the 
insertion point would be at the end of the word. This arrangement is fairly intuitive and works out quite well in practice. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
35 
Commands can be given to Tioga using various control keys, e.g., typing a character while the CTRL 
key is depressed. t43 For example. I'll undo the insertion I just made with a single keystroke. This ability 
to undo arbitrary editing operations allows the user to recover from mistakes. 
Another command that] can give to Tioga is to change the way characters appear by changing their 
looks. t44 For example, let me emphasize a sentence of this document to draw it to your attention by 
making it appear in a larger font and underlined (as shown in Figure 10). t45 
The Viewers Window Package 
Disclaimer 
This document is currently in progress and hence is incomplete (as witnessed by a number of 
sections not yet written), It reflects the state of the Viewers package for Cedar version 4,0, You 
may be able to find a more recent version on [Indigol<CedarViewers>Viewers>ViewerDoc,tioga, 
Introduction 
The Viewers Window Package is the arbiter of the user input and display hardware in the Cedar 
programming environment Here I am in the process of inserting characters, It provides the 
illusion to the 
r 
r 
1 
that there is a 
rivate dis la 
ouse and ke board 
associate Wit eac 
a 
Icatlon W I e a OWIn 
t e user to SI 
t neo s 
,m ... 
Interact Wit many sue ago Icatlons, 
The basic object manipulated by client programs and visible to the user is the lIiewer; a 
rectangular area with arbitrary contents which may be made visible on the user display, A viewer 
takes its name in that it allows the human user to view and interact with the data associated with a 
Cedar appliCation, The underlying applications software has complete control over the displayed 
contents of a viewer and has available a rich user interlace for user input, The screen position and 
A 
size of a viewer may be modified by the user as well as under program control. 
This documentation is written for the programmer intending to use the Viewers Window 
to build a new application, It is organised along the broad areas of functionality that the 
' 
system provides and attempts to explain design theory and some pragmatics, For examples of 
see the references within each section, and for exact details consult the interfaces directly, One 
of notation: used 
this 
client refers to a 
the Viewers 
cedar 
components 
Figure 10 
Changing fonts 
t43 Commands can also be given to Tioga via the EditTool, the right-most icon in Figure 7. The EditTool is menu driven and, 
as such. is self documenting: if the user does not know the particular key and mouse combinations to invoke an infrequently used 
operation. it is still an easy matter to perform it using the EditTool. The EditTool also provides the user with some additional, 
powerful capabilities not available through the keyboard. such as the ability to specify fairly complicated search operations and 
patterns. as well as to construct sophisticated macros. 
t44 The documentation for Tioga explains its underlying structure as follows: "Each node in a Tioga document contains text 
The characters of the text can have looks which control various aspects of their appearance such as font and size. Appearance is 
also influenced by the format of the node which determines things such as vertical and horizontal spacing. The document contains 
names of looks and formats. but not the specific interpretation of them. The interpretations are instead collected in a style which 
can be shared by many documents. [For example. in the style for this paper, there are definitions of formats for headings, 
quotations. and program output and similarly. there are definitions of looks for emphasis and for small caps.] Rather than copying 
the specific details for the formats and looks. the document refers to them by name so it is easy to change the definitions in the 
style and modify the appearance uniformly throughout the document" [22]. 
t45 Notice that to accomplish this font change. I do not insert commands into the document to change the font but give the 
command directly to the editor. and see the result of the command immediately take effect. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-ll, JUNE 1984 
36 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
The sentence that I underlined makes an important point: users can and do make heavy use of 
parallelism in Cedar. It enables them to start one task before another has finished, and to switch back 
and forth among several tasks, such as editing, compiling, reading mail, etc. t46 
Dest:l'ey Adjust Top < --
-- > 
Grow Close 
Clear ~ 
Get Getlmpl PrevFile Stefe. Save Time Split Places Levels ChangeLog 
Find Word Def Position Normalize PrevPlace Reselect 
FirstLevelOnly MoreLevels FewerLevels AllLevels 
Inter-Office Memorandum 
To 
Cedar Interest 
Date 
December 21, 1982 
From 
Scott McGregor 
Location 
Palo Alto 
Subject 
The Viewers Window Package 
Organization 
PARC/ISL 
XEROX 
Filed on: 
[Indi go] (Cedar> Documentation )ViewerDoc, Tioga and ViewerDoc ,Press, 
Documents: 
[Indigo](Cedar)Viewers>Viewers,df, as exported by the Cedar boot file, 
The Viewers Window Package 
r\," 
.1 
• 
Figure II 
The Destroy menu button is guarded to prevent accidents 
We aren't going to be needing this viewer, so let's destroy it using the Destroy menu button which 
is also contained in the caption menu. Notice that the Destroy button in the caption menu in Figure 11 
has a line through it (whereas the Destroy menu button in Figure 4 does not). This indicates that the 
button is guarded. Guarded buttons must be clicked twice in a short time interval to take effect. t47 This 
t46 To facilitate this parallelism. we have pursued in the design of the Cedar user interface what might be called the Principle 
of Non-Preemption: "Individual interactive programs operate in a non-intrusive manner with respect to the user's activities. The 
system does not usurp the attention and prerogatives of the user. A program responds to the user's stimuli. but then quietly retains 
its context and logical state until the user elects to interact with the program again. not (for example) monopolizing the resources 
of the computer" [8]. This is especially important in an environment such as ours where the use of personal machines encourages 
(and makes socially acceptable) using the time when the user is thinking or the time between keystrokes for performing various 
background processing. e.g .. sending and receiving mail. printing. recompilation. and database maintenance. Such activity loses a 
lot of its utility and attractiveness if the user is continually forced to deal with unexpected interrupts from these background tasks. 
t47 The first click removes the guard. If a second click does not occur within a specified interval (about five seconds). the guard 
is restored, We feel that this interface is preferable to having the system enter into a confirmation mode; the latter would violate 
our principal of non-preemption. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
37 
is to guard against the user's inadvertent destruction of useful work. For example. the first time any edits 
are made to a Tioga document. the Destroy button automatically becomes guarded. Similarly. the 
Local-Delete and Remote-Delete buttons in the FileTool (see Figure 2) are also guarded. Let's go ahead 
and destroy the viewer in Figure 11 anyway and see what happens. 
Figure 12 
Recovering lost edits 
In the lower portion of the screen. a new icon labeled UnsavedDocuments List has been created. If 
I were to open this icon. it would be found to contain: "The following files were edited but not saved. 
They may still be restored with edits intact simply by loading them. If you really want to get rid of the 
edits. load the file and hit Reset." i.e .. I can still get my edits back if I really want them. 
Such touches as undoing. guarded buttons. and the ability to recover destroyed edits. are what some 
might describe as frills. However. we believe that they contribute a surprising amount to programmer 
productivity. They allow the user to move ahead quickly with the confidence that he will be able either 
to avoid disaster or to recover from it. We have placed a great deal of emphasis on them in the design 
of Cedar. 
The UserExecutive 
An increasing number of users of Cedar are non-programmers; they use Cedar to prepare documents 
and read and send mail. However. Cedar is primarily a programming environment. So let us now focus 
our attention on the programming aspect of Cedar. To do this. I'll open up a UserExecutive. Notice that 
I said a UserExecutive. not the UserExecutive. Consistent with our philosophy of providing parallelism. 
there can be several instances of the executive. each with its own state. and performing itS own operations. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
38 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Each instance of an executive is associated with a viewer called a Work Area through which the 
user interacts with the executive. Commands are typed to the executive by typing to this viewer, and 
output from the executive is displayed in the same viewer. At this point in the demonstration, there is 
only one instance of the executive; it is associated with the icon at the lower right of Figure 7 that looks 
like a scroll and is labeled "A: Executive." I'll open this icon in the usual way, and then move the mouse 
into the resulting viewer and click it. In Figure 13, the caret is in Work Area A indicating that this 
UserExec is now listening to me, i.e., it will see the characters that I type. 
Figure 13 
A User Executive waiting for commands 
The Cedar UserExecutive implements various standard executive functions such as accessing the 
directory system, compiling, binding, loading, and running programs. 
Each interaction with the 
UserExecutive is called an event, and consists of a command name, followed by any parameters. The 
user can request explanatory information about a command or its arguments by typing "?". For example, 
&7 run? 
Run 
Load and Start the named programs. 
t48 
t48 Text that actually appears on the display, either because the user typed it or the system printed it. will be in this font The 
reason this event is number 7 is that it was preceded by six events-consisting of various initializations to prepare for making the 
figures for this paper. The Work Area has been scrolled so that these events are not visible since they are not of interest. 
XEROX PARe. CSL-83-ll, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
39 
The "?" indicates that I want to see more information about the preceding subject, in this case, the 
run command. The UserExec tells me that this command is used for loading and starting programs. I'll 
use the run command to run the program Watch, which is a performance monitoring tool that periodically 
samples and displays the words allocated, cpu load, and page faults. 
&8 run watcch 
watcch -> watch 
Loaded and started: watch.bcd 
I misspelled the name of the program to be run. In most systems, this would cause some sort of a 
FileNotFound error to occur. Instead, the Cedar spelling corrector was invoked, and given the name 
"watcch" and the context "a file to be run," quickly (a few seconds) produced a file which was reasonably 
close in spelling. The executive then loaded and started the corresponding program, which created the 
Watch tool box icon shown at the bottom of Figure 14.t49 
:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:. 
,'.',',','.',',',',1,' 
.1.'.',','.'.'.',','.' 
!:::!:!:!:!:!:::::!:!: 
',',',',',',',',','.'. 
',',',',',',',',1,',', 
',',',',',','.'.',',', 
',',',','.',',','.'.'. 
:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.: . 
. '.'.','.'.'.'.', ..... 
.'.' .. ,', .... ',.,', .. ' 
,',',',',',',',',',',' 
,',',','.'.'.',',',1,' 
.', .. ',', .... ',',., ... 
,'.','.',',',',',',',' 
,','.',', .... '.' .. ,' .. 
:!:!:!:::!:!:!:!:::!:: 
,',','.','.'.',1,',1.' 
,'.'.'.',',',',',',',' 
,','.',',',','.'.','.' 
,','.',',',','.',',',' 
.',',',',',','.'.',',' 
,',',',',',',',',', .. ' 
:::::::::::::::::::::: 
,' .. ,' ... ', ..... ,.,' .. 
. '.',','.'.'.',','.'.' 
,'.',',',',',',',',',' 
,',.,',', ..... ,',',' .. 
,',',','.',',',',',',' 
,I."",.,.""",.,., 
,','.',','.','.',',',' 
,'.','.'.'.'.',','.'.' 
..... ',', ..... ,.,',.,. 
,'.'.'.'.',',',',','.' 
,'.'.'.'.'.','.',','.' 
,',',',',','.',',.,'.' 
,','.','.',',',',',',' 
,'.','.','.',',',','.' 
, .... ' .. ,', ... ,., .. '.' 
,.,.,',' .... ,.,.,',.,. 
,',','.'.'.'.',','.'.' 
.... , ... ,., .. ',.,., .. ' 
,'.',',','.',',',','.' 
.',','.'.','.',',',',' 
, ••• , ••• ,' •••• ,1, •••• ' 
,',',',',','.'.','.',' 
,',',',',','.',',',',' 
.', ....... , .. ', ... ,' .. 
, .... ' ... ', .. ',',' .. ,. 
,','.',',',',',','.',' 
,',','.'.',',','.'.',' 
,.,', .... ' .. , ... ,', .. . 
run. 
run 
Load and St.3I't the named programs. 
& 8 run watcch 
nTatcch -} Watch 
Loaded and st.3I'ted: Watch.bed 
&9 
" 
, .. ' ..... ',' .... , .... . 
".'.'.', ..... '.' ..... ~::::~~~~~~~~::::::::~r-:rwr,"!:~::::::::r:i:i:i:~~~~;:::::::::::~~[:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::~~~::::::::::::~:::::::::::::::::::::::::::i;1r:t 
, ... ,' .. ,'.' .. ,., .... ' 
.. '.,' .. ' .. ' .... ,',.' .... '.',.'~.~.Ii .. ~.~.Ij.ii .. ~~~:GIi .. ,' ... ',., .. ', ..... u '.'.',',','.'.',' 
',',',',',',',',',','.','.'.'.'.','.'.',',',',','.',','.'.'.',',',',',',',','.' , , I • , •• , 
, , ••• ',' 
, •• ',', •••••• I,., ••• ,',.,','.~. 
""""",,~ • 
... ••• ,', •••• ' 
','.','."""""" ,.,., ••• '.',' •••• ,' 
., •••• '.' •• ,',. 
., 
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::!:: . 
:.:.:.:.:.' 
'.:,:.:.: 
::::::!:= 
0 
::::!::.:.! .. 
:::!:::::::!:: 
" .... , ... " .. ,.. 
. 
............. "'...: ...... , 
.. , 
,., 
".,'" 
:.:.:':.:':.:':.:.:.:.:.:.:':':.:.:. 
.'.'..... 
...,.... 
I.. 
... 
. .. ,',. 
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::.' , 
, • :. 
..:,: 
C I 0 v·e r :::::: A c: t i v e 
:::::: 
I:.::::::::::::::: 
:::::::::::::::::::::!:::::::: 
:-
.:::: 
!::::: 
:::::::,:-:, 
::::::::::::::!::: 
:::::::::::::::!:::::::::::::: W a toh:: 
.:::: 
~~~ 
:::::: 
:::::!:!:::! 
::::::::::::::!:!: Ed,'tTool 
" •••••••• ".,' 
..... 
..,' 
\: 
I,' •• , 
•••• ,.,','.' 
'i!'"1,',',','.'. 
:.:.:.:':.:.:.:.:.:.:.:':.:':' 
,.;-:r 
~,',.. 
_ 
_ 
'..... 
."-!.y..',' 
, 
., •••• ' •• ,'. 
':':':':':':.:.:.:.:.:':':.:.: 
:::::." 
.;:::::::: 
:::::. 
:;':J!!::'! ... '". ::"" .:::: 
Figure 14 
Loading and starting the Watch program 
t49 Some tools supply their own icon. such as the FileTool and the TypeSetter (the printer icon). The toolbox icon employed by 
the Watch tool is provided as the default icon for those tools that do not Not every implementor is artistic enough to design his 
own icon. though icon art is flourishing (some would say getting out of hand!). 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
40 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
The automatic correction of "watcch" to "watch" is an example of what we call DWIM, short for 
Do-What-I-Mean. The Cedar DWIM facility is patterned after the Interlisp DWIM facility in philosophy 
and style [31).t50 
t50 DWIM is an important part of Interlisp. In fact, is has been cited as one of the most impressive features in the Interlisp 
system [25]. Nevertheless, the reaction of the Cedar user community to DWIM has been mixed, and serves to highlight some of 
the basic differences in style and philosophy between the Lisp and Mesa communities (most Cedar users come from the Mesa 
community). Historically, Mesa programmers have never really had the opportunity to develop their programs interactively in the 
sense that Lisp programmers do: when a change is required in a Mesa program, the programmer has to edit his source, compile 
it, correct syntactic errors (except for minor changes, it is unusual for a program to compile successfully on the first attempt), 
recompile, and then reload the program, before he can evaluate the effects of his change. For programs that change the system in 
some global way so that multiple instances of the same progranl cannot be simply loaded on top of one another, the programmer 
may even have to reboot (reload the system), or at least rollback to a previously established checkpoint, before he can load his 
program. Running.on Dorados, we have been able to reduce this turnaround time to the order of minutes, rather than hours (or 
large fractions thereot), as was often the case in the Alto Mesa world. Nevertheless, the situation is still qualitatively very different 
from that of the Lisp programmer who can make a change and see the effect of his change immediately. Furthermore, as Erik 
Sandewall has observed [25]: "The average Lisp user often writes a program as a programming experiment, i.e., in order to develop 
the understanding of some task, rather than in expectation of production use of the program. The act of developing the program, 
not the act of running it, constitutes the experiment" [25]. During the course of such an experiment, the Lisp programmer expects 
to have to change his mind and his program many times. The Interlisp system also provides a general undo capability for allowing 
the user to reverse the effects of changes that he makes. 
As a result of these factors, the average Mesa programmer tends to put more thought and planning into each change, and to 
proceed at a slower, more deliberate pace in interacting with the system when compared with the average Lisp user. Because of 
this philosophy of "go slowly, don't make mistakes because they are expensive to correct," Mesa users tend to make fewer careless 
errors when interacting with the system than Lisp users, so that the utility of DWIM is correspondingly reduced. However, the 
general consensus is that a DWIM facility for dealing with simple syntactic errors detected by the compiler would be well received 
by Cedar users. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
41 
I'll open the Watch icon, and then we'll observe the Watch tool in action as I execute another event 
in the UserExec (see Figure 15). t51 
,',','.'.','.",1.',',',',','.'.',',',' 
run. 
run 
Load and Start the named programs. 
&8 run watceh 
~Tatcch -} Watch 
Loaded and started: Watch.bed 
&9 list'" .press 
figure l.press 
fi gure 2..press 
" 
105412. 31-Aug-83 12.:09:06 PDT 
105412. 31-Aug-83 12.:09:2.9 PDT 
Words 913144 
1 
10 
100 
1000 
10000 
CPU Load _--------------11 
Faults 6055 
1 
3 
10 
30 
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: requests 162.18 
disk 442.3 
gfi 104 mds 2.7 VM 3593 VM run 2.468 
11:1W1W1:111W11111:111W1iiWi I GC interval I 16000 
I GCI done. (GC#45 got 11194 words, 1305 objs) 
mmlilililmlilllilililllmmm I Sample II interval I 2. 
CIFS status (inverted iff active) 
iiiiiWiiiiiiiiiiiWiiiiiiiiiiiiii!i:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::;;; .... 11' '.'i;.:':':':':': 
, 
:':':':':':':':':':':':':':':':':':':':'::::::::iJj":'::: 
•.....•.• ::::::::::::::: •••...••••... ~.: 
~~mw~mmmmmmm~~~~~m~~~~~~~~~~~i~~~W~~~~~~~~~l~~~~~~~~~~~~~l~~~· { ·~llm 
~;":}4? 
':mm = I 
0 
~mw:::~·1 
mmmm~~ _..; ~. 
.:: 
::::!:!:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::!:::::::!:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::~ 
~::: 
C I 0 v· ~ r :::::: A c: t I V e 
::::::. I I 
:::::::::::::::::::.~. :.. 
::: 
::::::::!:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::!:::::::!:!:!:!:!:!:::::!:. 
.::: 
:::::: 
:::::::::::: 
::::::::!::::::::: 
::: 
:::.:.:.:::::::::.:.:.:::::::.:.:.:.:.:::.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:"""" 
.':':' ~ 
:.:.:. 
.:.:.:.:.:.: 
:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:. EditTool .:. 
11'.·.· ••• 1.·".'.11""".'.' •• '.'""""""""",',',',1,',',',',',:.. 
""'r"'" 
~"",I 
'~:~"" 
i:;:.c.",'.',',",' 
Il" 
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::"" 
.;:::::::: 
:::::;" 
:;':-r*::I""~:::':"::::: 
::: 
Figure 15 
The Watch tool in operation 
t 51 Cedar programs are often written in expectation of production use of the program. Thus, performance monitoring and tuning 
is an important issue to Cedar programmers, and "Dynamic Measurement Facilities" was one of the items in our catalogue of 
programming environment capabilities. The Watch tool is just one example of a number of such tools available in Cedar. Watch 
is used to give a rough answer to the question "What's it doing" (Watch is also used to answer the question "Is the system still 
alive?" when an operation seems to be taking an extraordinarily long time.) A much more elaborate and precise performance tool 
is the Cedar Spy. developed by John Maxwell. "With the Spy, the programmer can see which procedures are consuming CPU 
cycles. which are causing page faults, which are using the allocator, or which. are calling a particular procedure. When the 
programmer narrows his focus to just one process, the Spy will tell him where that process is spending its time, where it is waiting 
on page faults, where it is waiting on monitor locks, where it is waiting on condition variables, and when it is preempted by other 
processes. In addition, the programmer can measure precisely what he is interested in since the Spy provides a facility for setting 
breakpoints to determine where the Spy should start and stop its measurements" [181. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
42 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
The Interpreter 
One of the valuable lessons we learned from Interlisp and Smalltalk was that the availability of an 
interpreter greatly facilitates debugging and testing, even when the programs being debugged are 
themselves totally compiled. t52 Thus, the Cedar interpreter is an important and integral part of the Cedar 
environment, despite the fact that Cedar is a compiler-oriented language. t53 
To show you how the Cedar interpreter works, let's interpret some Cedar expressions. I'll create an 
interpreter Work Area by clicking the New menu button at the top of Work Area A (Figure 16).t54 
t52 Actually. all Smalltalk expressions that are input by the user are compiled before execution, although it is not clear that 
Smalltalk users are (or need to be) aware of this operation. The important point is the ability to create and execute program 
fragments in a specified. dynamic context. Whether this is done via a separate interpreter. as is the case with Interlisp. or by 
compiling each expression. as Smalltalk does. is simply an implementation issue. We originally had hoped that Cedar could obtain 
the benefits of an interpreter by appropriately reconfiguring the Cedar compiler. However. the Cedar compiler. having evolved 
over several years under several implementors. turned out to be so monolithic as to make restructuring it intractable (almost as 
difficult as starting over from scratch), and so we were forced to implement a separate interpreter. 
t53 The availability of a source·language debugger was one of our priority B items in the original EPE report [8]. We felt that: 
"It is essential that the programmer be able to debug using the same language constructs and concepts used in writing the original 
program" [8]. To a large extent, we have been successful in meeting this goal with the current Cedar Interpreter. With respect to 
other uses of the interpreter, the interpreter has not yet reached the stage where it is robust enough. or performs well enough. to 
allow and encourage the kind of parameterization of programs by expressions that is employed routinely by Lisp programs. The 
reason for this failure is partly that. for historical and cultural reasons, Mesa programmers simply tend to write applications in a 
different style than Lisp programmers. However, another reason is that in Cedar, the interpreter was viewed principally as an 
enabling facility for source-language debugging. and less thought and effort were devoted to the use of the interpreter as a package 
to be invoked by applications programs. Since the availability of an interpreter with low overhead at runtime was rated as only a 
priority C item. and program-manipulable representation of programs was rated even lower than that, the current state of affairs 
is not surprising. (There is some debate on this point; some members of the Cedar project do not agree with the author's 
conclusions.) 
t54 Actually there is very little difference between an Executive Work Area and an Interpreter Work Area. Both represent 
instances of the UserExecutive. The only difference is that the UserExecutive associated with the Interpreter Work Area treats 
inputs as expressions to be interpreted. whereas the UserExecutive associated with an Executive Work Area expects inputs to 
correspond to commands to be executed. It is possible (but not considered hygienic) to interpret expressions in an Executive Work 
Area, and conversely to execute commands in an Interpreter Work Area. In fact, if the user forgets himself and types into an 
Interpreter Work Area something that does not look like an expression but does look like a command, the system will respond 
with "Perhaps you meant" followed by the corresponding command, and allow the user to confirm with a single keystroke. (Another 
example of DWIM.) 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
wa~ch 
--' w~rch 
Loaded end ~M:rled: Watch.bed 
., Us1*,press 
Figure 16 
figurel.press 
figurel.press 
figureS.press 
figure4.press 
figureS.press 
fi:lure6.pres~ 
figure1.press 
flgure5.presg 
f'lgure9.press 
NewSmff,press 
remember.press 
Screen1.press 
Screen~.pre:;;~ 
spell.press 
UserExec.uoia.press 
UserProfile.press 
UserPromecloc.press 
Total of 11 flies, 2.631 pages 
Creating a new interpreter Work Area 
IOS4n 31-Aug-33 1,'.:09-06 PDT 
IOj47Z 31-Aug-83 IZ'ON9 PDT 
10~4n 31-Aug-83 12;.09:06 PDT 
IOS472 31-Aull-83 12.:09:06 PDT 
10~4n n-Aug-83 14:11:3fl PDT 
10~4n 3l-Aull-83 14:11:02. PDT 
105472. H-Aug-63 12.:09:06 PDT 
10$472. 3t-Aug-H 12.:09:06 PDT 
10~412 3l-Aug-6~ 12.:09:06 PDT 
312.32. lZ-Mar-a~ 1S:~:12 PST 
~4816 l5-Jun-a~ lO:,9:05 POT 
IOS472 I-Sep-al 10:2.1:04 PDT 
2.4S76 
I-Sep-83 10:22:30 PDT 
24064 9-Mar-83 23:00:2.5 PST 
123904 4MMay-83 0:20:06 PDT 
12288 9-Mar-83 B:03::j2, PST 
~2768 3-May-83 23;4~:49 PDT 
43 
The Cedar language includes the data types found in most modern programming languages, such as 
integers, reals, booleans, characters, arrays, pointers, records, etc. 
For example, 
&1 +- 3 + 4 
7 
a slightly more complicated example: 
&2 +- ABS[1.414 * 1.414 - 2.0] < .001 
TRUE 
The first event, &1 +- 3 + 4, really means assign the value of 3 + 4 to the variable &1, and I can 
refer to this value in later expressions. t55 For example, let's multiply it by 1.4: 
&3 +- &1 * 1.4 
9.8 
t55 All & variables are local to the corresponding executive, i.e., each executive has its own symbol table. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
44 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
The Cedar interpreter also allows me to perform operations on types as well as values. For example, 
typing ? following an expression will show the type of the value of the expression. t56 
&4 +- 3.2? 
is of type REAL 
&5 +- 'X? 
is of type CHAR 
&6 +- Time.Current? 
is of type PROC RETURNS [time: System.GreenwichMeanTime] 
In the Cedar language, "." is used to denote field extraction. For example, x.y means the field of x 
whose name is y. In this case, Time is the name of an interface, and Current names a procedure in that 
interface. An interface is like a contract between implementors and clients. It declares that a procedure 
ora specified name, such as Current, takes certain arguments and returns certain results. The Cedar 
compiler can then make sure that any programs that import (use) this interface conform to its specifications. 
The compiler also checks that the implementation module conforms to the same specifications. t57 
t56 Note that we are not just talking about primitive, built-in data types, such as integer, boolean, string, etc. Cedar encourages 
the programmer to augment the collection of predefined types by constructing new types defined in terms of built-in or previously 
constructed types. In a typical Cedar system, there may be over a thousand such types. Thus, for the purposes of debugging, 
knowing that a pa:rticular object is a pointer to a word containing all D's may not be anywhere near as informative as finding out 
that the object in question is of type REF Foo, rather than REF Baz, where both Foo and Saz happen to be synonyms for the 
type INTEGER. 
t57 The Cedar Briefing Blurb contains a good introduction to the notions of interface and implementation module: "Although 
Mesa [and hence Cedar] programs look a lot like PASCAL programs when viewed in the small, Mesa provides and enforces a 
modularization concept that allows large programs to be built up out of smaller pieces. These smaller pieces are compiled separately, 
and yet the strong type checking of Mesa is enforced even between different modules. The basic idea is to structure a system by 
determining certain abstract collections of facilities that some portions of the system will supply to other portions. Such an 
abstraction is called an inter/ace and it is codified for the compiler's benefit in a Mesa source file called an inter/ace module. An 
interface module defines certain types, and specifies a collection of procedures that act on values of those types [e.g., see the Rope 
interface in Figure 21]. Only the procedure headers go into the interface module, not the procedure bodies. This makes sense, 
since all the interface module has to do is to give the compiler enough information so that it can type-check programs that use the 
abstraction .... The procedure bodies go into a different type of module called an implementation module" [23]. 
The notion of abstraction mechanisms and the explicit notion of interface was a priority A item in our original catalogue of 
programming environment capabilities: "Abstraction mechanisms are important because they make explicit the logical dependencies 
of one part of a program on another, while concealing the implementation choices irrelevant to the communication between parts. 
Thus, these mechanisms enable the ability to factor the development, debugging, testing, documentation, understanding, and 
maintenance of programs into manageable pieces, while leaving individual programmers the appropriate freedom to design those 
pieces" [8]. The author believes that the abstract notion of an interface is one of the great strengths of the Mesa programming 
language. However, the need to specify interfaces in advance can also be cited as a weakness of the Mesa approach, Certainly, the 
present need for vast recompilations whenever a fundamental interface is changed. even in a backwards compatible fashion, is a 
weakness, but one that certainly can be reduced and maybe even eliminated (for example. by maintaining version stamps at the 
interface item level. rather than at the interface level, as is currently done). It just hasn't happened yet 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-ll, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
Let's call this procedure. It takes no arguments. 
& 7 +- Time.CurrentD 
Thursday, September 1, 1983 12:33:21 pm 
Its value is of type: 
&8 +- &? 
t58 
is of type System.GreenwichMeanTime 
&1+-3+4 
7 
&2 +- ABS[ 1.414 * 1.414 - 2.0] < .001 
TRUE 
&3 +- & 1 * 1.4 
9.8 
&4 +- 3.n 
is of type REAL 
&S +- 'X? 
is of type CHAR 
&6 +- Time.Current? 
is of type PROC RETURNS [time: System.GreenwichMeanTime] 
&1 ~ Time.Current[] 
Thursday, September 1, 1983 12:33:21 pm 
&8 +- &? 
is of type System.GreenwichMeanTime: TYPE = RECORD[LONG 
CARDINAL] 
&9 +-
" 
Figure 17 
Interpreting expressions 
45 
The reason that the value of Time.Current in event number 7 prints so nicely as a day. date. and 
time. rather than as a 32-bit quantity. is that a PrintProc has been associated with the type 
System.GreenwichMeanTime. A PrintProc is a procedure that provides a more desirable way of 
presenting an object of a certain type. rather than simply printing its data structure using the default 
methods. The PrintProc facility is quite useful for dealing with large and complicated data structures 
such as viewers, documents. and streams. where the user typically just wants to be able to identify the 
object, rather than seeing its actual structure. Cedar includes a number of PrintProcs for just this purpose. 
]n addition, individual users may define new PrintProcs for their own types. We will see more examples 
of PrintProcs later. 
t58 The value of the variable & is the value of the last event executed, i.e .. in this case & and &7 have the same value. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-ll, JUNE 1984 
46 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Automatic Storage Management and REFs 
In the early stages of planning for Cedar, one of the features that received the highest priority was 
automatic storage management-a garbage collector. t59 The Cedar language was extended to include a 
data type called a REF. which is a pointer to an object in collectible storage. In addition to REFS to 
particular types, such as REF REAL, REF BOOL. REF PROCEDURE, etc., the Cedar language includes a generic 
REF type. REF ANy.t60 
t59 In fact. it was the highest priority item, the reason being that it freed programmers from excessive concern for the size and 
location of their code and data. An excellent account of the importance and. effect of the availability of garbage collection on 
programming style in Cedar is contained in (23): "The programming language underlying Cedar is essentially Mesa with garbage 
collection added. Adding garbage collection actually changes things quite a bit. First of all, it changes programming style in large 
systems tremendously. Without garbage collection, you have to enforce some set of conventions about who owns the storage. When 
I call you and pass you a string argument. we must agree whether I am just letting you look at my string, or I am actually turning 
over ownership of the string to you. If we don't see eye to eye on this point, either we will end up both owning the string (and 
you will aggravate me by changing my string!) or else neither of us will own it (and its storage will never be reclaimed - a storage 
leak). Once garbage collection is available, most of these problems go away: God, in the person of the garbage collector, owns all 
of the storage: it gets reclaimed when it is no longer needed, and not before. But there is a price to be paid for this convenience. 
The garbage collector takes time to do its ~ork. In addition, all programmers must follow certain rules about using pointers so as 
not to confuse the garbage collector about what is garbage and what is not." 
It is only fair to observe that the above statement "it gets reclaimed when it is no longer needed" is not strictly true: circular, or 
self-referencing structures are only reclaimed by the trace-and-sweep garbage collector, which must be explicitly invoked. However, 
data structures that are not self-referencing are automatically reclaimed by the incremental garbage collector, which runs all the 
time as a background task. 
t60 A recurring theme in our discussions of requirements for an experimental programming environment centered around the 
issue of early versus late binding of various implementation decisions. On this subject. Beau Sheil (27) observed that: "The key 
property of the programming languages used in exploratory programming systems is their emphasis on minimizing and deferring 
the constraints placed on the programmer, in the interests of minimizing and deferring the cost of making large-scale program 
changes .... The languages make extensive use of late binding, i.e., allowing the programmer to defer commitments as long as 
possible" [27). 
The addition of the type REF ANY to the Cedar-Mesa language represents an attempt to provide for one form of late binding; 
use of the type REF ANY enables an implementor to defer type checking from compile time to runtime on a case by case basis. 
Note that in the Lisp programming language, every item is effectively a REF ANY: all objects are pointers, and the type of each 
object can always be determined at runtime. As a result. certain classes of errors can remain undetected until a program is run, 
perhaps even until the program is run on particular data. At the other extreme, the Mesa programming language requires the 
specification of the type of each object at compile time. Consequently, unanticipated modifications or extensions to Mesa programs 
often require changes to type declarations and recompilation of interfaces and implementation modules. 
In Cedar, we wanted the best of both worlds: the flexibility of runtime (dynamic) type checking and the reliability and performance 
of compile-time (static) type checking. We hoped that by employing REF ANY in the early stages of development, programs could 
opt for more flexibility at the expense of performance and/or runtime errors. As the program matured, various binding decisions 
could be made earlier by employing specific types where appropriate. 
Another important use of REF ANY in Cedar is to enable generic programs. Since programs can determine the type of a REF 
ANY at runtime, they can operate differently depending on the type of the object they are given. For example, the same Sort 
program can· be used to sort lists of integers, reals, strings, or even viewers, by selecting the appropriate comparison algorithm 
based on the type of the objects being compared. The capability provided by REF ANY is also essential for enabling object-oriented 
programming. For example, streams, viewers, and ropes are all objects in Cedar whose definition consists of a block of procedures 
along with a datum which contains the state of the object. Since the type of the datum is different for each different implementation, 
for example, file streams need different information than keyboard streams, the datum is represented as a REF ANY which the 
individual procedures can then interpret. 
XEROX PARe. CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
Atoms. which are very similar to Lisp atoms. t61 and Lists are also examples of REFS. t62 
For example. let's make a list of some of the values that we just computed. 
&9 ~ LlST[&1, &2, &3, &7] 
(t7, tTRUE, t9.8, tThursday, September 1, 1983 12:33:21 pm)t63 
&10 ~ &? 
is of type LIST OF REF ANY 
47 
Since each of these objects is of a different type, the type of the value of event 9 is LIST OF REF 
ANY. Note that the first element is really a REF INT, the second a REF BOOL, the third a REF REAL, etc. 
In other words. the type of &9.first, the first element of this list, is REF ANY. but the type of the referent 
of this element. &9.firstt. is INT. 
. 
t61 In order to ascertain the degree and nature to which atoms were actually used in Cedar. the author undertook an informal 
canvass of Cedar users. This footnote reports on the results of that poll. 
One of the principal uses made of atoms is to provide for a form of late binding: provide the client with an open-ended enumeration 
at run-time (with correspondingly less compile-time checking). as opposed to the standard Cedar enumerated type in which each 
element of the enumeration must be specified at compile-time. For example. one user reported: "In some situations. I pass a 
general atom instead of an element of a specific enumeration in order to avoid recompilation when I add a new element (especially 
to an error enumeration when the list of errors is not quite clear): Later I convert to a specific enumeration to gain the tighter 
binding." 
Another use made of atoms in Cedar takes advantage of their unique print names. i.e .. there is a one-to-one mapping between a 
sequence of characters and an atom (a 32-bit quantity). and it is very cheap to compare atoms for equality (which is not the case 
for comparison of two sequences of characters). Applications take advantage of this fact to save space and time 
A third use made of atoms in Cedar involves property lists. Each atom has a property list associated with it; applicatioris use these 
property lists to provide for unforeseen extensions. However. some applications such as Viewers and Tioga prefer to include a 
separate property list as part of the data structure for the corresponding object, rather than using the more global atom property 
list. "Property lists attached to objects are wonderful. but I think 'global' property lists attached to the atoms themselves are 
probably a bad idea." Associating property lists with the objects themselves also provides a place for clients to store information 
associated with the object that the client can then subsequently interpret and use. 
t62 A List in Cedar is a REF to a structure consisting of two fields. first and rest. The first field contains the element of the list 
and the rest field the tail of the list (the Lisp CAR and CDR). Cedar provides language support for the construction of lists (via 
LIST and CONS). but no polymorphism: it is not possible to write a program that traffics in LIST OF T without specifying T at 
compile time. Since most programs using lists employ lists of specific types. the absence of polymorphism means programmers 
must (re)implement for each specific type list primitives such as Reverse. Append. Union. and Intersection. This absence of 
polymorphism is cited as the biggest shortcoming of the current implementation. 
t63 t is how Cedar prints REFs. e.g .. t7 is a REF to the object that prints as 7. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
48 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Manipulating Lists 
The List interface includes a variety of procedures for manipulating lists. Let's create a viewer on 
the List interface and look at it. I click the New button in the message area at the top of the screen to 
create a new viewer on the left. Then I type the name of the interface into this viewer to cause the 
corresponding file to be loaded into the viewer, as has been done in Figure 18. t64 
List: CEDAR I:tIFINlTIONS 
Predicates: lsAList, Is.:'..ListOfReiAny, EqLists. Member 
constructors of lists.: Cot\~. A1-'petld. Reverse. R<"tllove. Union. Itlterse<:tiOI1, ListDif/erence n. 
like some constructors. but destructive to structure: NcotlC, DReverse. DSubst , .. 
extractors: NrhTail NthElement. Car. Cdr. C-adt. eddr. etc 
Alist operativns: DotCOflS. Assoc. Put..oI,.SStX 
miseellanevus.: Length. Map. Subs! 
Sorting 
Zone: ~~.IVATE ;::ONE; -- QV~'1H1Z,~r zcme 1J5/'f'1J tor $r.~-'rmg new U$INode$. -,'.11:'11 ,'I.:> 
ihl).'i.~ t:'re,ft'l.8<-'i b.le' 
.~,ppend. !.'I,'T,'er"e, e'!J: 
June 1, In~ 3:~~ pm 
V~:U'Je retlJ,rned by Length n(,W an INT. 'x' iilld 'yO arguments (hanged 10 
'11~1' 'ref' or '11', 'It 
Figure 18 
lQac\",d .:md ~I.:oJ'I.ed: W."Ich,bccl 
&!l hst ",pres~ 
fjgurel.pre5~ 
f)~lJ,re~,preS5 
f:igllre3.press 
fig1He4.press 
figu,re'i.press 
flgllre6,press 
fig1.J.re?prl:'ss 
fig1..l re3.prOO':;-s 
fijpne9,pre'ss 
NewStuff.press 
remember,pres~ 
SCII!'en1.pro:'ss 
Z~'reen2-,press 
sp",U,press 
UserE;(ec,t,log.:;.pres:> 
UserProfiJe,press 
USo:'rProf1ledoc.press 
TDI41 of Il flles, ~6)1 p.:.ges 
&3'" &1 .. 1,4 
9,3 
l~ 'Jf 
REAL 
.. , . 
'X 
46 ... Tlme_Curnmi? 
l~ e,!' type PROC: RETURN~.: [time: ,;y';Ip-l1uJreenwlt~hMeanTimel 
& 7 I- Tiftle,Current[] 
Thursd~', September I, 19~3 12:33:Z-l pm 
&8 .. &:..' 
IS of t~'pe Sy5tem.Greenwl'~hMe.mTime: TYPE" REr::t')RD[LON(; 
CARDINAL] 
&9 <--- LIZT[&1. 
.:ti', 1TRUE, 19 
Seplember I, l'.~~,l 
12:3):~1 pm) 
&10 .. &i' 
is of wpe LIST t,)F REF- ANY 
&11 f- 1'0. 
The List interface contains procedures for creating and manipulating lists 
Let's try the procedure Reverse on the list that we constructed In event 9. We return to our 
interpreter Work Area on the right and type ... 
& 11 .. List.Revers[&] 
Revers -) Reverse? 
t64 As mentioned earlier. we also use the Tioga editor for creating and modifying Cedar programs. The List interface shown in 
Figure 18 is in fact a Tioga document. Note that the use of node structure and levels here effectively provide a table of contents. 
The same node structure also enables the user to manipulate program statements, blocks. etc., as single entities. even though Tioga 
does not know about the Cedar language syntax. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-ll, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
49 
] misspelled the name of the procedure causing an error to occur, i.e., the procedure Revers was 
not found in the set of procedures contained in the interface List. DWIM was invoked and searched 
through the set of items declared in the interface List. t65 DWIM found a procedure, Reverse, whose 
spelling was pretty close to what] typed, and in Figure 19, DWIM is now waiting for me to confirm or 
reject the correction. t66 which ] can do via the keyboard, or by clicking the Yes or No menu buttons 
which have been added to the Work Area's menu for this purpose (just above the arrow-shaped cursor 
in Figure 19).t67 When (and if) ] confirm the correction. the corrected expression wiJI be evaluated. 
t65 When we first began work on Cedar: some thought that the complexity of the Cedar language would make it too difficult to 
implement an} sort of automatic error-correction facility such as was available in I nterlisp. However. this very complexity turns 
out to be of great benefit for error correction in Cedar expressions. because more information is available at the time of the error 
than with Lisp. where all the interpreter knows is that an identifier is unrecognized and whether it was used as a function or a 
variable. For example. when the user typed List.Revers above. DWIM was called given the identifier "Revers." the message 
"selection failed." and the context the List interface. DWIM knew that it was looking for an element defined in the List interface. 
which immediately narrowed the search down to 42 possible candidates. Similarly. List.Subst is a procedure which takes three 
arguments whose names are new. Old. and expr. If the user types List.Subst[new: $Foo, old: $Fie, exrp: x] (misspelling the 
name of the third argument). then DWIM only has to consider three candidates. For assignments. the type of the target can also 
be used to guide the correction. For example. if x is declared to be of type Color. where Color is an enumerated type consisting 
of {red, green, blue}. and the user writes x .. bue. then he probably means blue. whereas if x is of type {feature, nonfeature, 
bug}. and the user writes x .. bue. he probably means bug. 
t66 The algorithm for spelling correction and confirmation is the same as that used in Interlisp [14]. Basically. a metric is computed 
which measures the distance between two tokens in terms of the number of characters that do not match. If all characters are 
accounted for. i.e .. the only errors are transpositions or doubled characters. then confirmation is not required. In the case shown 
here. a character was missing. so confirmation was required. However. the user can specify in his user profile a default timeout 
and value for confirmation. In this case. when confirmation is required. if the user does not respond within the indicated interval. 
the value specified as a default is taken as the response. For example. if my default timeout is 60 seconds and the default value is 
Yes. then if I type ahead a sequence of operations and go to lunch. the system will wait 60 seconds for me to confirm a correction. 
and then proceed with the correction. On the other hand. a conservative user may not want the system to make any corrections 
without confirmation. User profiles in Cedar allow users to customize the behavior of the system to suit their own preferences. 
t67 In general. we try to give the user the choice of performing operations either via menu or via the keyboard. The main reason 
for this redundancy is that if the user's hands happen to be on the keyboard. it is more convenient to interact through that medium 
rather than having to reach for the mouse. Conversely. if the user's hands are already on the mouse. it is easier to click a menu 
button than to reach back to the keyboard. The use of menus in conjunction with confirmation provides the added benefit of 
allowing the system to gracefully handle the issue of type-ahead and its potential interaction with confirmation. Consider the case 
where the user has entered some operation. and then typed ahead the next operation not realizing that the first would require 
some kind of confirmation. The desired behavior of the system is that the user be able to confirm without having his type-ahead 
affected. i.e .. that he not have to retype it after confirmation. This is accomplished by requiring that the user only confirm via 
menu once there has been any type-ahead. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
50 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Find Split New Stop Compile Eval Redo Set Clear Yes 
No 
&S f- 'X 
'X 
&6 f- Time.Current? 
is of type PROC RETURNS [time: System.GreenwichMeanTime] 
& 7 f- Time.Current[] 
ThuJ;'sd~, September 1, 1983 12:33:21 pm 
&8 f- &? 
is of type System.GreenwichMeanTime: TYPE = RECORD[LONG 
CARDINAL] 
&9 f- LIST[&1, &2, &3, &1] 
(1'1, 1'TRUE, 1'9.8, 1'Thursd~, September 1, 1983 12:33:21 pm) 
&10 f- &? 
is of type LIST OF REF ANY 
& II f- List.Revers [ & ] 
Rey,Ters -} Rey,Terse ? 
A 
l:l:l:l:l:l:l:l:l:l:l:l:l:l:l:l:l:l:l:l:l:~::)'-'· "~:]i~l ~::~r:~:::::*~rliii::1:;::······::::l:1:1:1:1:1:1:· ~;'i~l 
111111111mlllmlml1111111111111ml~ 
~m 
over lll:ll 
1111111:1:1: 
111111111111111111 
&. ~f? 
1:1:1 
........................................... 
........ ~ 
... ~. 
•.•......... 
:~~ ............ EdltTool ..•. 
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::";4" 
.;::::::::: 
::::::" 
:~:¥::::: .. "'~:;*lt.;::: 
:::: 
&11 ... List.Revers[&] 
Revers -} Reverse? Yes 
Figure 19 
Confirming a DWIM error correction 
(tThursday, September 1, 1983 12:33:21 pm, t9.8, tTRUE, t7) 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
51 
Ropes 
Cedar also includes another useful type of REF called a ROPE. A ROPE is Cedar's standard string 
type. t68 The input syntax for a ROPE is a sequence of characters delimited by '''so For example: 
&12 .... "this is a rope" 
"this is a rope" 
&13 .... &? 
is of type ROPE 
Just as the List interface provides operations for dealing with lists, the Rope interface contains a 
variety of useful operations on ROPES. For example, Rope.Find is a procedure that searches one ROPE 
for the occurrence of another. 
& 1 4 .... Rope.Find? 
is of type PROe [s1: ROPE, s2: ROPE, pos1: INT .... 0, case: Baal .... TRUE] RETURNS [INT] 
This tells us both the names and the types of the arguments that Rope.Find expects, and that it 
returns an integer. (This integer indicates the character position in the first ROPE at which the second 
ROPE begins.) Let's try it. 
& 15 .... Rope.Find[ 
At this point, instead of retyping the ROPE "this is a rope," I can simply select the corresponding 
text in event number 12 using the mouse, and cause the characters to be treated exactly as though they 
had been typed. I can do this because this Work Area I have been typing to as though it were simply a 
glass teletype is really a full-fledged Tioga document, and I can make use of any of the facilities of the 
Tioga Editor when constructing expressions to be interpreted. For example, if I hold down the SHIFT 
key while selecting in a Tioga document, the selected material is displayed with a gray underline (as is 
shown in Figure 20). Such a selection is called a source selection. When I release the SHIFT key, this 
source selection will be copied to the current insertion point, i.e., the place where the caret is. t69 
t68 A ROPE is a garbage-collectible sequence of characters. ROPEs are immutable; the sequence of characters denoted by a 
ROPE never changes. Thus. ROPEs may be shared freely among independently-written applications. since no application can hand 
out a ROPE and have some client free its storage or somehow alter the characters it contains. ROPEs are also more general than 
conventional strings: a client can provide his own specialized implementation of a ROPE by implementing a small set of basic 
operations on the new representation, and applications that traffic in ROPEs need not distinguish between these specialized ropes 
and the standard variety. In other words, the Rope interface treats a ROPE as an object (in the Smalltalk sense) which knows how 
to perform certain operations. (Such object-style programming is generally recognized as a good thing, but except for some isolated 
instances, has not caught on in general with the Cedar community. Some of this is due to identified and understood language 
deficiencies.) Ropes were designed and implemented by Russ Atkinson. It is generally agreed that ROPEs are something that 
Cedar got right. 
t69 This feature is tremendously useful. It greatly increases the bandwidth of the user's interaction with the system. It also enables 
the use of long and descriptive identifiers, such 
as IO.CreateEditedStream, 
UserExec.FindExecFrom Viewer, and 
ViewerTools.GetSelectionContents, even though many of our users are not fast typists. Such long identifiers are tolerable because 
they rarely have to be typed, but usually can be copied from somewhere else on the screen, e.g., from a viewer on the interface 
that defines them. (Note that having to read long identifiers in programs is not a burden, but in fact is an asset, since the name 
contains so much information it is, in effect, a form of documentation.) 
XEROX PARe. CSL-83-II. JUNE 1984 
52 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
~,~;rorL ... ..'.!. .. re,j B: Interpreter 
Fmd SpIlt New Stop Complle Eva] Redo Set Clear 
CARDINAL] 
&9 +- LIST[&l, &2, &3, &7] 
(1'7, tTRUE, 1'9.8, tThursday, September 1, 1983 12:33:21 pm) 
&10 +- &? 
is of type LIST OF REF ANY 
& II +- List.Revers[ &] 
Rer,Ters -,\ Rer,Terse t Yes 
(tThursday, September 1, 1983 12:33:21 pm, 1'9.8, tTRUE, 1'7) 
& l2. +- "this is a rope" 
"this is a rOp'e" 
&13 +- &? "A 
is of type ROPE 
& 14 ~ Rope.Find? 
is of type PROC [s 1: ROPE, 52: ROPE, pos 1: INT +- 0, case: BaaL ~ 
TRUE] RETURNS [INT] 
&15 ~ Rope.Find~ 
Figure 20 
Source selections permit copying characters from one place to another as an alternative to typing 
& 15 +- Rope.Find["this is a rope", "is a"] 
5 
The value 5 indicates that the second ROPE begins at character position 5 in the first ROPE. 
This gives you a general overview of the Cedar interpreter. Now let's try using the Cedar system in 
earnest. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
53 
Tracking Down a Bug 
Earlier when I typed Rope.Find? in event 14, the system simply told me the names and types of 
the arguments and return values. I thought that the system was also supposed to show me the comments 
associated with the procedure Find in the Rope interface, so that I would know what the various 
arguments and the return value meant. Let's open this interface and see if there are any comments 
associated with this procedure. Rather than creating a new viewer, I'll simply reuse the viewer on the 
List interface. I select Rope.Find in my Work Area, and then click the Get menu button in the viewer. 
This tells the Viewers Package to load the file Rope.mesa into this viewer, and then search for the 
definition of the procedure Find, which it has finished doing in Figure 21. 
Fetch: I'ROC' [base: ROPE, mdex: lNT f- 0) RETuaNS [c: CHAR]; 
-- fe'lcnes inciexfKl 'hoN~tM trom &'1,'en ropes 
-- 8Jl1.ntisF.:wIt occur" ~r Jnd(!:x 1:< ,,= the rope 5i;;e 
~~.:&RfnCd~~.~'r~~~:n~P~~o; ~.~TS; :'h~:e;/~~~; ~~~ l~:l~~N:~ t;;sW 
- -
r(!:~urns -1 11' not fttund 
-- CoMe "~C..tM ()f' cnMac'f.ers IS s:smflc-!r;t 
Indez: Pi/.OC 
[s1: ROPE. post; !NT ... 0,52.: ROPE, case: IIOOL ... TRUE] RETURN! [un]; 
-- Returns 'he smo3ilest cn..31'actst po8ition N such thdt 
-- s:" DC'curs m sl at N md N .'" posl. If s2d~s not 
-- occur in s1 o!I:~ or ~r pwl, s/.length IS return~. 
-- C~ .' CoMe of cn-rat:ter;s 15 5i$mf'iC,31H 
lJI.Eapt,.: plloe [r: ROPE] U;Tl.1urS [lIoaLl; 
-- rewrns Vmct.b.[r) = Ii 
Lenfth: PRoe [b~e: ROPE] RETURN~ [INTJ; 
-- returns 'he length of the rope (Length[N!LJ" O} 
Replace: PIIOC" 
[b%e: ROPE, start: INT ~ (I, len: INT ~ MaxLen, with: ROPE ~ NIL] 
RETURN~ [IlOPE1~ 
-- reivrns tClpe lIo'1th ~1I.'en ran~e t~pla.ced oy nell' 
-- BoundsFault QCcurs if range lnr.'a.i2d or re:5ull too [012$ 
Size: PIlOC' [bM'e: ROP'!.] Il'!.TUIIN3 (INT]; 
--
Size[lJaseJ = Length[baseJ 
Substr: PRoe [bMe: ROPE, start: INT + 0:, len: INT ~ MaxLenjllETuRNS [ROPll]; 
-- r~W.rns a 5VOrope Clf the ruse 
-- Botmd3Fo!u/r occurs 2f ~ 
rmge 121.'.&12 lS not "'·.!lid 
-- character CDm.'erS1DnS (RRA 51%:.' TJ.'h,.vare the.v heret.~ 
c~~:!~p[I~C'~ke~~ [~~~l] ~E:~:~~ [_C~~JoiC:~~~;L~E ch) 
}, 
UPPM: FRoe [eh: CHAII] RZTURN'~ [CHAR] = INLINE { 
RETURN (Il' eh IN ['a .. 'z] THEN ch - caseQffset ELSE ch) 
}; 
Lowe:r: PROC' [eh: CHAR] IIETURN~ [CH ..... R] .. INLINE { 
RETURN [U' eh IN [·A .. 'Z] THEN ch + e~N'set. ELSE eh] 
), 
LeUer: PRoe [eh: CH ..... R] RE'lURNS [BOOL] = INUNE { 
RETURN [eh IN ['A .. 'Z] OR eh IN (·a .. 'z]] 
), 
Figure 21 
Sereenl.press 
SCfeenl.presz 
~pell.preSj5 
UserExe~.tloga.p:re~ 
UserProfile.press 
UserProfiledoc.press 
Total of 18 files, 2521 pages 
.... 
Words 1030524 
CPU Load 
1054n 31-Au&-83 14:11:38 PDT 
105412 31-Aug-83 14:13:02 PDT 
24576 
I-Sep-83 1(1:23:26 PDT 
31232 12-Mar-63 13:46:12 PST 
~4816 2S-Jun-8S 20:~9:0S PDT 
10S412 l-Sep-63 14:41:09 PDT 
209n I-Sep-83 14:42:01 PDT 
24064 9-MM-83 .B:OO:2~ PST 
123904 4-May-83 0:2(1:06 PDT 
12.2.88 9-Mar-83 23:03:52 PST 
32168 
3-Ma,y-83 l3:49:49 PDT 
(.,.1, 
September I, 1983 12:33:Zi pm) 
&11 f-
• 
1s of type LIST OF REF ANY 
&11 f-
List..Reyef~[&j 
ReVelS -) Re~·erse ? Yes 
(tThursd&.Y, September I, 1983 12:33:21 pm, t9.8, .,.TRUE, 1'1) 
&12. ~ "thiS is a rope" 
"this 15 e rope" 
&U ~ &? 
IS of type ROPE 
A14 f- Rope.Finel? 
IS of type PROC [sl: ROPE, s2: ROPE, pas I: INT f- 0, case: BOOL + 
TRUE] RETURNS [INT] 
AU f- _["this I'; a rope", "15 e"] 
5 
" 
&15 ~ 
Convenient access to program sources provides a form of online documentation 
As you can see, there are comments here. Let's trY to find out why they weren't shown when I 
typed "?". To do this, I am going to plant a breakpoint in the code that implements the ? feature of the 
UserExecutive. First, I create a viewer on the corresponding source file, as shown in Figure 22. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
54 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Fetch: FRoe [ba.o:e: ROP!:, index: INT .. OJ RETURNS [c CHAR]; 
~ - fi':>v:nes indexiW. c!J.JUIC'te1 ft~~m £,J1,T&11 rope.' 
- - Bouw:lsF.3Lllt occurs if mae-x i5 ,,: me rope SIZe' 
Find:, PROC' [sl, 52-: ROPE, ~0,51: INT .. 0, Ca3e: EOOt .... TRUE] RETURNS [INT]; 
~lke IIldex •. re~urm' po.;l'/Jon m s1 wbel'e s.~ occvrs (stans lookmg a~ po:;/) 
-- rl"wrns -1 If not fbund 
-- <ca;e ,,' ca'ie of choY.x-'lers IS ;5lgndlcmt 
Index: .,ROC' 
lsi: ROPE. pas!: INT .. O. S;:: ROPE, case: E:OOL" TRUE] RET'JRN~ [INT]; 
- - Rewrns the smalies/ cb.J]'scter posiTion N such thaI 
s2 ocnlrs In sl ~~:r N md N 
~'", posi, [( s2 does noi 
- - occur in s 1 .a~ or .31'Ier pos t" s 1,iellg:r.':. IS r~ttlrm;"}. 
-- c.3Se:' c-%e o('chara£;ters IS slgnif1'c.ant 
IsEmpty: PROC [r: Ron) RETURN~ [!looL); 
-- r&lvms Lengtil[r] = {f 
Length: PROC' [base: ROPE] RETtTRN~ [INT]; 
- - remr."!.s tile lengm of the rope (Lens,'th{NIL J .. (f) 
UserExecMiscImpl: CEDAR PROGRAM 
IMPORtS AME"~'ent<;, Atom, eIFS, ConvertUns~Je, Dlr~'\Ory, F'ileIO, 10, IOExtras, Loader, Rope, 
Ropelnline, RTProcess, S.;.!eStorage, Shc1wTime, Tlme, UserExec, Process, TlOgaOps, TlOg.3ExtraOps, 
lJserExec-Extra;, UserExecPri~'ale, lJserProfile, ViewerOps 
EXPORTS UserExec-, UserEx(lcExtras, UserEXI:<c.PflV"'\.e 
Types 
processing individual events 
looking up declarations in file 
running beds 
Figure 22 
"'" 
is of type Zyslf.'m,GreoonwichMeanTirne: TYPE ~ RECOP.D[LONG 
CARDINAL] 
&9 <- UST[&\, &2-, &3, &:1] 
(1'7, 1TRUE, 19.3, 1'Thursciay, September I, l~fll 12:53:2] pm) 
&10 .. &? 
l~ of 1.ype LIST OF REF ANY 
.to 11 I- List,Revers[ &; J 
R¢~·el.' -,.' RetTer.<e ,! Yes 
(tThursday. Sej:,tember I, 1933 12-:B:ll pm, 19,8, tTRUE, d) 
&12. I- "lhlS is '" rope" 
"this 15 '" rope" 
&13 .. &1 
15 of type ROPE 
&14'" Ropl::",Fmd? 
1$ of lype PROC [51: ROPE, ,,~,: ROPE, posl: TNT +- 0, ca:>e: BOOt- .. 
TRUE] RETURN;=; [INT] 
&15 <- F.ope.Fmd["tlu5 IS a rope", "15 a"] 
" 
Opening a viewer on a source file in preparation for setting a breakpoint 
I then scroll to the section entitled "looking up declarations in file," click the MoreLevels menu 
button a few times, and select a location within the procedure PrintDeclFromSource where I want the 
breakpoint inserted. no I then plant the breakpoint at this location by clicking the Set menu button in 
my Work Area.t71 
& 16 SetBreak UserExecMisclmpl.mesa 13897 
Break # 1 set. 
Break # 1 in UserExecMisclmpl.PrintDeclFromSource (source: 13891) 
pattern ... TiogaOps.CreateSimplePattern[target]; -- creates a pattern for the search. 
no The reader may wonder how I knew where to place the breakpoint. In this particular case, [ happened to be familiar with 
the internal workings of the UserExecutive. However, it is not at all uncommon for Cedar users, especially experienced ones, to 
poke around in other people's code, planting breakpoints, examining data. etc. This behavior is facilitated by the use of long, 
suggestive names as well as the structuring of the source files that Tioga enables. As a result. it is not uncommon for a bug report 
not only to describe the symptom. but to identify the offending line of code. 
t71 Clicking the Set menu button causes an appropriate command line to be constructed and input to the UserExecutive. rather 
than executing the operation directly. This technique provides the user with' a record of all of his interactions with the executive 
and enables him to examine or replay them at some later point. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
Fetcb: I'ROC' [basI!': ROI'E, index: INT to 0] J:.ETURNS [e: CRAPo]; 
-- ftr(cb~~ md~xed c/l.Nacrer ttom JH'~n ro~ 
- - Bound$F~IJ.U OCCl.lr$ If moeK lS \. t.h13' rope :HZe' 
Fi~~~;.a~~!~~'r~~~;n~P~:~ ~~TS; :'1~:;e;/~';r: (S~~ 1~:,~N;t r.;;w 
-- returns -/ if no' mUM 
-- case .. \ C~~ ()f ChoNo!tN8FS :s ,ngmtlco!n1 
IDde'l:: I'ROC 
[sl: ROPE, posl: INT .. 0, s2: 1I0PE, ,~e: II00l ... TItUE] IIETUJl.NS [INT]; 
.- ~~vrn,j me smallest cnardC'ter posHron N such 1}1,',1 
-- ${' aoxurs m $1 ~ Nand N ,': /X'sl. If sZ does not 
-- occur m sf ~t.or ~ 
~~I, s1JtmcU'J.ls r~tu.rned, 
-- case =' case of chM.sc'1.6rs is slcninco!IDr. 
bE.p\!', Mioe [r: i\OPE] lIETURM$ [800L]; 
-- Mt.vrm Lem.SI.h{l] = I} 
Len,th: PROC [lJa::e: ROPZ] RZTURN~ Inn], 
-- rewrns the length of t.b,b Mpe (L"l?I'h[NIL]. d,i 
lookilll up declarations in file 
Prln'tDeclF1'omSource:' PtTJ.LIC I'ROC [~get: RO"E, fl.le: ROPE, exec: UserExe.: E:x~cH.mdJe] 
U'rTJilNS [value: IIOOLr.: .... N] = { 
OUI: IO.S'l'lI.!!! .... M = UserExec.GetStreams[].out.: 
f"lIEAwm: .... 'rOM = Atom.MakeAtoffi[f"lle]: 
doc: Tloga.Ops.Ref: 
17leWer: ViewerClasses.Vlewer: 
pat\.ern: Tlogao~.Pattern; 
s1M1, end: Tlog.!iOps.Locau.on; 
found, mUne: lOOOL; 
~fre~: Io.n·REAM; 
'rR1JSTED {dO(" .. LOOPHOLE(ATom.GeIProp[3Tom: t1leAtom, prop· $ROOT]]}; 
U· doc # NIL 'rHEH NULL 
ELSE IF (viewer" ViewerOps.FmdVlewer(f"lle)) # NIL 'rHEN doc .. 
TlOgaOps.VlewerDoc[viewer] 
J;:LSE Awm.PutProP[4wm: f1leAWm, prop: $Root, val: doc'" TiogaExtr80pS.GE'tFlle(flle ! 
CIFs.Error .> connnuE]]; 
U~r'"n· .. N~lo~:~;5.g~~~1~;I:~!;~~[~~~~; -- crM~ d ]m~rn fOr dl~ search. 
~~"[dOC,O), 
}; -- of PrmtD«;IFrcm;:i"'ouKe 
.... 
15 of Type System.GreenwichMeanTime: TYPE = RECORD(LC!NG 
CARDINAL] 
'" .. L1ST[&I, &2., &.::, &i] 
(t7, tTRUE, 19.8, IThursday, 
S~ptE'mber 1. 1983 12:B:21 pm) 
"11 .. &? 
Is of type LIST OF REF ANY 
&11 .. LlsT.R~vers[&] 
Ret'eu .) R~t'~r~~ t Yes 
(fThur.sday, Sept.ember I, 1983 
I.?:B:~I pm, T9 S, TTRUE, t1) 
&12'" "T.hls IS a fope" 
"thiS l.s -!'I rope" 
"U .. &.? 
1~ of Type ROPE 
&14 .. R.ope.Fmd? 
IS of type PROC [51: ROPE, s2: ROPE, pasl: !NT .. 0, case: BaaL <-
TRUE] RETURNS [INT] 
&.15 .. Rope.Fmd["tlns IS a rope", "I~ a."] 
J 
& Hi ~etBNik 1J!'i!rZIl'i!cMi~cIrrl.Jt.m ... 131:191 
Break # 1 set. 
Break #1 In UserExecMIsclmpl.PrmtDeclFromSour~e (source: 13891) 
J22Yern .. TiogaOps.Creal.eSlmplePaT.Tern[f.3.rgel.]: .. cr/MlSs a 
p.3ttern tor dle seweh. 
&.11 ~ 
Figure 23 
Setting a breakpoint 
55 
The breakpoint has been set, as shown in Figure 23. t72 The system provides feedback by displaying 
in my Work Area the corresponding line of source text with the location of the breakpoint underlined, 
as well as by underlining the corresponding location in the source viewer (in Figure 23, the bottom 
viewer in the left column). 
Now let's reexecute Rope.Find? I can do this by simply selecting anywhere inside of the 
corresponding event and clicking the Redo menu button. The UserExecutive maintains a history of the 
events that have been executed. t73 It uses this history list to find the event corresponding to my selection 
and reexecute it. t74 
t72 Setting a breakpoint involves finding the place in the object (compiled) code that corresponds to the indicated location in 
the source. and then inserting a special instruction that will· invoke the breakpoint machinery. The Cedar compiler facilitates this 
process by constructing as a by-product of compilation a table that contains for each statement the mapping from the object 
locations to the corresponding source location. However, most users are unaware of this process. and simply think of and treat the 
source file as the program. Cedar goes to great lengths to encourage this model. 
t73 The notion of a history list and facilities for manipulating it came from Interlisp. We have not yet implemented the notion 
of Undo as applied to events that Interlisp provides. This is partly because it is harder to capture all of the side effects of an 
operation in a language such as Cedar. and partly because other tasks were given higher priority. 
t74 The user can also reexecute events by selecting the characters that were originally typed while holding the SHIFf key down. 
as was done in event 15. The principal convenience of the REDO menu button is (a) the user can simply select anywhere in the 
event. and (b) multiple events can be reexecuted by selecting a range that spans the desired events. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
56 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
&17 Redo 14 
)~ Rope.Find? 
is of type 
Break # 1 in UserExecMisclmpl.PrintDeclFromSource 
computation suspended, switching to Action Area C ... 
(and down below a new Work Area pops up in which appears:) 
Action # 1 (kind: break, process: 173B) (from Work Area B) 
Break # 1 in UserExecMisclmpl.PrintDeclFromSource 
pattern ~ TiogaOps.CreateSimplePattern[target]; -- creates a pattern for the search. 
Fetch: I'ROC. [base: ROPE, index: INT f- OJ RETURNS [c: CHAR]; 
-- fetches mdexed cho3IoXt,er from glw:m l'ope.~ 
- BoundsFQ.uU occurs it index IS ): the rope sIZe 
Find:, FROC [d, ~2_: Ito:?l:, po~l: IN! ... 0, ca;;e: BOOL +- TIlUl:] RETURN~ (INT]; 
-- i!ke 111dex, rewrns poslT,Jon m J.' WbeTa 5,] occur., (St..'tN~' lookmg «I pas1) 
-- l'etVJ:n5 -fIt nm fOund 
.- (..;J;je ",,-I t.a5e Qr c!Ul)"<K"'feN IS 3lgmilcant 
Index: I'ROC' 
[s1: ROPE, pos1: IN! +- 0, ~2: ROPE, ca;e: I'OOL f- TRtTE] RETllRNS [INT); 
-- Return., !he ;jm~'<11e:iI (;:naI'ac;.e.r positIOn N such lila. 
- _,2 occurs In Sf ,;,t N.md ."l ~\= post It' ;5,? does nOI 
- - occur In S 1 d~ or -=U'ler pos 1" _' Ueng/h is rewrned. 
- case ~ ,\ cas.'!' of cll&.JC'lers lS sJgnffl"c.mt_ 
I:>EmptT: PROC' [1': ROPE] RETURNS [1500L]; 
-- reu/rns l.-englh{r1' ~ (1 
Length: PRO': [tase: ROPE] REtURNS [INt], 
- r,'WHn.' ~Ji,'3 iengtil i)f ,.lje mpe (l.-eng'th{NIL1' _ 0) 
PrintDeclFromSource: PU15UC PROC [target: ROPE, file: ROPE, exec: UserExec.E'xecH.;mdle] 
RETURNS [value: EOOLEAN] ~ { 
out: W,STRE..'I.M : UserExec,GetStreams[],out; 
flleAwm: ATOM: Atom,MakeAtom[riJe]; 
doc: TiogaOps.Ref; 
viewer: ViewerClasse~.Vlewer; 
pattern: TlOgaOpS,Pattern; 
start, end: Tiog<:lOp~.LocatlOn; 
found, inhne: BOOL; 
r: ROPE; 
3I1'e=: W,Sl'RE..'I.M; 
TRunED {doC' +- lOOFHOLE[A1Dm,Get,Prop[(!lDm: flleAtom, prop: $ROOIJ]}; 
IF doc # NIL THEN NULL 
ELSE IF (Vlewer +- ViewerOps.FindViewer[fileJ) # NIl_ THEN doc ... 
TilJgaOps,ViewerDoc[viewerJ 
ElSE Atom.PutProp[al0m', fileAtom, prop: $Root, val: doC' ... TiogaExtraOps,GelFile[nle ! 
cH's,E,rror :, CONTINUE]]; 
IF doC' : NIL THEN {~'-alue .,. fALSE; RETURN}; 
~tem .,. TiogaOps,CreateSimpleP.s.tt.etn[target): -- cre.3.tes a M!tem fbr the sMreh 
~tart .,. [doc, OJ; 
DC 
}; -- of Prmt...r-)ec-IFrIJrldioUlee 
is of type UST OF REF ANY 
&11 .,. Ust,Re,rers[&] 
Re~'ers -,' Rew~rse ?'Yes 
(t-Thur~day, September I, 1933 12:33:21 pm, t-9.~, t-TRUE, 1-7) 
& 12 .,. "this 15 a rope" 
"this lS i'J rope" 
&13 +- &1 
is of type ROPE 
&14 .. Rope,Find? 
is of type PROC [51: ROPE, 52: ROPE, posl: INT .. 0, case: B00L ... 
TRUE] RETURNS [INT] 
&15" Rope,Fmd["thls IS a rope", "is a"J 
j 
& 16 3etB~ .. e" lJ<e~Ex~{Mi<~T»lp1,me,3 DMI 
Bre.sk 
Break #1 in IjserExecMl~clmpLPrmtDecIF'romSource 
13B91) 
!,1£1.tern .,. TiogaOp3,Creat,eSimpleP.sttern[target); 
.j 
p.3.l.lerl'l fbr I.he se.ueh 
&11 Reeo 14 
)+- Rope,Find? 
IS of type 
:::v!;:~~ ~"C:"CX'C,::r"cr,;p,i':'in:r'OC i,!:,'m~'""c, 
Action # 1 (kind: break, proceos: 2048) (from Work Are.s B) 
Break # 1 In UserExecMisclmpl.PrintDedfromSource 
ru,Ltern +- "flogaops.CreateSimplePattern[t9l'getj; -- C!M'05 a pauelr< 
fbr tile sMreh 
&1 .. '" 
Figure 24 
Hitting a breakpoint 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
57 
Breakpoints and Action Areas 
Whenever a breakpoint is encountered in Cedar, the corresponding process is suspended so that the 
user can examine the state of the computation. We have found it useful for these interactions to take 
place in an entirely separate Work Area called an Action Area. t75 In Figure 24 we see that a new Action 
Area has been created. This Action Area tells me that I am at a breakpoint that arose out of an operation 
in Work Area B. It also tells me that the breakpoint is in the procedure PrintDeclFromSource, and 
shows me the line of code in which the breakpoint occurred. 
The first thing I want to do in this breakpoint is to examine the arguments to the procedure 
PrintDeclFromSource. To do this, I middle-click the ShowFrame menu button in my Action Area. t76 
& 1 ShowFrame args 
A- target: "Find\n", 
file: "Rope.mesa", 
UserExecMisclmpl.PrintDeclFromSource 
t77 
exec: {UserExecHandle: "B"} 
t78 
The debugger tells me that this procedure, PrintDeclFromSource, has three arguments, target, file, 
and exec. The values for file and exec are ok, but the value of target should be "Find" rather than 
"Find\n." Let's see if this is the only problem, i.e., if target were "Find," would the comments be 
printed? So I reset the variable target using the interpreter. 
&2 +- target +- "Find" 
"Find" 
Now nl allow the computation to continue by clicking the Proceed menu button, and we'll see if 
the comments from the Rope interface are in fact printed in Work Area B above. 
t75 This method also supports the Principle of Non-Preemption espoused in footnote 46. The user is not required to deal with 
this action at this time. He can continue editing documents. create and interact with other executives. read his mail. etc .. and this 
action will wait for him. Another benefit of separate Action Areas is that it enables the user to keep track of the flow of control 
if another action occurs while pursuing this one. 
t76 Left-clicking this menu button would show me just the frame's name. right-clicking would show the name. arguments. plus 
the local variables. There is some controversy over this overloading of menu buttons. especially when the use of the various mouse 
buttons is further inflected via the CTRL or SHIFT keys. On the one hand. some users feel that it makes the interface too 
complicated to learn. On the other hand. there is the desire on the part of experts who are facile with the system to be able to 
perform complicated operations with a minimum of keystrokes and mouse actions. and the competition for screen real estate (there 
is room for only so many buttons). Our current plan is to try to satisfy both camps by providing for pop-up menus that will allow 
the novice (or forgetful) user to peruse all of his options. while retaining the ability for allowing the expert to specify his own 
abbreviations via various mouse and CTRLlSHIFT combinations. 
t77 \n is how Cedar prints carriage-return when it appears as part of a value. 
t78 The printing of UserExec handles is another example of the use of PrintProcs. The actual handle is a fairly complicated data 
structure. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
58 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
&3 Proceed 
proceeded Action # 1, returning to Work Area B 
(and in Work Area B above:) 
PRoe [51, 52: ROPE, pos1: INT .. 0, case: BOOL .. TRUE] RETURNS [INT]; 
-- like Index, returns position in s1 where s2 occurs (starts looking at pos1) 
-- returns -1 if not found 
-- case = > case of characters is significant 
and sure enough. there are the comments. 
SetBl'eax U~etEXec:M:iscIm.p1.t'I1e$a 13891 
set. 
Break #1 in UserExecMiscImpJ.PrintDeclFromSource (source: 13891) 
l2SLtern .. TiogaOps.CreateSimplePattern[target]; -- creates" 
p3ttern fl:Jr the search. 
&11 Redo 14 
> .. Rope.Find? 
is of type 
Break # 1 in UserExecMiscImpl.PrintDeclFrom$ource 
comput..3.tion suspended, s""llching to Action Area C ... PROC [51, s2: 
ROPE, pos 1: INT .. 0, case: BOOL .. TRUE] RETURNS [INT]; 
-- like Index, returns position in sl ",'here s2 occurs (SWIS 
looking "t pos 1,1 
- - returns -1 it' not fl:Jund 
-- case =,\ case ot' char.:;cters is signifl'cant 
&18 .. 
Acti.on #1 (kind: break, process: 204B) (from Work Area B) 
Break #1 in UserExecMiscImpJ.PrintDeclFromSource 
l2SLtern .. TiogaOps.CreateSimplePattern[target]; -- creates" pattern 
fl:Jr the search. 
& 1 SMwFrame •• p 
UserExecMisclmpJ.PrintDeclFromSource 
A-
target: "Find\n" 
file: "Rope.mesa" 
exec: {UserExecHandle: "B"} 
&2 .. target .. "Find" 
"Find" 
&3 Proceed 
proceeded Action #1, returning to Work Area B 
Figure 25 
Testing a proposed bug fix by manually resetting data and proceeding 
Having identified the nature of the problem. now we must find out the cause-why is the wrong 
value being given for target in the first place? Let's redo Rope.Find? again ... 
&18 Redo 17 
> .. ROpe.Find? 
is of type 
Break # 1 in UserExecMisclmpl.PrintDeclFromSource 
computation suspended, switching to Action Area C ... 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
59 
... and we are back at the breakpoint. Now I'll use the WalkStack menu button to climb the call 
stack. Each time we click the WalkStack menu button, we climb/descend the call stack one frame. t79 
&4 WalkStack 
UserExecMethodslmpl.Help 
Now we are at the frame corresponding to the procedure that called PrintDeclFromSource. I'd like 
to look at the source code corresponding to this call. I click the Source menu button, and the system 
will find the source and display it in a new viewer on the left. t80 
. 
ROPE, file: ROPE, exec: UserExec,E:xecHandle] 
$Root]]}; 
... ~.b) 
: expr,rope, 52.: ",", post: I + 1] = -1 THEN ( 
fileName: R 
= Rope,Concat[Rope.Substr[base: expr,rope. len: i], ",mesa"l; 
target ~ Rope,Substr[base: expr,rope, start: i + 1, len: Rope.Length[expr,rope] - i -
1]; 
,,-NOT UserExecPriv.ate.PrintDeclFromSource[taJ'ge~: target, file: f11~Name, exec: 
exec] THEN target .(- NIL: 
-- W mdica1.e ~a~ i~ dldn~ tlnd i~ in flle 
}~ 
typ, 1J nderType: Type; 
clazs: AMTypes,Classj 
typeName: :ROPE; 
~yp .... 
Figure 26 
ROPE, pas 1: INT ~ 0, case: :fiOOL ~ TRUE] RETURNS [INT]; 
-- like Index, reWrns msi'!.Jon in 31 u?h,ere s2 occurs (st31'ts 
looking a;! pos l) 
- - returns -1 If' llO~ fOund 
-- case = ,'. case of ch,3I',}Cters is signif'ic.m t 
4.18 Redo 14 
)~ Rope,Find? 
is of type 
Bre.3k # 1 in UserExecN!iscimpl.Prin 1DeclFromSource 
compu'(..jUon suspended) swi'ch.ing tel Ac~ion Are.3 C ... 
Action # 1 (kind: break, process: 2.04B) (from Work Area B) 
Bre.:U:; # 1 in UserExec.Mi.scImpl.PrintDecIFromSource 
R21..tern ~ Tiog.:-.Op.s,CreaU!SimplePatt.ern[target]j -- cre.!rres d pa.~tern 
fl:Jr lhe seMeh. 
. 
&.1 3MVfFratY~e arg~ UserExecMi.scImpl.PrintDeclFromSource 
A-
t.arget.: "Find\n" 
file: "Rope,mesa" 
exec: {UserExecHandle: HB"} 
&.2 ~ target ~ "Find" 
"Find" 
&3 Proceed 
proceeded Act jon # 1, ret.urning tn Work Area B 
Action #2. (kind: i::Ireak, process: 204B) (from Work Area B) 
Break # 1 in UserExecMiscImpl.PrintDeclFromSource 
t!2Ltern ~ TiogaOps,CreateSimplePat.tern[target.]; -- cre.3:t.e5 ,3 p.J~tern 
for the search. 
&4 Wa:L1c3tack 
UserExecMethodslmpl.Help 
&S Source 
userexecmethodsimpl,mesa 
382.2. 
!l..J! OT' U serExecPri v ate,PrintDeclFromSource [tar get: tar get, file: 
fileName, exec: exec] THEN target. ~ NIL; 
-- W indic,3te t,.h03~ it,. 
dtdnl ,'ind il in file 
4.6 • 
The Source command finds the location in the source file corresponding to the call stack 
&5 Source 
userexecmethodsimpl.mesa 
3822 
IF NOT UserExecPrivate.PrintDecIFromSource[target: target, file: fileName, exec: exec] THEN 
target ~ NIL; -- to indicate that it didnt find it in file 
The underlined location is the point in the procedure UserExecMethodslmpl.Help that corresponds 
to where the computation is right now, i.e., the statement from which PrintDeclFromSource was called. 
Notice in Figure 26 that immediately before this statement is the expression: target ~ Rope.Substr[base: 
t79 Left-clicking climbs. right-clicking descends. 
t80 This operation involves using the compiler's statement map to perfonn the inverse mapping from that of planting breakpoints, 
namely given a location in object code. find the corresponding location in the source. If the source file is not on the user's local 
disk. but is part of the released system, i.e .. is contained in the version map (see footnote 28). the file will be automatically obtained 
from a file server. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
60 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
expr.rope, start: i + 1, len: Rope.Length[expr.rope] - i - 1]. This expression uses the procedure 
Rope.Substr to compute target as the substring of expr.rope that is len characters long, and begins at 
position start. We already determined in the previous breakpoint that the value of target at this point 
is the ROPE "Find\n," instead of the ROPE "Find." Let's find out why this is the case by examining the 
arguments specified in the call to Rope.Substr. First, we'll find out the value of the argument named 
base by evaluating the expression expr.rope. We can do this by simply pointing at the expression in 
the source viewer while holding down the SHIFf key, thereby causing the characters to be copied into 
the interpreter Work Area, the same as we did earlier, even though in this case we are copying characters 
from one viewer into another. 
&6 +- expr.rope 
"Rope.Find\n" 
That's what we expected. Similarly, let's check the value of start, the starting position for the 
substring. specified to be i + 1, and the value of len, the length of the substring, given by 
Rope.Length[expr.rope] - i - 1. Figure 27 shows the display as I am about to evaluate this latter 
expression. (Note the source selection underlined in gray in the viewer on the lower left.) 
,rope, ", 
-- is 
fOrm d.b, ra.'lh8r than a..b.c 
: expr.rope, 52: ".", pos!: i + 1] = -1 THEN { 
= Rope,Concat[Rope.substr[base: expr,rope, len: i), ",mesa"]; 
target .. Rope,Substr[base: expr,rope, start: i + 1, len: ~"e,LenIi.l!!JSAW2p,.!tL:J...: 
1]; 
IF'NOT UserExecPrivate ,PrintDeclFromSource [tar get: target, file: fileName, exec: 
exec] THEN target .. NIL; -- to ,ndic,,"" !hat it didnt fInd it in me 
}; 
typ, underType: Type; 
class: AMTypes,Class; 
typeName: ROPE; 
.. TV1rYIli,[exlPr,v,alue 
Figure 27 
compu14Uon -suspended, s • .'itching to 
!l....l!OT 
. 
fileName, exec: exec] THEN target to NIL; 
didnt fInd it in fl'le 
A6 .. expr ,rope 
"Rope,Find\n" 
A7 .. i + 1 
5 
AI .. 
Evaluating expressions from a source program by pointing at them 
&7 +- i + 1 
5 
&8 +- Rope.Length[expr.rope] - i - 1 
5 
Here is the problem. an off-by-one bug. If we don't want the \n to be included, there should only 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
61 
be four characters in the substring, instead of five. In other words, the length argument should be the 
length of the entire ROPE, minus the start position, minus 1 (so as not to include the last character), i.e., 
Rope.Length[expr.rope] - (i + 1) - 1. Let's make that change in the source. 
I make the edit using Tioga, and then click the ChangeLog menu button. This automatically 
constructs a change log entry containing my name, the date, and a list of those items that have been 
changed. It also provides a space for me to fill in a comment describing each change, as shown in Figure 
28. 
viewer: ViewerClasses, Viewer; 
pattern: TiogaOps,Pattern; 
start, end: TiogaOps,Location; 
found, inline: BOOL; 
r: ROPE; 
stream: IO,STREAM; 
. 
TRUSTED {doc +- LOOPHoLE[Atom,GetProp[atom: fileAtom, prop: $Root]]}; 
IF doc # NIL THEN NULL 
Clear ~ 
Get Getlmpl PrevFile ~ 
Save Time Split Places Levels ChangeLog 
Find Word Def Position Normalize PrevPlace Reselect 
I FirstLevelOn)v MoreLevels FewerLevels AllLevels 
Edited on A'[~v 24, IUS 1(1:28.ml, by Teiteiman 
changed co3l1 w Ge~Token in esca,pecomplete w use IDProc ra~er ~an TokenProc because of fIle 
n.mles containing -, e,g, Horning ~ied wping Lo31"ch -H ESC and go~ NNo match" 
changes w: Escape 
Edited on September I, 193$ 12:51 pm, by Teitelman 
-. 
1flJ.ll;; w: Help~ ~ 
: 
" 
= 
= 
" 
: : 
: 
: 
: 
: 
" 
: 
Figure 28 
Automatic ChangeLog maintenance 
yy ate h 
t::;OO]'----I 
I fill in the comments field, and then save the file using the Save menu button. t81 
Now let's go back to the Action Area on the right, clear the breakpoint, and since we are finished 
with this problem, let's just abort the action and control will return to the Work Area from which the 
action originated. 
t81 Had I just clicked the Save menu button without clicking the ChangeLog button first, the system would have automatically 
constructed a ChangeLog entry containing my name, the date, and a list of items that had been changed, but without any 
explanation of the reason behind or nature of the change. However. even this amount of information can be extremely useful in 
an environment in which several different programmers may edit the same program. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
62 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Electronic Mail 
The next thing I want to do is to fix a bug that was reported to me in a message. As r mentioned 
earlier, the mail box shaped icon in the lower right corner of the screen (see Figure 1) is my Walnut 
Control Panel. I'll open it now. As the flag on the mail box icon indicated, the Walnut Control Panel 
tel1s me that I have new mail. I click the NewMail menu button in the Walnut Control Panel to retrieve 
these messages from the mail server. These messages will initial1y be placed in my Active message set, 
represented by the icon that looks like a stack of envelopes. I'll open my Active messages and we wil1 
be able to see my new mail. t82 
The messages marked with ? in Figure 29 are the ones that I haven't read yet. t83 Some I'll simply 
read and delete (or delete without reading because the subject does not interest me, e.g., "eye glasses 
~3 ~ F:ope,Lengfb[expr,rope] - i-I 
&9 n~~rAl1f,N;S-1: 
&10 AbOTl 
aborT,;>(:\ ActlOll #2, remrnmg t)) ',Vork Area B 
1:' Sep~: Tramont.:ono,PA 
PAR,:,'/(IS[\ F'K<NK' 
1', :'5ep 
Pl<03.",pl'< 
Re. \)~I:" ot ll.:,t~, and Ll~j 
1:; ~,ep ~,: Hormllg,.pa 
SJH~e, 
I:, ~_~ep 
Don 
,~_ Ted & 
2~ September 
IS ;~ep 
raJM-h.;.w,p,~ 
1:; S<:-p 
l"'''in,P.''-. 
I" ;';ep 
Ja,:e,bl.p., 
E",,: 
'-'~'" of h"t" and Li>CI 
Ref.llKLES 
DEC/EtherneT Interr",l;'e 
Plncl,OIT_PA 
II,flssmg hl)r",.ry \)1)01:;; 
;I.l:in50n'1"~ 
Two 
HBrown,r·" 
Nell 
Parj.;er,PA 
Raw~on,pa 
j·'lIr"bee,pa 
Figure 29 
My Active message set and the Walnut control panel 
c1:: PDT 
t82 We rely heavily on our electronic mail systems at PARe. We use them for mail as well as for the type of announcement that 
might in other environments be posted on a bulletin board. In addition to messages from one user to another, announcements of 
impending meetings. for sale notices. and the like are all sent as messages directed at expansive distribution lists. You can see 
examples of such messages in my Active Message Set in Figure 29 (bottom viewer. left hand column). 
There are a number of such electronic mail systems in use at PARC (because there are several different programming environments). 
However. all of these access a common mail distribution service [1]. Walnut, the mail system for Cedar, provides facilities to send 
and retrieve mail and to display and classify stored (previously retrieved) messages. Walnut uses the Cypress database system [5] 
to maintain information about stored messages. 
t83 The observant reader may have noticed that the date in the change log entry in the file I edited (Figure 28) is September L 
whereas the date in the Walnut control panel and on many of the messages is September 20. There are other such anomalies later 
in this paper. all attributable to the fact that the figures in this paper were not all produced on the same day. 
XEROX PARe, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
63 
found" or "Tennis Tickets Gone"). Messages regarding events I want to be sure not to forget, such as a 
talk or meeting, I can enter into my personal calendar/reminder system by simply clicking the Remind 
menu button on the corresponding message, as I have in Figure 30. The Reminder system obtains the 
time and date for the corresponding event from the message itself, t84 and when the corresponding time 
rolls around, a blinking icon is automatically displayed on my screen (see Figure 33). If I open this icon, 
the corresponding viewer will contain this message. t85 
cll.m.g~ 
fC! (:eo/Taken In e$l;~om.pl~~ 1,1) uSe'IDPrcc fatiter 'th.m ToicenPtOl.: ~"U$E' or flie 
n.m'!8'.5 cotl1.3imr.lj -, e.g, HorninG 1r1ed t~'pmt Larch-H ESt."? <3TJ.d got. "No march" 
ch..:m,fes 1.(." EscapE' 
Ed1.ted Qn ~p14m~r I. 
1.'~$.s 1.J'.,1 pm, ~r Te1teim.m 
fllli9d !lUi: 14'her6'm . 14','\5 nO! })MSml'.he rJth, sr.rint 1<) Prmr.DeclFrom.'iiJl}1'CtC' 
chmges to: Help 
1~ S@p $3 JacObl,pa 
16 Sev 83 Resnlck.ES 
1~ Sep 83 Pmdar.PA 
I~ Sep 8"3 
o!Ir.}.;m~on,pe 
19 Sep 89 MBrown.p-=, 
19 Sep 63 Parker.PA 
1~ Sap 83 Rawson.p.!i 
19 Sep 63 lo3J'rabe€',pa 
19 Sep~.3 Joos.PA 
1:sa~$9: MI!:\l!GWn,lI:5. 
1<:1 Sep 83 Swmehart.pa 
I~ S~p IH 
Homl1'l~.p~ 
;:0 ~p ~~ 
Farrand.e~ 
.... 0 Sep 6, C'Mo.PA 
83 Allen.PA 
From. MBrown,pe. 
R!!': us!!' of ll;sf.$ N'ld List 
DlC/)!thern!!'t Interface 
MI~3me hbrMy OODleS 
Two b\.1 gs to a~~ol.;J 
Nell Wilhelm selIllnM c.hN'lged to UUO tomorrow 
FMewell Party for Sam Mid Jacle Sarge:nl 
More Info Santa Clara Ballet at Fhnt Center 
Re: use ot hsts and List 
eye iJl3$ses found 
1ir~1 With-elm 3l!!1rttlnM' '!:lhan:gm m HI~lO 'll:IMtlttbW 
Hlrml! Meelmg Wedne~(()' after DoMIer 
Computer Systems Relio!lbility omd Risk~ to the Pubh( 
Expert System Intere~1 
Umons~ 
More Tennts Ticleets -- All Gone! 
hhject,: Nell WIlhelm seminar chan~ed to 11):30 t"morrow 
To'Meo1hodologyt 
Reply·to: MBrown.p.! 
Date. l!l Sep 83 
!(I:1)1'4~ PDT 
From: MBrown.pa 
Sllhj."t,: Nell Wilhelm lIemtn&' changed to 10: jO tomorroW' 
To: Comput.erRe.!l!arch t. Compul,mgSemmar1, ComputlllgSemmaxRemote-r 
Reply-To: MBlown 
To ..'!.<rold conflict With t.he IDL lab meetm~, the tlml" of Nell Wilhelm's gemmar has been 
chanieod te 11):30 tomerrow, 20 September (stJll In CSt O:!ommons). Here IS a repeal of Ihe IJIle 
wd ./!b~t.reo::t 
Figure 30 
iookmg ~I po:; 1,1 
- - returns -/ If no! fa>.Jnd 
-- ~~~'=' c.,..,~ of chN'~! ... rs 13 .Hgnifll::.J1'I.' 
&18 Redo 17 
, .. Rope.Find' 
IS or type 
Bre.u #1 In Us!!'r~KtKNfI$clmpl.PrmfDeciFromSotlrre 
com.pV'1.)1IOn $'n~ndi!'d. Sll'11J::hm~~ 1£1 ACT/on Aro!';' ,~, 
~bor"!eJ 
.lIt ... 
a.8 ... Rope.Len&Th[F.'xpr ropF.'] - I - I 
, 
a., cle,w.A1JlIreak: 
All breaks cleMed 
a.ID Abort 
aborted ACTlon #2. relUrnm~ 10 Work Area B 
DateAndTl:me 
Document.al~on Forum 
HowTo HUmor ImpledS1Jgg InlmePoll 10 'Mlse IVIyBugs 
MySunestlons 
No~bool:lndex i)thersBujj'5 RememberStuft 
RemmderExamples 
RI~rerRMt Spell Tio:1aSuggeS!10n5 TShlrt.s 
UserExec:Changes UserExecPoll UserRequest.s VideoTape 
Resl.art fim.shed 
r:'.abernet..m:5: .................. retrieved t4 meJJ..'!.geJ. 
:':Illfeondel.ms: : ret.rle~'ed 1 messages. 
Entering a message into my reminder system 
t84 You' can see the feedback from the reminder system in Figure 29 in the message window at the top of the screen: "Reminder 
will be posted at Tuesday. September 20. 1983 10:30 am for 60 minutes." This time was computed from the string "10:30 tomorrow" 
in the subject field of the message. using the date field of the message to determine the reference point for "tomorrow." i.e .. 
pretend today is 19 Sep 83 when figuring out what tomorrow is. even though I am actually reading the message on September 20 
(the day after it was sent). 
t85 Here is an excellent example of what we mean when we say Cedar is integrated: the various facilities can use each other in 
important ways since they all coexist in the same address space. (Here the reminder system uses both Walnut and Tioga.) 
Furthermore. there need not be any explicit context switch and corresponding loss of state when switching between tasks or 
programming tools. for example. in switching from debugging. to editing. to reading mail. Integration is one of the reasons why a 
large virtual address space (> 24 bits) was one of the Priority A items in our original Catalogue of Programming Environment 
Capabilities [8]. 
-
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-H. JUNE 1984 
64 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Messages that I want to save so that I can refer to them later I frequently sort into various categories 
called message sets. t86 I have about thirty of these categories and can add more whenever I need them. 
My current message sets are shown in the Walnut Control Panel (at the lower right in Figure 30): 
BackBumer, CedarPaper, Discussion, Documentation, etc. Notice in Figure 29 that my Active message 
set contains a number of messages about the use of lists. These are in response to a poll I sent to Cedar 
users about how they used lists (for material for this paper). In Figure 31, I have created a new message 
set called Lists, and am in the process of moving these messages into that message set so that I will have 
them all in one. convenient place. I do this by pointing at the corresponding message in my Active 
message set viewer and then clicking the MoveTo menu button . 
thm ToktmProc rec:ause of' fUe 
Z'l..mJes cOlHdinmg -, e.g. 
.md $01. UNo mar,ch· 
ch.m.ges 'to: Esca~ 
EdIted .on $eptemb-&r 1. 19M IJ:.5J pm, by nmelmm 
t'1.xed bl.li wh8rem .' WdS not pa,ssing the rl¥ht strin& U) Prinr.DecIFromSource 
changes '0: Help 
1$ Sep 83 Horning.pa 
15 Sep 63 Don &; Ted & '" nen bndge Wedn",roay 28 September 
'J~.:Se:p oM, 'Dt~iii«:' 
:~~ .J#j$' of 1ti:til: :&nt::t,~·.:;:···· : 
'16 Sep 83 ReznlckES 
DEC/Ethernet Interface 
16 Sep 8:5' PmQ.u.PA 
Mls~ng ilbxary books 
16 Sep 83 .atkmson.pa 
Two bugs 1£1 avoid 
19 Sap 6$ MBrown.pa 
Nell Wilhelm seminar chanlIed 'to 10:30 'IOmorrow 
19 Sap €IS Parker.PA 
Farewell Party for Sam and Jack Sargent. 
19 Sep 83 Rawson.pa 
More Info: Santa Claro!! Bo!1l1e1 at flint Center 
19 Sep 83 larr.abee.pt3 
Re: ~e of liST:; and List 
19 Sep 83 JOO$.PA 
eye glasses found 
19 ~p 63 MBrown.pa 
Neil WIlhelm semmar changed 1£1 10:30 tomorrow 
19 Sep 83 Swmehart.po! 
Hiring Meeting Wednesd~ after Dealer 
; 
19 Sep 83' 
Sy~telru: Reliablltty and Risks '10 the Pubhc 
Int.erest 
1) I use LIST (bUT rarely). 
2.) 1 use CONS extensi~rely. 
3) I frequenlly defin~ LIST OF T, and only occasionally LIST OF REF ANY. 
Figure 31 
.. _ ....•.. ,,-c::.: .. / If nor. flJund 
A.' Redo 11 
~ ... Rope.Find,? 
u; of type 
CdSe at ch~tel'$ is si$nitrc-.m~ 
BrMk #1 in Userl!xS(;Misdmpl.Prin~lF1'Olt/$(1Urce 
O!:lmJW'""Jon sV;1pended, sTlo"11ching :10 Ac:!lon Are.! '::: .. 
_Wi 
.t11,f..", 
4' f. RopeLength[expr,rope) - i-I 
, 
41) C1eBl"Al1~ft!B~< 
All breMcs cleared 
.11 Abort. 
aboNd AcUon #2, returnmg to Work Area B 
Sorting messages into message sets 
If I point at one of the message set buttons in the Walnut control panel and click the mouse, Walnut 
creates a viewer on the corresponding message set. This viewer shows the date, sender, and subject of 
each message in the set. For example, I typically save messages about bugs in my software in the message 
set called MyBugs. The message regarding the bug I want to fix is in this message set, which I'll now 
open. 
t86 Walnut's database contains two types of entities: messages and message sets. A message entity corresponds to a message 
retrieved from the mail distribution system. A message entity can be a member of one or more message sets. There are two 
distinguished message sets: Active and Deleted. A newly retrieved message automatically becomes a member of Active. A message 
that is removed from all other messages sets is added to Deleted. The user can create or destroy additional message sets as the 
demonstration illustrates. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
65 
The message that I am interested in is 11·Feb·83 Willie·Sue.pa bug??t87 I'll click it, and Walnut 
will obtain the message contents from the data base and put it in a new viewer, as shown in Figure 32 
(left column, top viewer). 
SUbj~CT.: bur?~ 
To: Teltelma.n 
cc: wlllie-sue.pa 
A Bug Report 
1 Mar 83 wIllie-sue,po 
13 Mar 8:3 MBrown.pa 
~4 May ~3 kollint.p.; 
n Iun 8$ Spreltzer.pa 
21 Jun 8$ BE>ach.pa 
21 Jun 83 ST,e'WMf.pa 
28: JlJn 8S To'Spreltnr 
~8 Jun 8~ To' Spre-ltzer 
2'" Jun 83 
M~well.pa 
2!1 Jun 83 Swmehart.pa 
1 Jul;n 1:o111nr.pa 
6 lui 83 kOlbnl.pa 
1 lui 83 Swmehs:rt.pa 
1 S Sep 83 Horning.pa 
IS Sep 83 Don.! Ted & 
lS""ze;p"$':r~ip:a 
16 Sep 83 Resnicl;.ES 
16 Sep 83 Pmdar.PA 
Hi Sep 63 atkmson,pa 
1~ Sep 63 MErown,pa 
1~ Sep 83 Parker,PA 
1~ Sap 8S R6WSOn,pe1 
1~ Sap 63 larr.;lbee,pa 
l~ Sep 83 Joo5,PA 
l~ Sep 83 MElrown.pa 
19 SEp 83 SWlDehart,pi!l 
I~ Sep 83 HOrnlD&.pa 
1.~ Sep 83 
Farrarut.e~ 
misplaced looks 
SetBreak scrolls spliT. actlon area 
bu, 
Re: Lo!ISI edited by: 
CTRL-e' on Buttons,CrMte 
~ commend in USE>rExec 
Re: DWIM hOOks 
Reo: DWIM hooks 
Menw in files crea1.ed due to compilation errors 
Re: Menus in files created due to compllatlon errors 
Re, MQre DWIM 
Re: More DWIM 
Quo1.e~ In commands at41n 
Shdes 
neXT bridge Wednesd.ay 28 sep~mber 
·k: u~e·of·llii#·Obt:Lt$t· 
DEC I!thernet Intertace 
MISSln& bbrary books 
Two bug5 1.0 a""old 
Nell WIlhelm ~mmar chanfeCI to 10:30 "tomorrow 
Farewell Party tor Sam and Jack Sargent 
More Jnto: Smt.:! Clara Ballet 091 Flint Cenler 
Re: use of hsts an(.t LISt 
eye glasses found 
Neil WIlhelm semmar changect to 10:30 lomorrow 
Hiring Meel.1ng Wednesda,y after Dealer 
Computer Systems Reliilbllity and Risks to the 'PubliC" 
llQ'er~ Sys~m Interest 
Figure 32 
DateAndTl1Cte 
HowTo Humor ImpledSui:i: InlmePoli io Mise __ 
MySuggesl.ions Nol.ebooklndex OthersBuis Remember!::t.uft 
RemiliderExamples 
Ri~lerRail Spell TiogaZuggestions TShirts 
U~r!xecChanges Use~Exe(Poll UserP.aquesf.s VideoTape 
A user reports a bug via an electronic message 
The message states that when an event consisting of just a comment is typed to the executive, an 
error occurs. Let's try it and see. I'll return to Work Area A and then, instead of typing the comment, 
copy it from the message directly into the Work Area. In Figure 32, I have selected the corresponding 
characters in the message with the SHIFf key depressed. When I lift the SHIFf key, the characters will 
be copied into Work Area A.t88 
t87 The video tape that this demonstration was taken from was originally produced in February 1983. whereas this paper was 
written in September 1983. Obviously this and other bugs that I will fix during the course of this demonstration were actually 
taken care of many months ago. However. for the purposes of this paper. I have restored Cedar to the state that it was in February. 
at least with respect to these changes. and am reenacting the scenario. 
t88 Note that in this case I will be copying characters from a Walnut message viewer into an Executive Work Area. still using 
the same method as we used previously. Consistency of user interface! 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
66 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
&10 -- try it now 
ERROR IOlmpl.EndOfStream from Inputlmpl.GetCedarScannerToken 1 
computation suspended, switching to Action Area E. .. 
(and down below a new Work Area pops up in which appears:) 
Action # 1 (kind: signal, process: 2048) (from Work Area A) 
ERROR IOlmpI.EndOfStream[stream: {155010668 
Input From Rope Stream}] from 
Inputlmpl.GetCedarScannerToken1 
Subject: buC? 
To: Telteiman 
cc: wllhe-sue.pa 
I WPM who!t I expected would be a CQmment to the exec. e.g. "-- try It now' CR; 
J w% greet«! With an a:1JOn area annoutlcina: ERROR IOlmpI.EndOfStreMI[mumbleJ. 
1Jul83 Swmehart.p.:. 
7 Jul 83 MBrown,pa 
1 Jul 83 To: teitelman 
8 Jut 83 MBrown.pa 
6 Ju\ 33 MBrown.pa 
12 Jul 6:5' crow.pa 
2( Jui 83 Maxwell.pa 
1 AUi 83 
Wllbe-S1Je'.~ 
1 Sep 63 iomez.pa 
8 Sep 8~ NIX.!» 
1~ ~p IH Swlli..pa 
11 AUi 8.3 
vMll~unen.pa 
I~ Aug 8.3 To' '~.m.le\Jnen 
12 Aug 8$ SargenT"PA 
12 A\Ji; 83 v.m.leunen.pa 
IS Atlj; 63 GobbeLPA 
lci Aug 6~ SchIller.PA 
16 Aug 63 
~oughty.PA 
F Aug 63 Lehner.PA 
Ii' Aug 63 HormPIf.pa 
Quotes in commands again 
error genera1et\ by "&\8 source commander" 
bu, 
end -of-file III ~trin& li!.eral 
ml~ng help trom ~ C<lmmMld 
Uncompiled procedures 
prehistonc erpor 
Test.mesa 
t.rouble With NewSt1Jft 
Bu~ in Spell.GetMatchmrPlI.eLIst 
N~wStuff date parsIni 
updating 1~I.·edil.ed entry 
Re: upda,1,m& last·edlf.ed entry 
Seminar. Thurs" 8/18, 10:30 a.m. (Auditollum). Baldev Singh (U. of 
Re' updating \asl-I.'dll.ed enTJ'Y 
Re: car 5er'11ce' ~trong ANTI-recmnmend-1lljon 
IncacJescenl humor 
Party Time for McGregor and Frlend~ 
Menu for the WE"ek enclm: 6/.26 
Re: Cedar Command LmE' 
PMart1n.PA 
Baldev Smgh's ml.efvlew postponed one we-ek 
SavInG Cedar Lore 
FOl'ms for PostCedar 4.2 
Re The Memory SysTem of -11 HIgh-Performance Person& Computer 
for the demIse o( Maze 
Figure 33 
Ar-"E". 
Ac'llon #4 (kmd: SIgnal, process: 2.068) (from Work Area A) 
ERROR 100mp1.lndOfSlJ'eam[stream: {1S72~42m - InpuT From Rope 
Stream}] from Inputlmpl.GeTt::edarSc.m.nerTokenl 
&1'" '" 
An error causeS the creation of a new Action Area 
Well, it's just like the message said. We got an EndOfStream error, and are now in a new Action Area. t89 
t90 Let's walk the stack and see what's happening. 
t89 Uncaught errors and signals are handled the same as breakpoints: they constitute actions and are given their own Action 
Area. 
t90 Notice that. since it is now 10:30AM, the reminder concerning that talk I wanted to attend (entered in Figure 30) has popped 
up at the bottom of my display, fourth icon from the left. (Though the reader obviously can't see it in the figure, the icon is 
blinking to call itself to my attention.) If I were to open this icon, I would find the original message. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
& 1 WalkStack 
&2 WalkStack 
&3 WalkStack 
&4 WalkStack 
&5 WalkStack 
&6 WalkStack 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
Inputlmpl.GetCedarScannerToken 
Inputlmpl.GetCedarToken 
Inputlmpl,fromTokenProc 
Inputimpl.GetCedarScannerToken 
Inputimpl.GetCedarToken 
UserExeclmpl.lsWeliFormed 
67 
The first five levels of procedure nesting correspond to internal calls within the 10 package. However, 
the procedure UserExeclmpl.lsWeliFormed looks more promising. Let's look at its source. 
& 7 Source 
userexecimpl.mesa 
23932 
IF Rope.lsEmpty[rope] OR NOT Rope.Equal[If ... ", lo.GetCedarToken[stream]] THEN GOTO Yes; t91 
I tYPE'd what I expected would be a comment 10 !.he exec, !!I.K. "-~ try it now" CRj 
I Via:; £fee\OO. With an acUon area announcing ERROR IOImpl,EndOfStleam[mumNe). 
,. ... ,;11P;;~;;;.~: noe [rope: Ron] RUURNfI[1300LEAH] ~ { 
stream: nIl.EAM; 
slJ'eam ;- IO.lus[ropej; -- smce streams 03Jreatl.l· .:rcq1Jll'/M, 1I'e mJ.ghl cormdN' 5d~Til'l.e d 
scrd'tCh strewn md using i1.. 
~pelSEmpty[ropeJ OR NOT RopeEqu&["f-", Io,GetCedarToken[stream)) THEN GOT a n~: 
IO£xtrM.GetCedarScannerToken[nre8m, NIL' 
lo.syn\aJ(Error :~ GOTO No; 
ro.!ndOf'Stream => GOTO Yes 
J' 
ENDLOOP; 
EXIT;!! 
). 
~~s ~~'. RRE~T~~[~T:L~~~: 
AcquiIing Slream~ 
AcquireExec: PU8LIC FRoe [exec: Exec.Hmc.Ue) II.I:TURNs[newlyAcqulled: 8aOl] ~ Tl1.USTED { 
~- !'races:; 
priV(l1e: it.Er' ExecPrlVaTeRecord = GeWrl'>l'ateStuf'f[execj: 
proceu: UHSAJ'E I'ROCB3$ = Process,GetCurrent[]; 
\.hlsExec: ExecHandle .. GetExecHanttle[process: process]; 
Are-!E ... 
Actl.on #4 (kmd: Sl&nal, process: 2068) (from Work Area A) 
ERROR IOlmpl.EndOfStrMm[stream: {lSnS42.m - Input From Rope 
Stream}] from InpuUmpl,(i.etCedarSc.MneTTokenl 
"t WIII:llSla~:II 
Inpullmpl.GetCedarScannerToken 
"2 Wsl:ll;!lla~:II 
tnpuUmpJ.Get!:'edM'Token 
'" 
WaI:IItlla~k 
InputlmpJ.fromTokenProc 
"4 Wslxtll1lck 
tnput.lmpl.Ge1Cedan;c.,mnerToken 
,,$ WlIIk3t.c.k 
Inp1Jtlmp1.Get.cedarToken 
'" 
W*,k5'UIOk 
UserExecImpl.IsWellFormed 
"7 SOilrot 
userexecimpI.mesa 
l3931 
IF Rope.lsEmpt.y[rope] Of{. NOT Rope.£qual[" ... ·, 
lo.GetC'edarToken[~treoll\]] THJ:1'l ~OTO ¥e,: 
.... 
Figure 34 
Tracking down a bug 
The underlined location marks the place in the source that corresponds to where the computation 
is now. It looks like the program is using the procedure IO.GetCedarToken to read a token from stream. 
Let's examine the variable stream using the interpreter. 
t91 The Cedar language provides for an extremely restricted form of GOTO statements. namely to a series of labeled statements 
called an ExitsClause that appear at the end of a block. Think of GOTO as the Cedar way of spelling EXIT. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-H. JUNE 1984 
68 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
&8 +- stream 
{157254228 - Input From Rope Stream} 
Note that streams have PrintProcs which print out the kind of stream, suppressing the stream's actual 
representation. t92 In this case, we do want to look inside of the stream at its data, which we can do 
using the interpreter. First, I'll find out the stream's type using the interpreter. 
&9 +- &? 
is of type STREAM: TYPE = REF IO.STREAMRecord; 
IO.STREAMRecord: TYPE = RECORD[streamProcs: REF IO.StreamProcs, streamData: REF 
ANY, propList: Atom.PropList +- NIL, backingStream: STREAM +- NIL] 
This says that a stream is a REF to a record consisting of four fields: streamProcs, stream Data, 
propList. and backingStream, each of which have the indicated type; Let's look at the stream Data 
field, which contains the data for this particular stream. 
& 10 +- &.streamData 
t[rope: "-- try it now", pos: 13] 
Even though the type of this field is REF ANY (so that different kinds of streams can store different 
types of data in the same field), the interpreter is able to figure out the type of the referent using the 
run-time type system. It tells me that the data for this stream is a REF to a record consisting of two fields 
named rope and pos, whose values are" -- try it now" (notice that this ROPE has 13 characters), and 13. 
In other words, the current position, pos, does indeed correspond to the end of the stream. What 
happened to the previous 13 characters? 
In puzzlement. I decide to look at the definition for IO.GetCedarToken. I select the characters 
IO.GetCedarToken in the source viewer, and then click the Open menu button to create a new viewer 
on the 10 interface positioned at the definition of GetCedarToken, as shown in Figure 35. 
t92 A stream in Cedar is simply a producer and/or consumer of byte sequences. The stream abstraction can be implemented in 
a variety of ways. For instance. the producer behind an input stream might be a file or a user typing at a keyboard. We call each 
stream implementation (file. keyboard, and so on) a stream class. One of the most important aspects of streams are that a client 
program can manipulate a stream without regard to the class that implements it. Thus. varying stream implementations can be 
substituted without effect on the program. Furthermore. new implementations of streams can be supplied by the user at runtime. 
Examples of such user defined streams are: decrypted input and encrypted output streams layered on top of other streams. an 
output stream that automatically indents to indicate structure. a stream which reads Intel format absolute binary object files. and 
a stream that emulates Unix pipes. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
11] 
IsWellFormed: PROC {rope' ROPE] RETURN3[tOOlEAN) '" { 
stre-.'mt: STREAM; 
st.reaJIL +- I(I,Ftls[rope]; -- smce s1.re..~~i.s ,-"tir834,y .3>~Xl.wred.~ 'we tllig'hr. consider sa~"ing a 
5Cl' ... ~tch st.re.=o};· ... =t.'lO· 1,151nS It 
IF Rope,IsEmpt.y[rope] OR NOT Rope.Equal["+-", 'Md'Uem.stream]] THEN GOTO Ye$: 
DO 
K\Ext,ra:..GetCed.:uScannerToken[5~.rearn, NIL! 
IO,SyntaxE:rror =\ GOTO No; 
Io,E.ndOfStre,:tm =--, GOTO Yes 
j; 
ENDLOOP; 
EXITS 
Yes "'> RETURN[Tl!.UE]; 
No =;. RETURN[FALSE]; 
del1nitJon i3 {RETURN[F.'!.LSE, TRUE]} 1,e. in,v.et/.;equ.ence{EveryThing] reWrn5 the 
con1e-n'(S of'in. 
Parsing the input stream as a. sequence of Cedar Tok.ens: G-etCedarTo1<.en 
Ge19;dYele!ff~n~~Q~ ~~~~&~L~ ~~~~~~~:&::;T:!rN~~;~~~J/ mes~ wken, WhlCh is reWrned .3.1 
~~~~;::;,' r~'t~r;;r;:~·~:~~~~~;l?:~[T~(:;::. ~~) .. _::,,<:'.~' :'~~~:~:'Sl,.;,~~,:·~·~ o.l".-c~~~~:;:~~n 
.:i1-.w::'matJcaii..~~ f}lf2I.' ov~ .. ~'l COllW.l.ents. FOr D:"'ll2pelW!'ll/ .. -e in use v,'rth the ln1.erpre1.e1', &: lS 
~.re....~~ea· ,3.." ,3 regulal' ch.;'I,3f:'t,er, r,3,t .. '2er 1",.1-J"jJ:2 
C"'''(I..,~Jing ... ~ 3yn'f,.3~,{ error, j,.:::, -"&J3" will p:tl'Je ·33 
.. ~ 51ngl& roken. 
Get,i:.,toO), GetBool. Gf!tCot-d, (~lf!tlnt, Gf!tRf!al, and GetRopf! described below provide ways of 
parsing the input stream intL) objects of the correspomting type, If the client knows what type of 
object is next expected. he can use the input routine for that type, e.g. i: I[\JT ~ 
Figure 35 
Action 
ERROF, IOI,y,pll,E",dOrs,,'eam 
Stream} ] from 
mpI,(""Cedlar'l 
&1 Wlllk3t8Ck 
&.2 WalkStilcY. 
&3 Walx3tacK 
&.4 lNalk3tS(.j{ 
&'S WaikStac'K 
&6 Watk3ts('K 
&. 1 3Olu'ce 
u,erex,ecunpI,me,. 
1L..Rope.IsEmpty[rope] OR 
IO .GetCeda.rToken [stre~m]] 
&.8 +- stream 
{15n':;1l2.2B - Input From Rope 
&.9 +- &i' 
is of type STREAIVI: TYPE = 
IO$TREAMRecord: TYPE = 
IO.StreamProcs, st.reamDa.td.: REF 
nIL, hackin:?-S'reaJ(L: STRE:AM .f-
&. 10 ~ &.strean-IDa'a 
t[rope: "-- try it. now", po;:;: 13] 
&11 ~ 
The 10 interface serves as online documentation 
69 
Aha! The comment in the 10 interface says: "GetCedarToken automatically filters out all 
comments." The problem is that when my program asks for the next token from the stream, there isn't 
one. because comments are filtered out when reading tokens. So the error EndOfStream is raised. t93 
What I should be doing in this program is catching the signal EndOfStream in the call to 
IO.GetCedarToken. and simply returning TRUE. Let's make that change. 
Now let's return to our Action Area on the right, and since we are finished with this problem, we 
can abort the action. and return to the Work Area above. 
t93 The Cedar language uses signals and errors as a mechanism for handling exceptional conditions, (The only difference between 
a signal and an error is that the program that catches the signal can resume the program that raised the signal. whereas errors 
cannot be resumed.) Think of a signal/error as a procedure call where the body of the procedure is determined dynamically using 
the call stack. In this way. an implementor can allow a client to specify what to do for various exceptional cases. without requiring 
that the client specify a plethora of extra arguments to cover all such cases. or returning various invalid values for which the caller 
must check, This way of handling exceptions has two important aspects. one for the human reader of the program. and one for its 
execution efficiency, First. anyone reading the program can see immediately that an exceptional condition can arise by the catch 
phrase. knows that this is an unusual event. and can read on with the normal program flow, Second. when the program is executing. 
the code to handle the exceptional cases is not executed on every call. but only when the actual signal is generated. i.e .. when the 
exceptional condition occurs [20]. It is worth pointing out that a facility for raising and catching signals very similar to Cedar's 
has recently been implemented for Interlisp. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
70 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Compiling, Support for Concurrent Operations 
Now I want to compile the files that I have edited. The system keeps a list of those files that need 
to be compiled. i.e., those that were edited but not yet successfully compiled. It also provides visual 
reminders in the form of a black border around the corresponding icons, as shown in Figure 36. I can 
instruct the system to compile all of the files that need compilation via the command compileall. t94 
& 10 compileall 
>Compile UserExecMethodslmpl.mesa UserExeclmpl.mesa 
While that is going on, I'll answer Willie-Sue's message. I click the Answer menu button in the 
viewer containing her message, and Walnut creates a reply form containing the appropriate Subject, To, 
and cc fields. In Figure 36, I am in the process of composing my answer in the viewer on the lower left. 
From: Wilhe-Sue.pa 
Sub)e'cI: bug;'~ 
To' Teltelman 
cc: W'llhe-sue.pa 
I \y~d what I expected would be a commenl to the exec. e.a. "-- try It now" CR: 
I wat. greet.w WiTh an aCl.ion area announcin&: ERROR IOImpI.EndOfttream[mumble]. 
--try 11 now 
ERROR 1Ol.pi.EadOtstreaa htnlll. 
lapurlapl.GelCtHlarSc.mn",,,Tol:en I 
'-:<lmp!1~~l.]n .1U.1pend~. sJI,'Jrchmj 1.0 Acf.wn Ar~ F .. 
"borted 
&18 compile-all 
"Compile UserExecMet.hodslmpl.mesa UserExeclmpl.me~a 
Compllin&: UserExecMethodslmpl . 
AClhre Deleted AMTypesSuggesl.ions Atoms 
DateAndTime dealerE'XaJIlples DiscusslOn DocumenT.atlOn Forum 
HowTo Humor ImpledSugg InlmePoli io LI$T.; Mise MyB'Jgs 
~!!~~!I~II~~~~!II!lIIII!!~e~~~~~~~ 
MySoggeStlons Nnt-E'bnnklnojex OthersBugs RememberStuff 
RemmderExQlT\ples RlverRe!t Spell Tloia1)unesUons TShlr'\s 
UserE%ecChana-es UserExecPoll UserRequest:; VideoTape 
ViewersSua:a:estions 
Thank~ for your bUii; report, I fixed Ihe- problem 
Figure 36 
Doing Checkpoint. ". 
Closmg Walnut transection. ...done 
(!Io~mg Walnut t.ri3ll~&tl.on .... done 
. 
Walnut t.ransactjon " ,,,done 
IO,Zt.reQlT\Procs, str~~6;ta~ ;iiO:J'J~t;:{7::S~~7: Propllst <-
NIL, backmgStre8lIL: STREAM. NIL] 
.11 + &,streamData 
t[rope "-- try 11 now", P"~: 11] 
.11 Abort 
aborl.ed ACTJon #4, returnmli; t.o Work Area A 
Concurrency: answering mail while compiling 
t94 CompileAII simply keeps track of those files that have been edited. It does not deduce that because Interface A has been 
recompiled. Modules B. C. and D also need to be recompiled. This latter behavior is much more ambitious and falls under the 
category of what we call System Modeling: "The user describes his software in a system model that lists the versions of files used, 
the infonnation needed to compile the system, and the interconnections between the various modules. The modeler is connected 
to the editor and is notified when files are edited and new versions are created" [26]. A preliminary version of a system modeler 
has been built and tested. and a more comprehensive version has been partially implemented. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
71 
while the compiler continues to run in the Work Area at the upper right. t95 
I finish composing the message, and click Send, and the message is sent on its way. In Figure 37, 
the Walnut Control Panel tells me that the message has been delivered. The next time that Willie-Sue 
clicks her NewMail menu button, she will see the message. 
From: Wllhe-Sue.pa 
Subject' bt\g~~ 
To' TelleimMi 
CC' wllhe-sue,po!l 
I typed what I eXPE'Cted would be a c,omment to the exec. e.g "-- try It now" CR; 
I was rreewd With an acuon Mea announcmg ERROR IOlmpl.EndOfSt.rearn[mumble]. 
Alea E ... 
compileall 
)('ompIle UserExecMetho,j3Imp1.me~~ U5erExec.lmpJ me~~ 
Compllmg: U:5erExecMethodslmpl . 
. . no erron 
Compllin&: UserExec.Impl 
1 errors 
End of compilation 
-- ErI'OZS iD. -- UserExeclmpl 
&" 
Ac:ll"e 
DateAndTime dealerexamples 
Docoffienl,alion Forum 
~1'!;~~~~~~~=~~'1~~~~~!1'!!~m~~~ 
HowTo Humor ImpJedSugg InilnePl:lll io Li31,,5 M13C MyBogs 
MySuggest10ns Not.ebookIndex Ot.hersBugs RemernberSwN 
RemlnderEl!ampl~ Rl'I.rerRM! Spell TlOgaEuggeStlons TZhlr's 
UtlerExecCMl"iges UserExecPoli UserRequests VideoTape 
Command: UserExecMet:hodslmpl.mesa 
UserExec~1,hodsImpl.mesa -- sourel!' wJ.:ens: 3116, tune: B 
cooe bytes: 216.2., lmks: 61, frame size: 98 
Command: UserExec.lmpl.mesa 
IF Rope.lsEmpty[rope] OR NOT Rope.Equal("<-", IO.Ge'ICedarToken[stream ! rO.EndOfSt.ream $' 
GOT0 Yes] T 
Error [23869] 
Text m:;erred IS: ] 
UserExeclmpl.mesa - • .,.oorttld, 1 errors, time: 2.5 
Total elapsed time: ~2 
Figure 37 
Compiler error log 
Authenticatmg user ..... ok 
Parsmg. 
Senaing me:;sage ... sendmg w 1 reclplen~ 
.. Message ho3l> been deUllered 
IO.sU'eamProc:;, stxeamDaM: REF 
, propLisl.: Alom.PropLlst .. 
NIL. backmgSt.ream: STREAM" NIL J 
410 .. &.stxeamDat.s 
t[rope: "-- try i1 now", pos· 13J 
411 Abort 
aborted ActJon #4. returning to Work Area A 
Meanwhile, the compiler has successfully compiled the first file (notice in Figure 37 that the black 
border around the fifth icon from the left is now gone), but ran into a problem in compiling the second 
file. The UserExec has created a viewer on the left which displays the compiler log containing the error 
message. 
t95 As mentioned earlier. Cedar supports and encourages concurrent operations, and users make heavy use of this parallelism. 
Here I am sending a message while compiling a file. In this particular case, only one task requires my attention: the other is 
running in background (my background, not the computer's). However, it is not uncommon for users to be perfonning several 
foreground tasks simultaneously, such as editing several source files at the same time, or debugging a program by stepping it from 
breakpoint to breakpoint. while simultaneously reading mail. etc. The important point is that the user's interactions with the system 
can match the style with which he is most comfortable. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
72 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
The error is a simple syntactic error, a missing ']. t96 I'll make this fix and recompile. In the meantime, 
this reminds me that a user had sent me a message about a request concerning the UserExec's behavior 
with regard to the compiler log. I keep such messages in my UserRequests message set. I click the 
UserRequests button in my Walnut Control Panel to create a viewer for this message set, and then click 
the corresponding message in the message set viewer (see Figure 38). 
: no(' [rope: ROllE] RETURN"[~OOU;AN] : 
stream: :nAEAM, 
stream 0-
IO.llls[r~l' -- smce s1.reams ,'l.ire..-'lci..1" acqUired, J.\'e rllljhx consld&r ~T"inB .iJ 
"("r~'.ch ~1r1!\.V/I; .omd v.fing If. 
IP F.op!.IsEmpw[rope] air. NOT Ropeo.l!'qllal[· ..... , lo.GetC'edarToken(stream ! 1Q.E!:ndOfStream 
ro~' GOT .. 1 T~sJ] THEN GOTO "·e;: 
." 
K'Extra$.'JetCedazSc.m.nerToKE'n[st.ream, NIL! 
IO.Syn~Error :' GOTO No, 
lo.FndOf'Sl:reiIDI =' GO'l'O Ye~ 
l' 
ENDLOOP. 
EXITS 
~e: .~:' RREETTl~RRRrVA~~!t 
mt 
~ No~' 82 MBrown.pa 
1 No" 82 MBrown.pa 
nJ~ 13' i;jjJi~ni-.~·· 
31 Jan ~,' Maxwell.pa 
P05SIbll!! l.ime-S-!l~I/!!r 01".1 rollb-!lck 
Re pos;5lble flme-Sal'l!!r on r""llb~k 
:~'Jer..1oi· 
.. 
Nl;lw Icon for (.ompller.lo~ 
IT;5E'rProfile .llsfOfTokens 
/I FE'b 1';3 Swmehart.PA 
In Feb 8~ Hornmj.pa 
.;:; Feb &3 
"ollin~ .pi;! 
Is "What t Mean" different from ·Whal You Mean": 
t) Mar e 3 MBrown.p., 
1 Q Mar 8 ~ S"lewarl .. p6 
;:3 Apt 83 Swmeharl.p" 
211 Apr 63 ;i;wmehMT..PA 
31 May 63 To ie1rm 
"31 May 6~ 
Mc.:orel~hl.pCl 
to ,1un 33 
I don't know what this should do, bul 
Bre.!l:En1ry o~n~ 1rteWer 
.:oompller errlog.; 
A coupl/!! ot nit;:; 
Re: A couple ot nil'; 
am I runnma this m;'lSlOll at a. bcd~ 
Callm~ procedl,.ue,; from Ihe command line 
. 
,yearn 
Icon or 
recreate Ih~ VIE'WE'I 
unrequested ltI-!1ten&lzed u~er ~c-!llJse It's 
laler whE'ln I WMiI 10 see Ihe lew}ls. t ballp. 
Wh09'P.1't'r Il)", tIme I~ Ih-"'-I reql\j~d t(l ·tum 11 
MI~·-way 
::'.:::','."··,",,-CCa ~~~':tion 
l:'at.e 
~!H':'C1-8.:' l/1'l(l:l~ pr'T 
J'rnm: i':r,Umg.pa 
~·l1b.1E-(t ....... mpllE'r.lo@ 
To. tellei!l'1al'1 
r," kollmj.pa 
What ne-w fE'atures I would hJ:e to be ablE' m SpE'oty 1£1 h.:me happE'n tQ The compiler .lO!! at thl!' 
f!nd of a. ,.-ompi1atJ.on 
Figure 38 
A user request 
The User Profile 
... 10 compileall 
, 
'Compile UserExecMethodslmpl me~ UserExf!'cimpi.me-sa 
Compllmg: U5erExec~1hodsImpl " 
. no errors 
Compiling: UserExeclmpJ. 
. I erro.rs 
End of complJ.!JUon 
-- 6rmrs is -- UrerExeclmpl 
&11 Redo 10 
>complleall 
~Complle U~erExeclmpl.mesa 
CompiHn&:: UserExecImpl 
Authentlu.t1ng user .... ok 
Par.:51n~ .... ,. Sendmg message, . .:.endm& 1.0 1 reclplent.; 
.,. Message has been dell11ered 
lS of typE' STREAM: TYPE 
~g~~!!~i~~~~;~~JnY6!o= ~::C'",'~cl'~:~':,< :~", 
NIL. bac.);mgStream: STREAM. 
&18 f- .& .sll'edJtlClata 
,[rope' "-- t.ry Jt now", pes 1'] 
&11 Abort 
03borl.ed Action #4, returnlni 1£1 W(trk Aree- A 
The message (bottom viewer, left column in Figure 38) states that the user wants to be able to 
specify that compiler logs are always created iconic instead of being open, as in Figure 37. Since some 
users like the way compiler logs currently work, to satisfy this user's request, I am going to define a new 
user profile option so that each user can specify how they want the compiler log handled. In the area of 
user interface, rather than enforcing a consensus upon everyone, we allow individuals to tailor the system 
to suit themselves, enabling facilities that they like and disabling those that they don't. For example, I'll 
open my profile. 
t96 The compiler log includes for each error a position (character count) in the ~urce file, e.g., in Figure 37 the Syntax Error 
occurred at position 23868. The user selects this position. and then clicks the Position menu button in the corresponding source 
file and the source tile is automatically positioned at the indicated location (as I have done in Figure 38). The user can thus quickly 
step through the source tile from error to error and make the necessary edits. Even so. the process of getting a tile to compile 
successfully is still very tedious. More tools are required. For example. many compiler errors tum out to be of the nature that their 
correction could be automated. One could imagine an extension of DWIM that would handle this task. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
yearn 
~a~:~~~~dl ~:!l:l!:~ 1~1:v:::u~~a~'s~~~: ",_,,~'C,:::o:,·_ ~;"C 
whate"er \.hI!' lIme 15 That's reqUired t.J "Iurn II ort" IS 
anyway. 
DalE" 
~S ·o..Xl-62 14:10:1~ pr'T 
From: kollll'li;.pa 
SUbjeCT complier lo~ 
To: l.eitf'lman 
c( kollmj;.p-, 
What nE'W fE'aTUre~ I would like 1.0 ~ able I£) specify 1£1 have happerl to \.he compller.lo& aT. the 
end of Co cl:>mptlatlon' 
['on', ""'er blink \1 
If It':!; n~lIher lcomc llor a ~11€'Wer. make II an Icon on thl:' LH ,noe 
Karen 
Rod, 
;'complle&l 
":;ompile Userl!xElcliCtl-'I.mesa 
C(lmpllmg USF.'rExerlmpl 
End ofcompilatlOn 
.. 11 
ACtiI7E' 
. PDT 
Dal.e"AndTime dll!a].erexamples r'ISCl)ssjon DocUffle'nt.3lion Forum 
HawTo Humor ImpledS1Jn': InlmePoll io 
LI~I'; MI5C MyBugs 
.!!!IIIJ!I!!!!!I"'IIII!!!!I!!!!!II!!.~!!!!!",~q~II!I!!III!!!!!I'-"!'-II!II!I!!!!"'I!II.1I4 ~~~~~~~;!::Pl~OI~~:~~!~X s~l~e~!~~u:;:~~:;rS;~~rt~ 
u~erexec 
Cre;:ot,@oSesslOnlog: Tlltl!: 
Crea~WorkAre-3l.0is: !'ALSE 
I:Ulal.echan~esLo[: TillIE 
CommandllP rom: telT.elman (ommM"lds 
WhenlogFlleE:mt.> Apper,d 
NI?wf."'ff.Uselocl:, Tilt'!: 
spellill8 ['orre{'tor 
Spetll.conflrm. ~rlmeMI~t&es 
Sp:-ILinform: a11Accot'nlerJPor 
Spell.t~meout: 6000 
Spell.def",ulT-Confum TIIUE 
f'ompiler 
(·ompller.DetrroyLo~(lnSuccess: TrlU! 
('nmpiler AutOf'<ll1€': TIlUE 
Figure 39 
UserExecChange~ U~rExecPoll UserRequests VideoTape 
AUI.hen'~C"'tlng U5er 
.. ok 
... Partmg ...... Senclmj! mess",j!e ... .;endmll 10 I reCipient:; 
... Message hoM been deliltered 
I!).s'reamProC$, sl-l'eamDat.,· REF 
Nil, backlDiStre.am: STREAM" NIL] 
&10 + &.stream[ial.3 
1[rope' ".- try It now", po;;: BJ 
411 Abort 
aborTed AclJon #4, returning TO Work Area A 
User profiles allow tailoring of the system to suit individual tastes 
As you can see (lower left in Figure 39), my profile specifies a variety of options and defaults. 
73 
Let's implement the new profile option. I'll create a new viewer, load it with the appropriate source 
file, and then scroll to the procedure ShowLog, where I want to make the change. What I want to do 
is to insert a conditional statement that will check the user's profile to determine whether or not to create 
the viewer for the compiler log iconic. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
74 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Abbreviation Expansion and Templates as an Aid for Editing Programs 
To accomplish this, I will use Tioga's abbreviation expansion facility to cause a template for an 
IF-THEN statement to be inserted. To do this, I type IF followed by CfRL-E (E with the CTRL key 
depressed). This causes Tioga to expand the abbreviation for IF into the template you see in Figure 
40. t97 This template contains two fields, TEST and TRUEPART, each delimited by special brackets called 
placeholders, which are displayed as .~. Tioga allows me to move to the next/previous field delimited 
by placeholders with a single keystroke. If I am positioned at one of these fields, anything I type 
automatically replaces the field. In Figure 40, I am ready to specify the predicate for my IF-THEN 
statement. 
Clear ~ 
Get Getlmpl PrevFile ~ 
Save Time Split Places Levels ChangeLog 
Find Word Def Position Normalize PrevPlace Reselect 
FirstLevelOnly MoreLevels FewerLevels AllLevels 
ShowLog: PROC [name: ROPE, ok: BOOLEAN, exec: ExecHandle, blinklt: BaaL i- TRUE] 
RETURNS[log: Viewer] = { 
log i- ViewerOps.FindViewer[name]; 
IF NOT ok THEN 
{ 
createlconic: BOOLEAN i- TRUE; 
IF exec # NIL AND NOT exec ,viewer ,iconic AND (InputFocus,GetlnputFocus[],owner = 
exec,viewer) THEN createlconic i- FALSE; 
IF I)'.CI THEN HRUEPARH 
IF log # NIL THEN ViewerOps,RestoreViewer[log] 
ELSE IF UserExec,CheckForFile[name] THEN log i- CreateLog[name: name, iconic: 
createlconic]; --·log no~ 'lhere in C03Se of' no such source 
} 
ELSE IF log # NIL THEN ( 
}; 
IF destroyLogOnSuccess THEN {ViewerOps.DestroyViewer[log]; log i- NIL} 
E LS E ViewerOps ,Restore Viewer [10 g]; 
}; 
CreateLog: PROC [name: ROPE, iconic: BaaL i- TRUE] RETURNs[viewer: Viewer] = { 
viewer i- ViewerOps ,CreateViewer [flavor: $Text, info: [name: name, file: name, iconic: 
iconic]] 
}; 
Blinklcon: PUBLIC PROC [icon: Viewer, n: INT i- 10] = TRUSTED { 
Process.Detach[FoRK Blink[icon, n]]; 
Figure 40 
Tioga abbreviation expansion facility 
t97 The Tioga abbreviation expansion facility helps the user in dealing with the Cedar syntax, avoiding errors, and formatting 
programs consistently. There are similar abbreviations for many of the language constructs in Cedar, e.g., FOR expands to FOR 
.ControIVariable~ .... lnitiaIExpr~, .NextExpr~ 00 .BODY~ ENDLOOP. In addition. the user can add to or change the 
set of predefined abbreviations. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
75 
The predicate I want to use is the procedure UserProfile.Boolean. I type the name of the procedure, 
UserProfile.Boolean, and then I type CTRL-E again, this time to request a template for its arguments. 
Note that UserProfile.Boolean is not defined as an abbreviation: Tioga computes a template consisting 
of the names, types, and default values for this procedure using the run-time type system, and inserts it 
in the document as shown in Figure 41.t98 
Clear ~ 
Get Getlmpl PrevFile ~ 
Save Time Split Places Levels ChangeLog 
Find Word Def Position Normalize PrevPlace Reselect 
FirstLevelOnly MoreLevels FewerLevels All Levels 
ShowLog: PROC [name: ROPE, ok: BOOLEAN, exec': ExecHandle, blinkIt: BOOL ~ TRUE] 
RETURNS[log: Viewer] = { 
log ~ ViewerOps.FindViewer[name]j 
IF NOT ok THEN 
{ 
createIconic: BOOLEAN ~ TRUE; 
IF exec # NIL AND NOT exec.viewer.iconic AND (InputFocus.GetlnputFocus[].owner = 
exec.viewer) THEN createIconic ~ F ALSEj 
IF userprofile.Boolean[key:l'-'Z], default: .,BOOLEAN ~ FALSE.] THEN 
HRUEPARH 
IF log # NIL THEN ViewerOps.RestoreViewer[10g] 
ELSE IF UserExec.CheckForFile[name] THEN log ~ CreateLog[name: name, iconic: 
createIconic]; -- log not there in C03.5e of' no such source 
} 
ELSE IF log # NIL THEN { 
}j 
IF destroyLogOnSuccess THEN {ViewerOps.DestroyViewer[log]j log ~ NIL} 
E LS E ViewerOps .Restore Viewer [10 g] j 
}j 
CreateLog: PROC [name: ROPE, iconic: BOOL ~ TRUE] RETURNs[viewer: Viewer] = { 
viewer ~ ViewerOps.CreateViewer[flavor: $Text, info: [name: name, file: name, iconic: 
iconic]] 
}j 
Blinklcon: PUBLIC PROC ~ic0l"l:: Viewer~ n: INT ~ 10] = TRUSTED { 
Figure 41 
Computing a template for a procedure call 
As the template indicates, UserProfile.Boolean takes two arguments: the first is named key, and is 
of type ROPE, the second is named default. and is of type BOOLEAN. I'll call the key for the new user 
profile option that I am going to define Compiler.lconicLogs. If the value of this key is TRUE, i.e., if 
the user's profile contains an entry of the form Compiler.lconicLogs: TRUE, then we make the compiler 
log viewer iconic (by setting the variable createlconic to TRUE). The entire statement that I inserted is: 
IF UserProfile.Boolean[key: "Compiler.lconicLogs", default: FALSE] THEN createlconic +- TRUE; 
but I only had to type the underlined characters plus two CTRL-E'S. 
t98 
Runtime availability of all source program information was one of the priority B items on our original catalogue of 
programming environment capabilities. Underlying this was our desire to make it easy to extend the set of tools for assisting the 
programmer. The computed template facility shown here is a good example of the kind of thing we had in mind. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
76 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Using the Interpreter for Experimentation 
There was another request in my UserRequests message set concerning compiler logs, namely that 
the compiler log use the typescript icon rather than the document icon, to make it easier to distinguish 
the compiler log from other iconic Tioga documents. If we look at all of the icons at the bottom of 
Figure 39, we can indeed see that it is hard to find the compiler log among all these other documents 
with the same icon (it's in the center). 
Before we make this edit, let's try changing the icon for this viewer by hand, i.e., by using the 
interpreter. t99 So I'll reopen my interpreter Work Area, select the compiler log, and use the Eval menu 
button to evaluate the current selection (see Figure 42). 
'{ Nov 8:' MBrown,}:.a 
'{ No~· 82 MBrown,p", 
I~]an 83 kollmg.pa 
'3:1 "San '83 M«tWe:u,pe. 
/I P",I;) 
~, Swmehart,PA 
\0 p~" e~ Hornmi.pa 
::~ Feb ~~ I:ollmg.pa 
13 Mar 83 MBrown,p", 
1~ Mar 83 
~1E'Warl.p.oo 
23 Apr 83 Swmehart.pa 
::11 Apr 83 Swmehart..PA 
31 May 83 To it'''m 
31 Ma,.v R~ Mc('rel,ihl,pa 
" Jun 8S l'anieunen.pa 
Warren. 
possible tlme-sa~'er on rollback 
Re poulbl", IJ.me-Sa"E'f on rollbacy. 
compller.log 
-Wei"; lWH trir ~lIer;lrjg 
llserProf'llE'.lI5t0fTokenz 
I" ·WhaT I Mean" dlfff.'rent from "What You Mean"~ 
I eo:>n', know wh~1 t-hl~ sho~lltJ 0:10, \)t1f 
Breill:Entry opens Viewer 
(,'offiPlIererrlogs 
A (ouple of nilS 
Re: A couple of mt.; 
oM'! I funmng llu~ "'!Inion of " bed' 
Calltng: pro(edlJre~ from The ("omman,j lme 
beyond' 
('ould you chan~E' V1E'wE'rExE'c0pslmpI ShowRE'sull ~o ThaT The complIer 10~'3 Icon l~ a 'YPE'SCrJpl 
tnstead of.3 docull'lent~ Hen;' IS The necessary code: 
log 
0- \l1E'we-r0ps Cre-.3Te\lI"'wer[O.3~ror $Te~t. mfo' [name: n.3l"ilE', fIle name. IC"Onl(" lC"omc. icon' 
typescriPT]] 
log 
0-
Vlewer0p~ Cre..,TeVlewer[Oeo1r(lr. $Te:.:I, mfo: [n.:vne n.3l"il>3. flle name. ICOniC ICOniC ll; 
" Tr<t:rt:; 
IF lo~ II Hll. THEN VlewerC'Pt.Ri!'tlOri!'Vlewer[lo~J 
£l.~t: IF UserExec.CheckForFile[namel THEN log .. ':::re.3telog[name nM"le. ic-onic 
creaTelc(lnlc]; 
-- 1&g n07 There m ~a.:ie 0( no sv~h sovrce 
) 
t:L(!"t: If" log # NIL THEN { 
), 
~f"l::~;:";eor~=;;~~~~::;\.il:!:rr\~;1~e1")P5.DeSTMY"leWl!'r[IOg]; lot .. Nn} 
l' 
Crea.ceLog PROC" [name ROPt:, 180mc FOOL 
~ TRUE] RETVRN~["II!'Wer Viewer] • { 
'r]ewer .. Vl ... wer0l"'~ cre-!lleVlewer[fla,mr $Tl!'xt, tnt..,: [n-!I:Me nMne, Ole t"lMlIe, IconIC 
tCOnlC]] 
Figure 42 
11:44'44 PDT 
Atom~ Bat:kBurner 
Di:!TeAndTime dealerE'xamples DisclJssion r'O(UffiO?nl-21110n Forull'l 
HowTo Humor Impll?dSugg InilnePoll 
\0 
Ll~T.s MI5C MyBugs 
My;::U~gesIIOns Nr)le'oooklndex 
('thersBu~s 
Rell'leffiber~ll1ff 
RemmderExamples Rl"",rRatl SpE'1l 
T1og-a;::ug~esllotlJ T;':hu'.; 
UserExecChi3J"lg''''s U5E'r:ExE'cPoll U5erRequest5 
\lldeoT~pe 
V1E'wersf:u &gestlon.~ 
AUThenl.icaTing. us",r 
ok 
Parsmi' .... Sendmg ll'IE'ssaf:'" ... sendmg 1(1 I reclplo!'nlJ 
.. Message has been deh"ered 
S,",B1"~a" U-~tE,,~cMi-crmit.m~:* 1."\391 
sel. 
Bre>ak #1 In U-,,,,r:Ex,,,cMuclmpl.Pnnt,D,,,clFromf.:olJtce (50Ulce' 
I~flq]) 
~tern .. T1ogaOps.C're.,\.eSIiAplePatlern(l.arge'J; --
CFIN"leS·~ 
p.~w~rn (or '.he Je.;I1'Ch 
&11 Redo t4 
'0- P,ope.Find ~ 
l~ of type 
Er~ #/ In !JJl?rl!Xev:;N/ISJ:Impl.PnnfDfflFmm.':oIJITe 
(:"ompvT.JfJOn svspe-lldPd. :m'ITchms fl] AC~Qn .4.l-l"~ ,_~ 
PRQc" [~1. 32 
ROPE, pozl: INT .. 0, casE': BOOL .. TI<UEJ Jl.ETUJl.N' [INT]; 
-- ilkp. Index. refurnJ J.l(Ull.lf)n Il'l "/lI'here s" /XOJrJ (J'.yTS 
lookmg aT poo l.r 
- - returns -I l( nOT (OUDd 
-- C.J.11J .. \ conI!! o( ~h.y.JC!ers 1$ slgmfJ.-:..mT 
&18 Redo II 
.... Rope.Flnd.' 
IS of Typo: 
Br~' #1 m Use-rExI!CNIlsclmp1.P1"mtt:'et:lFromSo1..!rcl? 
(:"ompvT.J'Jon svspended. SVlITChmj; ID ActJon .4.roS<;< 
,~, 
~~t.DnM 
&19 C'urrentZO?lecuon 
{Viewer - class: Texl, flam", ('omptler Lo& f 
&2' <-
Using the interpreter to experiment 
t99 Using the interpreter to try things out before going to the trouble of making changes to a program is a technique that is 
relatively new to the Mesa community (although it has been commonplace in Interlisp for many years). Part of the reason for this 
is historical. All levels of the Mesa system are written in Mesa itself. even the lowest level of run-time support. i.e .. there is no 
assembly code or other language. Since using source-level debugging was desirable for the entire system. even those primitives that 
the debugger itself would need to operate. the solution adopted was to implement a non-resident or world-swap debugger, one in 
which the debugger operated at ann's length from the debuggee in an entirely separate address space. Interpreting expressions in 
this remote world was slow and cumbersome. Furthennore. the interpreter only handled a limited subset of the language, 
We had higher aspirations for Cedar: to provide a resident debugger. one that shared the same address space as the programs 
being debugged. as well as a complete expression interpreter. (A world-swap debugger is included in Cedar. however. for debugging 
those levels of the system that are more primitive than the debugger itself.) Thus. the Cedar environment represents the first 
opportunity that Mesa programmers have had for using an interpreter to carry out experiments. Consequently. this style has not 
yet caught on. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
77 
&19 CurrentSelection 
{Viewer - class: Text, name: Compiler.Log} 
The value of this event is the viewer for the Compiler Log. I can manipulate this value. For example, 
let's look at its icon field. 
&20 +- &19.icon 
document 
As expected. Now let's change this field to be typescript. The simplest way to do this is to repeat 
the previous line up to but not including the CR. I can do this with a single keystroke (by typing ESC). 
Now I'll complete the line by typing an assignment that will assign a new value to the icon. 
&21 +- &19.icon +- typescriptt 
typescriptt -> typescript 
typescript 
Obviously. I am making some of these typing mistakes just to demonstrate the pervasiveness of the 
error-correction facilities. However. this correction is especially interesting because, in this case, DwrM 
uses as candidates for the correction only the set of values that an object of type icon can assume. In 
order to find what these are. DwrM uses the run-ime type system to compute this information when the 
error occurs. In this way. DWIM can work on user defined types as well as those that are defined in the 
basic system. 
Now let's repaint the icon an.d see how it looks. I can do this by using the procedure PaintViewer, 
which is in the interface ViewerOps. 
&22 +- ViewerOps.PaintViewer[&19] 
-. -Missing Arguments: hint: ViewerOps.PaintHint 
What's a paint hint? I'll evaluate it and find out.tlOO 
&23 +- ViewerOps.PaintHint 
ViewerOps.PaintHint: TYPE = {all, client, menu, caption} 
This says that a PaintHint is an enumerated type consisting of the four values all, client, menu, 
and caption. I'll bet I can just pass in all for the hint argument. However, there may be other arguments 
to PaintViewer that also have to be specified, so I'll use the template feature again to construct a template 
for PaintViewer, as shown in FIgure 43. 
t 100 Note that in this example. we are evaluating an expression whose value is a type. One of the goals of Cedar was to make 
types into first-class citizens. We have not succeeded in making much progress on this so far with respect to the Cedar language: 
it is not possible to pass types around as values. and there is no polymorphism in the language. However. with regard to the Cedar 
run-time system. it is possible to perform a wide variety of operations on types. e.g .. given a record type. compute the names and 
types for each field. or. given a REF type. compute the type of the referent. Here is an example of an application: a user tried to 
use the interpreter to call a procedure one of whose arguments was defined to be of type LIST OF ROPE. For this argument. he 
typed L1ST["abc". "def'). a list of ropes. but got an error message complaining that the value supplied was of type LIST OF REF 
ANY. This is a current shortfall in the interpreter: whenever it sees LIST. it constructs a LIST OF REF ANY regardless of the 
target type. However. it was fairly straightforward to extend DWIM to perform the necessary coercion after the fact. This involved 
writing a procedure which took a type. TYP. and a value. VAL. and: (1) determined whether TYP was of the form LIST OF REF 
T for some type T. (2) if so. determined the type of the elements of the list. i.e .. REF T. (3) checked that VAL was of type LIST 
OF REF ANY. (4) if so. iterated down VAL and verified that each element was in fact of type REF T. and finally (5) constructed 
a new value of type LIST OF REF T whose elements were the corresponding elements of VAL. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
78 
g 
BOOL ~ TRUE] 
name, iconic: 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
comput.!tion suspended, sl\Titching to Action Are.! C ... PROC [s I, s2: 
ROPE, pos I: INT ~ 0, case: BOOL ~ TRUE] RETURNS [INT]; 
-- like Index, returns position in sJ l\There s2 occurs (st.!rts 
looking at pos J) 
- - returns - J if' not fOund 
-- CdSe =} CdSe of' characters is signiflcant 
&18 Redo 11 
>~ Rope.Find? 
is of type 
Break # J in UserExeci't'liscImpl.PrintDeclFromSource 
comput.!tion suspended, sl\Titching to Action Are.! C ... 
aborted 
& 19 CurrentSelection 
{Viewer - class: Text, name: Compiler.Log} 
&20 ~ &19.icon 
document 
&21 ~ &19.icon ~ typescriptt 
(vpescriptt -) (vpescript 
typescript 
&22 ~ ViewerOps.PaintViewer[&19] 
---Missing Argumenu: hiD': VieJll'erOps.PaintHiD' 
&23 ~ ViewerOps.PaintHint 
ViewerOps.PaintHint: TYPE = {all, clie.n~t,.m!llen~u., IIcal\iP.til·o,n.,aa1ll 
&24 ~ Viewerops.PaintViewer[viewer:~ 
hint: "ViewerOps.PaintHint~, clearClie 
whatChanged: "REF ANY ~ NIL~] 
Figure 43 
Computing a template for a procedure call to be executed 
There are two additional arguments. clearClient aDd whatChanged. but both have default values 
so I can omit them. I fill in the viewer field with the viewer I want to repaint. which is the value of 
event 19, fill in the hint field with all, and I'm done. tIOI 
&24 +- ViewerOps.PaintViewer[viewer: &19, hint: all] 
{does not return a value} 
tlOl It is interesting to consider how few keystrokes and mouse actions were actually necessary to construct the expression: 
ViewerOps.PaintViewer[viewer: &19, hint: all]. First, I selected the word "ViewerOps" in event 22 by clicking in that word using 
the middle button on my mouse; then I extended the selection to include "PaintViewer" by clicking in the latter word using the 
right button. Both of these selections were performed while holding the SHIff Key down. I then lifted the SHIff key causing 
the entire selection, i.e., the characters "ViewerOps.PaintViewer," to be inserted into the Work Area. Next I typed CfRL-E to 
construct the template shown in Figure 43, SHIff-selected the word "&19" from event 22, hit the NEXT key on my keyboard to 
move the caret to the hint: field; SHIff-selected "all" from the value of event 23; and then finally hit CfRL-NEXT to delete the 
remaining argument fields. all of which have default·values, and to advance the caret to just past the "l." I completed the event 
by typing CR. Total: 4 mouse clicks. 4 keystrokes. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
BOOL ~ TRUE] 
name, iconic: 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
comput3tion suspended, switching to Aaion Are.! C ... PROC [51, 52.: 
ROPE, posl: INT +- 0, case: BOOL +- TRUE] RETURNS [INT]; 
--like Index, returns position in s1 p,There s2 occurs (St3rts 
looking dt pos 1) 
-- returns -1 if not fiJund 
-- case =) case of chdtdCt.ers is signitJc.mt 
&18 Redo 17 
> 
+- Rope .Find ? 
is of type 
Bredk # 1 in UserExecNIiscimpl.PrintDeclFromSource 
comput3tion suspended, sp,Titching to Action Are.! C ... 
doort.ed 
& 19 CurrentSelection 
{Viewer - class: Text, name: Compiler.Log} 
&20 +- & 19.icon 
document 
&11 +- & 19.icon +- typescriptt 
tvpescriptt -) typescript 
typescript 
&22 +- ViewerOps.PaintViewer[ & 19] 
***MititiiDg ArguliII8Dts: hiDt: Vi8l111'8rOpti.PaiDtHiDt 
&23 +- ViewerOps.PaintHint 
ViewerOps.PaintHint: TYPE = {all, Client, menu, caption} 
&24 +-
ViewerOps.PaintViewer[~liewer: & 19, hint: all] 
{does not return a value} 
&2S +-
Figure 44 
The icon for the Compiler Log has been changed to a typescript 
79 
Sure enough, the icon for the compiler log is now a typescript. I can now implement this feature by 
editing the source, which is still in the viewer immediately to the left. 
XEROX PARC,CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
80 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
However, now I find that while I have made it easy to distinguish the compiler log from the other 
documents, there are so many typescript icons that it is hard to find the compiler log among all of them 
(Figure 45). 
1 NO~I 8':: MBrown.pa 
posslble time-sauer on rollback 
1 Nov 82. MBrown.p<I 
Re: PlJs511)le I.ime-scover on rollback 
12 Jan 8.~ };olhn;g;.pa 
compller.log 
:.,t:}om:(I:~ ~;pa' :":'::WIit:w:~wa:ttii:~Uj;jtilOg::':':'" 
4 Feb e~ Swineh&-1.,PA 
UserProfile,liSTOfToken! 
10 Feb 6S Hormng.pa 
Is "What I Mean" (litteren~ !rom "WhaT You Mean"? 
ZS Feb 83 kolhng.pa 
I don', know what thls should do, but 
B MQl" 83 MBrown.pa 
:BreakEntry opens \>iE'wer 
19 Mar 83 sfewart,pa 
Complier errlogs 
23 Apr 63 SWLnehart.pa 
A couple of m~ 
24 Apr 63 Swmeh.ext.PA 
Re: A couple of m~ 
31 Ma,y 8S To: levin 
.ml I running mis version of a b~d? 
31 May 83 McCrelii'ht,pa 
Callmg procedures from t.he command lme 
Ii Jun 83 vanleunen.p.:. 
beyond .... 
Warren. 
('ouk' you change VlewerExecOpslmpl.ShowResult so that the complier leg's Icon is a typescript. 
Instead. of a documem: Here IS the necessary COde: 
log. f. VlewerOps.('reateVlewt"r[tlavor: $TexT. mfo: [name: name. file: name. iconiC: tcom>:, Kon 
Iypescript]) 
insTead of: 
lo~ ~ Vlewerops.createVlewer[flavor: SText. mfo: [name: name. file: name, ICOfilC: IconiC]]; 
Figure 45 
DaTeAndTime dealerexamples Discussion Documentation Forum 
HowTo Humer ImpledSugg InlmePoll Ie LisT.S Mise MyBugs 
MySuggestions Notebooklndex OthersBugs RememberSr.uff 
RemlnderE'xamples IUverRaf't Spell TiogaSu ggestions TShirts 
UserExecCh.mge~ U~rExecPol1 U.serRequetU VideoTape 
Authenticating user 
... ok 
.. PMslng."". I'>8ndmg message. "sendmg W 1 reCipients 
". Message h~ been dell'.1"ered 
Seillreax U!erExe~Mi!~Irr:Ip1.lnesa 13891 
set. 
Break #1 in U~erExecMisc.lmpl.PrintDecIFromSource (seurce: B891) 
mM:.,t.ern f. TlogaOps.CreateSlmplePattern[target]; ~~ CEtn."I.8$ d 
p.3lremi'tlr lheseaJ'(;n 
.17 Redo 14 
~~ Repe.Find? 
1$ of type 
BrIMic # I in U"~rEKecN[l"clmpl.Prm1,[)fJcIFrQm$Qurce 
co"ltqJl.J"l.atian suspended. swi1.Cnmg 1£1 AC:!lon Ara;o C ... »ROC" (51, 52: 
ROPE, post: INT ... O. c'!tl'e: 1I00L'" TRur:] RETURN" [INT]; 
~~ llk~ lnd~x, r~Wrn" pt»Won m 51 v,'lIere s2 occurs (sml.s 
looking at PQ51.! 
~~ relums ~11f 1101 fOund 
~~ case- :.\ C&ie Qf characters lS slgmfIc.m1 
.11 Redo 17 
If. Rope,Fmd? 
is of type 
Break #1 in U3erl!xeoci't113clmp!.PrintDecIFrQmS"ou1'ce 
compvtdt./Qn suspended, s1'.'itchinc ta Act]on Ar~ C .. 
... ,"" 
.n CurrentSelection 
i~~:er'&'19~l:~: Text. name: Compller.Log} 
document 
.21 ~ &19.tcon f. I.ypescriptt 
"Q-'pescriptl ~> "{vpescript 
typescript 
&.22. ~ ViewerOps.PamtVIswer[&19] 
***Mi66ilJ.l ArguaelJ.u: l.Iizn: ViewezOps.PaiZltlliat 
.23 .. VlewerOps.PainTHint 
Vlewerops.PamtHint.: TYPE: {all, client, menu, caption} 
.24 ... VlewerOps.PamIVlewer[vlewer: &. 19, hInt: all] 
{does not reTurn a lfalue} 
.2S .. 
Now there are too many typescript icons 
Designing a New Icon 
One way of solving the problem of too many typescript icons is to use a different icon for some of 
the executives. I'll use a graphics tool called the Icon Editor to design a new icon for Action Areas 
executives (the two executives on the right in Figure 45). 
&25 run iconeditor 
Loaded and started: Icon Editor. bed 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
Figure 46 
The Icon Editor 
DocumentatJon Forum 
HowTo Humor ImpledSugg InlmePoll Ie Lists Mise My8ugs 
MyS'uUestions Notebooktndex OthersBugs RememberStutf 
RemmderExamples Rl1rerRaft Spell TiogaSu ggestions TZhlrts 
Use:rl!xecChomges 
U~rExecPoll UserReque,!:1$ ViI:'leoT.,pe 
Resml. fimshed 
Authenticating U3er .... "ok 
.. Pa;rsmg ...... Sending message ..... sendmg to 1 rec.lpient.:; 
.. Message h'M been dehvered 
ccnnpu'l.3.'J"tm suspended, s""ltchinS '1J) 
Are.;. 
dborted 
,. It Curren~lec.tion 
{Viewer - c.lass: Text, name: Compiler,Log} 
&11 f- &19.1con 
doc.ument 
&21 to &i9.lcon .. typescrlpt.1 
lVpesl;ripn "~ tVpesl;rlpt 
typesc.rtpt 
"'-11 .. VIf!'werOps.PainfVlewer('& 19) 
···Mi53illl A7IUlaIHJ.U: biat: VieweTOps.PaiatHiDt 
&2.3 .. vlewerOps.PainIHint 
VlewerOps.PamtHint: TYPE 
~ {all. client, menu, c.aptIon} 
&24 f-
VlewerOps.PamtVlewer[~llewer: &19, hinl.: .all) 
{!joe,; not return a value} 
&25 .. 
-- Ermrlf 
"'II Redo 
>Compileall 
>Complle UserExecimpl.mes.:o 
Compiling: UserExecimpl ... . no errors 
End of compilation 
"'12 run lconeditor 
Loaded and st.artad: IconEdlfor.bcd 
& .. 
81 
In Figure 46, the Icon Editor contains some of the icons that other people have designed for various 
applications. The Squirrel icon is for our data base facility which is named Squirrel. Next to it is the 
Walnut mail reader icon you have already seen. Also included in the two rows of icons are an icon for 
a calendar, a bus schedule, a TV listing, an organization chart, etc. The last icon in the second row is 
the traffic Light icon I am working on (for executives stopped because of a signal). 
The 64 x 64 array of squares that occupies the lower two-thirds of the Icon Editor's viewer represents 
the individual pixels in the icon currently being edited. I can change individual pixels from black to 
white or vice versa by clicking with the mouse in the corresponding square. I can also draw lines, change 
rectangular areas to different textures (stiple patterns), shift rectangular areas up, down, left or right. As 
I make changes in this array, the smaller version of the icon is updated so that I can see how the icon 
is going to look, actual size. You can see this as I make a few finishing touches to my icon:-darkening 
the red light and adding rays of light coming from it. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
82 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Figure 47 
Designing a new icon 
I'm happy with the icon now,so I'll save it on a file. I'll also associate the name "trafficLight" with 
this icon by using the Register menu button Icon Editor viewer. This will allow me to refer to the icon 
by name without having to remember where it is stored. 
Now let's use the interpreter to change the icon of one of my executives to be the traffic Light and 
see how it looks. First, we obtain an exec handle using the same method we did earlier, namely selecting 
the viewer and evaluating the current selection. 
&26 ... CurrentSelection 
l' [viewer: 
{Viewer 
-
class: 
Typescript, 
name: 
Action 
Area 
E: 
aborted 
ERROR 
IOlmpl,EndOfStream from InputlmpI,GetCedarScannerToken1}, privateStuff: 724604481'] 
This value is the handle for Work Area E. Now let's set its icon to be a traffic Light. 
&27 ... &26.icon ... IconRegistry.Getlcon["trafficLight"] 
selection failed on icon 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-ll, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
83 
The viewer is one of the fields of the exec handle, and icon is one of the fields of the viewer. I am 
one level of indirection off: I should have said" &26.viewer.icon." Since what I did type is correct in 
every other respect, I can fix this error by simply replaying the line by typing ESC, ~ointing at the "." in 
"&26.icon,", and typing "viewer," as I am in the process of doing in Figure 48.tl 2 
Restart. finished 
Authenticating user ...... ok 
... Parsing ...... Sending message ..... sending to 1 recipients 
... Message has been delivered 
V~urL ~':'~re3 E Int.erpret.er 
Find Split New Stop Compile Eval Redo Set. Clear 
&23 .. ViewerOps.PaintHint 
ViewerOps.PaintHint.: TYPE = {all, client, menu, caption} 
&24 .. ViewerOps.PaintViewer[viewer: &19, hint: all] 
{does not return a value} 
&25 CurrentSelection 
1'[viewer: {Viewer - class: Typescript, name: Action Area E: 
aborted ERROR IOImpl.EndOfStJeam from 
Inpu t1mpl.GetCedarScannerToken I}, pri" ateStuff: 72.460 44B l' ] 
&26 .. &25.icon .. IconRegistry.Getlcon["traf'ficLight"] 
selection tailed on icon 
&21 .. &25.vie.icon f- IconRegistry.Getlcon["trafficLight"] 
" 
),~rl-Irt 
i.!!.~re,~ i":'i E :0:81-' 1 II ,,:;rp 
Find Split. New Stop 
Compile E"al Redo Set Clear 
>Compile UserExecMethodslmpl.mesa. UserExeclmpl.mesa 
Compiling: UserExecMethodslmpl 
. no errors 
Compiling: UserExeclmpl 
1 errors 
E:nd of compilation 
-- Errors in -- UserExeclmpl 
&11 Redo 10 
>compileall 
>ComDile UserExecImDl.mesa. 
Figure 48 
Editing events as they are being composed 
&28 ~ &26.viewer.icon ~ IconRegistry.Getlcon["trafficLight"] 
278? 
t103 
t102 In previous examples. the caret was always at the end of the typescript. so that our editing consisted of simply appending 
characters. This example illustrates that we really can edit. in the full generality of the term. events that are being entered for 
execution. 
tlm The type of an icon is somewhat esoteric: it is a MACHINE DEPENDENT enumerated type. The predefined icons such 
as document. typescript. tool. etc .. have names for the corresponding values. and hence print nicely. However. user-defined icons 
print in the strange fashion you see here. Ignore it. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-ll, JUNE 1984 
84 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Now let's repaint the icon for Action Area E and see how it looks. We already have an expression 
in event 24 that is pretty close to what we want, namely ViewerOps.PaintViewer[viewer: &19, hint: 
all]. We can use the use command to specify reexecution of this event with a different value for the 
viewer argument tI04 
&29 use "&25.viewer" for &19 
)+- ViewerOps.PaintViewer[viewer: &25.viewer, hint: all] 
{does not return a value} 
Vlewer'Op5;,PaI,nUilmt: TYPE = {all, client, menu, caption} 
&24.. 
,PaintViewer[viewer: &19, hint: all] 
{does not return a value} 
&2l CurrentSelection 
~[viewer: {Viewer - class: Typescript, namE!: Action Area E: 
aborted ERROR IOlmpl.EndOfStream from 
Inpu Umpl.GetCedarScannerToken I}, privateS tuff: 12460 44B ~ ] 
&26 .. &2S,icon .. IconRegistry,GeUcon["trafficLight"] 
seIeel/olfJ /'aiIBtI OIfJ icolfJ 
&27 .. &2S,viewer,icon .. [conRegistry,GeUcon["trafficLight"] 
21B7 
&28 use "&2S,viewer" for &19 
> .. ViewerOps,PaintViewer[viewer: &25,viewer, hint: all] 
{does not return a value} 
&2'J .. 
" 
>Compile UserExeclmpl.mesa 
Compiling: UserExeelmpl , , , , , , no errors 
End of compilation 
' 
& 12 run iconeditor 
Loaded and started: lconEditor.bcd 
&13 
Figure 49 
The Action Area icon has been changed to a traffic light 
And there's our traffic light. 
Let's go ahead and make the edit that will cause the system to use the trafficLight icon for Action 
Areas. We simply create a viewer on the file ActionAreaslmpl, and insert at the appropriate place in the 
procedure NewAction the statement: 
exec.viewer.icon +- IconRegistry.Getlcon["trafficLight"]; 
(The characters to the right of the +- can simply be copied from event 27.) 
tl04 We could also have replayed event 19 (either by SHIFf-selecting it or via the REDO command). and then made the desired 
change by editing. In this particular example, this would have, actually resulted in fewer keystrokes than the use command. However. 
for a fast typist moving one hand to the mouse and then positioning the mouse appropriately might actually take more time than 
typing the above. In any case, I wanted to demonstrate this feature of the history facility. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-H. JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
Wrapping it up 
Now let's compile the files we have changed. 
&13 compileall 
)Compile ActionAreaslmpl.mesa CompilerExecOpslmpl.mesa 
Compiling: CompilerExecOpslmpl 
. no errors 
Compiling: ActionAreaslmpl ... 1 errors 
End of compilation 
-- Errors in -- ActionAreaslmpl 
r""'''''''2''!''---'~~~~~~~~~i:=~:~=:::::-1~A~'U~''~'~D~'~I,,~ed~A~MTYJles;Sugge~t.lOn5 Atoms 
pnvat.e .. exec-privateSluff; 
UserExecPrivale ,For AliSplitViewers[exec,.v\ewer, "iewerPror: J; 
prl'JI;Jf.",acUonAreOlD;:ol,a.fullMsg .. fullMsg, 
pnvate,actlonArewala.abbre"Msg .. abbrevMsg; 
prlvate.actionAreoD3(.a.ieonMsg .. ropeForlcon; 
prl'l73te.actlonAre.,Da1h,actlon t- actlOn; 
[] .;-
U~erExecPnvate'.CaptlonForExec[exec, TRUE]; 
}; 
exec: .... lev, .. er.icon +- IconRepstry.Ge!Jcon["trofflclig,ht"]; 
evalHead <- lIserExecPn"ate.GetEvalHead[exe(]; 
evalHead.context \- BBContext.ContextForLocaiFrame[fram,eTV]: 
rr parent # NIL THEN TRtHTED { 
viewerProc: UserExecPnvate.spli~VlewerProc • TRU3TED { 
11' parenl':;PrIvate.actlIJnAreaData # NIL THEN { 
Menus.setLme[menu: vIewer,menu, 1me I, entryLlS~: NIL]; 
ViewerOps.PeJ.ntViewer[viewer, menu]; 
}; 
}: 
17:21:28 
Command: CompllerE'xecOpslmpl.me.5a 
('ompl1erExecOpslmpl.mesa -- S01J.rce t!Jkens: 4e28, tIme: 39 
c!Jde byw~: ,1S4B, links: 63, frame Slze: 1~3 
C!Jmmand: &twnarea5lmpl 
lc:onReglstry IS undeclared, at. NewAc:tJ!Jn[9998), 
exec..'liewer.ll~on '-
IconRegistry,Getlcon["1.r,~fficLight"l; 
;:IctlOnareasimpl.m("so -- ;:obor1Brj, I errors, time: 15 
Figure 50 
D'3teAwJTime deail:'reXaIJ1.ples Discussion DO)cumen'-'.tion Forum 
HowTo Humor Tmpled3ugg InlinePoll io 
LiST,:) Mise MyBugs 
MySuggestlOns Not.ebooklndex OI,hersB1Jgs Remo;'mberSIlJff 
ReminderExaroples RiverRm. Spell TiogaZuggestions TShltt-s 
1)serExecChMges UserExecPoll UserReques!.S VideoTape 
{does not 
&25 CurrentteJecl.ion 
""[,,iewer: {Viewer - class: TypeSCrIpt, n,~.rfL"': Ac.tlOnArea E 
a\Jort.erJ ERF.OR IOImpl.EndOfi.:tr.eam from 
inputImp\,GetCedarScannerToken I}, pnvateSturr: 12:45044B t 1 
.&26 +- &2:i.lcon .. Ic.'JnF.eglsl.ry,GetIc.on["l.rafficL\ghl"] 
5elecUoZl railed on: icon 
.&21 .. &2,I,vlewer.lcon <- IconReglstry.Getlcon["I,r&flC'llghl"] 
nB' 
.&28 lj,se "&2,5,viewer" for &19 
>+- VlewerOps,PamtVlewer[',iewer: &2,S.crievTer, hInl,: all] 
{d,oe~ not return a value} 
&29 '-
)c.ompileall 
'Compile UserExec.lmp1,mesa 
Compiling: UserExec.lmpl 
End of compil.:oti,)n 
.&12 run Iconedltor 
loaded ,3110 slQIted: IconE,rjjtor,br::d 
.& 13 r::ompil<:'all 
)i:;ompil", CompilerExec.Opslmp1,mesi'l ActwllAreaslmpl.mesa 
('ompilmg; CompllerEx8GO}'simpl 
IlQ errot$ 
Compiling: Act1!JnAre.:oslmpl 
1 errorJ 
End of c.ompiJ.~l.ion 
-- Error::> in -- A<~tJ<JnAreaslmpl 
&14 
More simple compiler errors 
85 
There was an error in the compilation of the second file. It is displayed in the log on the left in 
Figure 50: "IconRegistry is undeclared." This error is due to the fact that I forgot to add IconRegistry 
to my Directory and Imports list and it reveals one area of weakness in Cedar common to many strongly 
typed languages: the tedium of getting a file to successfully compile. The majority of compiler errors 
turn out to be of the nature that their correction could be automated (such as the case with the missing 
'] earlier). An extension to DWIM to handle such errors automatically would be of great utility. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
,86 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Let's fix this error and recompile. 
&14 redo 13 
)compileall 
)Compile ActionAreaslmpl.mesa 
Compiling: ActionAreaslmpl ... no errors 
End of compilation 
The compilation has finished successfully. Now let's bind the program. 
& 15 bind userexecutive 
Loading Binder.bcd ... 
Binding: userexecutive ...... no errors 
End of binding 
Unfortunately, since the changes we have made were to the UserExec, a component of the system 
that is already running, in order to test the changes we have to boot (reload) the system; we can't simply 
replace the UserExec that is running with the new one. Reloading of booting takes about two minutes. 
We hope to implement a facility for replacing an individual module in a running system. This should 
greatly improve the turnaround time on making and testing changes. t 105 
&16 boot 
Testing Our Changes 
(Later ... ) We have just finished booting the system. Let's test our changes. The system maintains a 
log of all of the files that were changed in our previous session. Let's open Work Area A and then open 
this log. 
&2 open changes. log 
Created Viewer: Changes. Log 
The changes log tel1s us (see Figure 51) that the first problem we fixed was the one regarding not 
getting comments from files when I typed "?". Let's create an interpreter Work Area and try it out. 
& 1 +- Rope.Find? 
is of type PRoe [s1, s2: ROPE, pos1: INT +- 0, case: BOOL +- TRUE] RETURNS [INT]; 
-- like Index, returns position in s1 where s2 occurs (starts looking at pos1) 
-- returns -1 if not found 
-- case = > case of characters is significant 
n05 One of the top priorities in our original catalogue of programming environment capabilities was fast turnaround for minor 
program changes « 5 sec). "Our concern with fast turnaround comes from the observation that programming should be think 
bound. not compute bound. There are several 'knees' (points of substantial non-linearity) in one's perception of response delays. 
One such knee is in the vicinity of 3 to 5 seconds. We believe that it is essential to reduce the system time for minor program 
changes to below this point" [8]. While the changes thatwe made in this tour were not minor, sad to say that even had they been 
minor. we would still have been forced to reboot (or at least return to an earlier checkpoint), in order to test them out Attacking 
this shortcoming is now one of our highest priority items. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
A TOUR THROUGH CEDAR 
87 
The UserExec printed the comments correctly (see Figure 51). The next change was to fix the 
problem wherein an event consisting of just a comment caused an EndOfStream error. Let's try this in 
Work Area A. 
&3 -- try it now 
That worked: it didn't raise an EndOfStream signal like it used to. The next change was to the 
procedure CreateLog to cause it to use the typescript icon for compiler logs. Let's try this out. 
&2 +- CompilerExecOpslmpI.CreateLog["compiler.log"] 
{Viewer - class: Text, name: compiler. log} 
Now we close this viewer and see whether its icon is a typescript (see Figure 51). Finally, the last 
change we made was to use the trafficLight icon for Action Areas. Let's do something that will cause an 
error, like dividing by zero. 
&3 +- 1/0 
SIGNAL Traps.ZeroD;v;sor from Traps.ZeroD;v;sorTrap 
computation suspended, switching to Action Area C ... 
Now we'll make the viewer for Action Area C iconic and see if the trafficLight is used. 
####################################### 
ChMges loa: created at. 
9~Sep-3l 22.:41:41 PDT 
Chanred File: UserExecMethodsImpl.mesa 
Edited on september 9, 1983 10:40 pm, by T~ltelman 
fixed bu~ wherein ? W~ nol gerung comments from file 
changes to: Help 
####################################### 
Chanied !"lIe: UserExec.Impl.mesa 
Edited on September U, 1983 11:2.2 am, by Teilelmcm 
fixed bug who!'rein typing just 8 commen~ 10 an exec caused an endofHreem error 
ch~,es to: bWellFormeo:1 
####################################### 
Changed fIle: ComplierExecOpslmpl.mesa 
Edited on SEptember 2.7, 1983 10:43 pm, by Teitelmm 
added userproftle optlon tor makmg compiler log icomc, fixed createlog to use typescript 
ch-mges to: ShowLog, CreateLoJ 
####################################### 
Ch-m;led Fde: Ac'UonAreaslmpl.mesa 
Edlted on Sepf8mber 30, 1983 3:31 pm, by Teiteiman 
changes 10: New Action 
####################################### 
Chan~ed Flle: ActlonAreasimpi.mesa 
EdiTed on September 30, 1983 6:05 pm. by TeiT.eim.an 
change~ 10. NewAcUon, DIRECTORY, IMPORTS 
Figure 51 
&2 open change!'.log 
Created Viewer: Changes.Loi 
{Viewer - "las!': Text. name: Chan,es.Log} 
.31 -- try It now 
... 
& 1 of- Rope.Find? 
i~ ot type PAOC [51, s2.: ROPE. pOS!: INT ... 0, case: SOOL ... TRUE] 
RETURNS [INT]; 
-- like Index, returns ptJ3ificm in s I 'wh"t" 53 C'lCClJES (smts 
iookmg ~t pas l} 
-- returns -1 If" nat tound 
-- case ... ' case of characters i.~ slBnlfIcant 
tJleof-w;~~p;:!s~x~~~~S~~~~~~~~l~~'~C:}Pller.lOg"l 
431 ... 110 
SIGNAL TEap8.ZlIroDiTl'isor !'rom Traps..zeroDi~illorTrq 
computation suspended. sllo'itchin~ to Action Ared C", 
Trying out our changes 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-n, JUNE 1984 
88 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Summary 
The demonstration contained in this paper has presented a number of the key concepts and facilities 
in Cedar. Some of these are: Ii highly visual user interface which exploits the high-bandwidth display 
and mouse pointing device; a uniform screen paradigm provided by the Viewers Window package, which 
includes facilities for icons, white boards, and tools, as well as text viewers; a high-quality editor and 
document preparation system (Tioga); spelling correction (OWIM); availability of an interpreter for a 
compiler-based language; a strongly typed programming language of the Pascal family which also includes 
automatic storage management. the ability to manipulate types at run-time, and support for Lisp-style 
lists and atoms; a sophisticated debugger which includes source-object code mapping to facilitate planting 
of breakpoints and examining program state; support for concurrent operations; and a high degree of 
integration of facilities and uniformity of user interface. The next paper, "Cedar: The Report Card," 
evaluates the successes and failures of Cedar. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
CEDAR: THE REPORT CARD 
89 
Cedar: The Report Card 
This paper takes a closer look at various aspects of the Cedar programming environment, its successes. 
its failures. and the lessons to be learned from both. The paper consists of four sections: Catalog 
Scorecard. Notable Successes. Shortcomings. and What Next? The first section. Catalog Scorecard. grades 
the current Cedar system against the original catalog of programming environment capabilities drawn up 
in 1978 .. The conclusion it draws is that we were successful with respect to most of our high priority 
items with a few exceptions that are discussed in the section on shortcomings. The second section. 
Notable Successes. looks in more detail at some areas of Cedar considered (by the author) to have been 
successes. These include: Object Management. Self Typing Data. Run-time type System. Manipulation 
of Images. Uniform Screen Management, Remote Procedure Call. Version Control. and Remote File 
Storage. The third section looks at some of the shortcomings of Cedar in its current form. Most of these 
shortcomings are in the area of providing support for the Lisp programming style. one of our original 
goals. This section discusses some of the basic differences between the Lisp and Mesa programming style. 
and then looks at some specific shortcomings of Cedar including: Fast Turnaround for Small Changes. 
Support for Wide Range of Binding Times. Easy Use of Programs as Data. and Inheritance/defaulting. 
The final section. What Next? discusses some areas that might fruitfully be attacked next. 
It is important to bear in mind while reading this paper that while I have attempted to be objective. 
it is only fair to note that the observations and conclusions presented here belong to the author. and that 
some members of the Cedar project almost certainly would disagree with many of them. 
Catalog Scorecard 
Evaluating a programming environment is an extremely difficult task. There is no concept of 
certification of environments. as there is for compilers. because there is no well-defined notion of what 
an environment is supposed to do. other than increase productivity. There is no objective metric for the 
performance of a programming environment, as there is for sort algorithms. Whether or not a 
programming environment is good or bad depends on what it was trying to achieve. what its goals were. 
In the case of Cedar. we were in the somewhat unusual position of having articulated our goals before 
we started ([8] and reproduced in Appendix 1 and 2). Thus. one way of evaluating Cedar is to return to 
these original goals and grade Cedar on each item. 
The original list of capabilities was divided into four categories by priority. The seven priority A 
items were: object management (garbage collection. reference counting). statically checked type system. 
memory management (object/page swapping). abstraction mechanisms and the explicit notion of interface. 
fast turnaround for minor program changes (less than 5 seconds). adequate run-time efficiency. and large 
virtual address space (> 24 bits). With respect to these items. we have done extremely well with one 
glaring exception: fast -turnaround for minor program changes (see discussion under "Shortcomings" 
below). Mesa already had a statically checked type system. memory management, the explicit notion of 
an interface. and adequate run-time efficiency. The extension of the virtual address space to 24 bits was 
a difficult, but straightforward task. The addition of garbage collection to Cedar is discussed in the next 
section. 
There were ten items on our priority B list of capabilities: encapsulation/protection mechanisms 
(scopes. classes. import/export rules). well-integrated access to large. robust data bases. self-typing data 
(a fa Lisp and Smalltalk) and a run-time type system. consistent compilation. version control; 
source-language debugger. text objects and images. uniform screen management. user access to the 
machine's capability for packed data. and run-time availability of all information derivable from source 
program (e.g .• names. types, scopes). With respect to these items, we have also attained most of our goals. 
Mesa already had encapsulation/protection mechanisms, consistent compilation, and user access to the 
machine's capability for packed data. We successfully implemented a run-time type system, 
source-language debugger, uniform screen manager (discussed in more detail below), and provided for 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
90 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
run-time availability of all information derivable from source program. Facilities for version control and 
uniform screen management were provided and are two of Cedar's notable successes (see discussion of 
successes below). We believe that the Cypress database system [5] is the first step towards providing 
well-integrated access to large, robust data bases, but the verdict is not yet in. 
Successes among the twelve priority C items include: support for interrupts, compiler/interpreter 
available with low overhead at run time, dynamic measurement facilities, scanned bitmap objects and 
images. formatted document files, line objects and images, and remote file storage, many of which are 
discussed in more detail below. Adequate reference documentation is just beginning to appear but work 
on a librarian and a program-oriented filing system including a browser has not yet begun. Program 
manipulable representation of programs has not been fully achieved for some of the same reasons that 
polymorphism and the ability to create fully integrated local sublanguages has failed to materialize (see 
discussion under "Shortcomings" below). 
Other items on our shopping list were checkpoint. menus and other standard user interfaces, 
document editing, adequate exceptional handling, remote procedure call, message transmission system, 
all of which have been done. Access to on-line documentation is just beginning to happen. 
Inheritance/defaulting, the ability to extend the language, and the ability to create fully integrated local 
sublanguages have not been attacked at all and are discussed further in the section "Shortcomings." 
Notable Successes 
This section elaborates on some areas of Cedar generally considered to have been successes. 
Object Management - Garbage Collection 
The addition of garbage collection to Cedar has been an unqualified success; many diehard Mesa 
programmers that were initially skeptical about the need for a garbage collector in Cedar now state that 
they would find it extremely difficult to give it up. Although originally thought of as just a convenience 
for programmers,' the addition of garbage collection to Cedar has also caused profound changes both in 
interface design and programming styles. Without garbage collection, the programmer must insert explicit 
deallocation statements in all the appropriate places to free storage when it is no longer being used. 
However. for certain styles of use. it is not always clear that there is any "appropriate place" to insert a 
deallocation statement For example, it would be a substantial challenge in a system without garbage 
collection to ensure that that when no references to a particular stream remain, a backing file would 
automatically be closed. Thus, the availability of garbage collection to Cedar has enabled a variety of 
styles of programming not previously available to the Mesa community. 
The addition of garbage collection to Cedar required the solution of two problems. The first problem 
was simply enabling the garbage collector to locate the pointers to objects in collectible storage, since 
not enough information was present in the actual data itself, i.e., pointers do not carry type information 
in Mesa. We solved this problem by modifying the compiler to put out additional information in the 
object code to enable the garbage collector to perform this task. 
The second problem was more fundamental: the presence of LOOPHOLEs (breaches of the type 
system). pointer arithmetic. overlaid variants, and relative pointers in the Mesa language makes it possible 
for the Mesa programmer to easily fool or confuse the garbage collector without intending to do so. 
Furthermore, in such a case. a single programming error that smashed a pointer to an object in collectible 
storage could destroy critical system data structures in ways that would make it difficult to reconstruct, 
after the fact, any evidence of the original clause of the crash: the system would be, in effect. reduced 
to a rubble of bits. 
In order to resolve this latter problem, we took the approach of identifying a subset of the Mesa 
language. the so-called safe language, that did not contain any of the LOOPHoLE-like features mentioned 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
CEDAR: THE REPORT CARD 
91 
above. We then added language constructs to Cedar to draw a protection boundary around a program 
written in this subset. Even incorrect programs written using this safe subset of Cedar were guaranteed 
not to be able to interfere with the reliable operation of the garbage collector. The vast majority of Cedar 
programs are now written primarily (or entirely) in Safe Cedar. (For more information, see [12].) 
Self Typing Data. Run-time Type System 
The addition of self typing data (REF ANY) to Mesa's statically checked type system was also 
performed successfully. Self typing data was intended to provide for a form of late binding by allowing 
the implementor to defer type checking from compile time to run-time on a case by case basis. By 
employing REF ANY in the early stages of development, programmers could opt for more flexibility at 
the expensive of performance and/or run-time errors. As the program matured, various binding decisions 
could be made earlier by employing specific types where appropriate. However, due to the lack of other 
forms of system support for late binding (see discussion below under "Shortcomings"), this particular 
use for self typing data did not come into widespread use. 
However, we had also envisioned two other important uses for self typing data, both of which were 
realized and are widespread in Cedar today. The first use is to enable generic programs -
programs that 
can determine the type of a REF ANY at run-time, and operate differently depending on the type of the 
object they are given. For example, a Sort program could be written which takes as arguments two items 
of type LIST OF REF ANY, and a comparison procedure of type PROC[X: REF ANY, y: REF ANY] 
RETURNS[inOrder: BOOLEAN]. The same Sort program could thus be used to sort lists of integers, reals, 
strings, etc., by supplying a comparison procedure which selected the appropriate metric based on the 
type of objects being compared. tl06 
The second use for REF ANY is to enable object-oriented programming (also called closures), where 
an object in Cedar consists of a block of procedures that defines various operations, along with some 
private data, represented by a REF ANY, that contains the state information. The use of REF ANY enables 
the form and representation of the private data to vary between different implementations of the same 
object, for example, between file streams and keyboard streams. However, from the standpoint of Cedar's 
type system. these different implementations are nevertheless objects of the same type. Thus, an application 
can be passed different implementations of a stream without requiring breaching the type system, i.e. a 
LOOPHOLE. For example. a procedure that takes as an argument an output stream can output material 
to this stream without caring whether the ultimate destination of the characters is a file, a rope, or a 
viewer. 
In each of the applications discussed so far, the type discrimination being performed at run time is 
among a collection of types that were known ahead of time, i.e., specified at compile time. For example, 
the generic Sort routine could only sort those objects whose types were built into the comparison 
procedure, even though that procedure could determine at run-time which of these types was the type 
of the object it was processing. Being able to perform such type discriminations is sufficient for most 
applications. However, we also implemented in Cedar a full-blown run-time type system which allows 
programs to manipulate types as data in a completely general fashion. For example, having determined 
that the type of an object it has been given is a record, a program can compute the number and names 
of the fields of the record and obtain the value of the datum stored in any particular field. A Lisp 
analogy might be to contrast a function that takes an atom and sees whether it is one of a particular set 
of atoms (very fast) with a function that unpacks the atom into its constitutent characters and then 
performs some processing on these, e.g., determine if two atoms are the same except for differences in 
the case of the component characters. 
tl06 In actual practice, if the application will be sorting long lists of such objects or it is important that the sort be as efficient as 
possible, clients will cuStomize the Sort program to the specific type of the object so as to avoid the run time type discrimination. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
92 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Such a capability is admittedly needed only for specialized applications. However. it enables users 
to implement a c1C;iss of applications that are normally only in the province of system wizards. For 
example. the expression interpreter used by the debugger is simply a client of the Cedar run-time type 
system: it does not include or use any specialized information that is not available to any other client. 
Another one of the first clients of the run-time type system was a general print routine which took an 
arbitrary object and printed its value in a manner appropriate to its type. Another interesting application 
designed by a student is the ViewRec Package. which accepts an aggregate datum (a record. sequence. 
or array) and constructs a visual interface to this datum. This interface (a viewer) displays and continuously 
keeps up to date the various fields and values of the datum. It can also be used to change the contents. 
of the data structure. 
In most programming environments that are built on top of strongly typed languages. it is simply 
not possible for an arbitrary user to construct such applications. 
Manipulation of Images-Cedar Graphics 
There were several items relating to the manipulation of images in our original catalog of 
programming environment capabilities: text objects and images. line objects and images. scanned (bitmap) 
objects and images. and formatted document files. This was not surprising. given that the manipulation 
of images is of primary concern to us in our experimental systems. We divided these manipulations into 
two categories: manipulation of abstract objects such as formatted documents. forms. line drawings. and 
continuous-tone images: and manipulation of these objects on displays or printers. Operations in the first 
category are defined by the semantics of the objects. not by their representation on a particular medium. 
whereas operations in the second category must take the nature of the medium into account. The first 
EPE working group believed that "enough experience had been gained in these areas that it [would be] 
possible to construct packages that will be useful in a wide range of programs. arid that will markedly 
decrease the effort required to write programs that use them" [8] . 
The Cedar Graphics package designed and implemented by John Warnock and Doug Wyatt [33] 
amply confirmed this belief. It provides the support for Cedar's uniform screen manager. the Viewers 
Window Package. (described earlier in "A Tour Through· Cedar" and discussed further in the section 
below). The flexibility of Cedar Graphics has enabled Viewers to support not only simple typescript-style 
text applications but also applications involving drawings. scanned images. and combinations of graphics 
and text. In addition to Viewers. Cedar Graphics has been used to implement a music composition 
system. a VLSI design system. and a graphic arts design package. 
The key idea in Cedar Graphics is a unified graphics imaging model and an associated programming 
interface. The imaging model is totally independent of display devices: it provides an abstraction of how 
an image would ideally look on a perfect medium. The implementation for a specific device renders the 
appearance of this ideal image as well as possible. For example. a device that can show grey values might 
display color values via appropriate grey values. or a binary device might display colors with stipple 
patterns. Isolating the device-dependent portions of Cedar Graphics into a relatively small set of primitives 
reduces the cost of implementation for additional devices. For example. Cedar Graphics has already been 
implemented for binary. grey-scale. and full-color raster display systems. and for high-resolution 
black-and-white printers and color raster printers. 
A good way to think about the Cedar Graphics imaging model is to consider a slide projector shining 
a general-colored image through a stencil onto a piece of paper. or a silk-screen printer pushing colored 
ink through a stencil onto paper. The programmer defines sources and stencils via a sequence of procedure 
calls. and then uses other procedures to produce the effect of pushing a given source through a given 
stencil. Each stencil and source can also be mapped through any linear transformation prior to display. 
Very complex images can be built using different combinations of stencils. sources. and mappings. For 
example. Figure 52 shows the result of using a two-dimensional sampled image of a photograph of our 
laboratory as a source. and a collection of analytic curves that form the outline of the letters P-A-R-C as 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
! 
CEDAR: THE REPORT CARD 
93 
a stencil. The upper image is the result of scaling the same source and stencil by .5 in height and .75 in 
width. 
Figure 52 
Cedar Graphics enables the display of very complex images 
The Cedar Graphics imaging model also includes an additional level of stencil caIled a clipping 
region. which restricts the area where ink is displayed regardless of what other shapes or masks are used. 
The Viewers window package makes heavy use of clipping regions. It enables clients of Viewers to ignore 
the fact that the display is shared among many applications. 
Uniform Screen Management-the Viewers Window Package 
Use of the display is pervasive in our interactive systems. Lack of uniformity leads to 
duplicated effort often of low quality. since an individual builder cannot easily draw on 
all past experience or devote the time to taking advantage of it. On the other hand, too 
much central control over screen management may frustrate the desire to experiment 
with new paradigms for interaction. We believe that it is possible to "virtualize" the 
screen and the user input devices-that is, require people to write programs on the 
assumption that they will only have access to a subpart of the screen, and to a slightly 
filtered stream of input events-in a way that will not markedly impede our ability to 
experiment, and that will have a large payoff in terms of the user's ability to construct a 
screen environment containing multiple windows on different programs. 
[8] 
The Viewers Window Package has successfully attained these goals. It is "the arbiter of the user 
input and display hardware in the Cedar programming environment. It provides the illusion to the 
programmer that there is a private display, mouse and keyboard associated with each application, while 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
94 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
allowing the user to simultaneously interact with many such applications" [19]. 
Resolving this issue of distributing user actions among various applications all running concurrently 
was one of the most interesting and challenging issues in the design of Viewers. The problem is that 
while some user actions. such as mouse clicks. include information that determines the application to 
which they are directed. namely the location of the cursor at the time the mouse is clicked, many user 
actions such as keystrokes do not contain such information. Instead. the recipient of these latter actions 
is a function of previous user or program actions. 
This problem is handled in Viewers by defining the notion of an input focus that associates keyboard 
activity with a particular viewer. The corresponding application program reads characters from the 
keyboard using the standard pull model: the program asks for a character. and when characters are not 
available. the program waits. Note that characters may not be available to this program because the user 
has not typed any. or because the user has redirected his typing to some other application. t107 In fact, 
one of the virtues of this scheme is that these two cases are indistinguishable to the program. In other 
words. the program can ignore the fact that the keyboard is shared, just as the clipping region in Cedar 
Graphics makes it possible for programs to ignore the fact that the display is shared. 
Another issue successfully addressed by Viewers was the desire to facilitate experimentation with 
various user interfaces. The Terminal Interface Package (TIP) makes it easy for individual applications 
each to employ different user interfaces, and for individual users to change existing interfaces to meet 
their own preferences. TIP achieves this by separating inter/ace from junction, i.e., separating the 
operations implemented by a particular application, such as Delete, Exchange, and SelectNode for Tioga, 
and Select and Draw for the Icon Editor, from the way in which the user invokes the operation, such as 
typing CTRL-X. or double-clicking the left mouse button. A specially formatted file called a TIP table 
specifies the mapping of user actions into system operations. For each application, TIP parses the user 
actions into the corresponding operations using the application's own TIP table. This arrangement makes 
it easy for individuals to change or extend the user interface~ Figure 53 shows a portion of the TIP table 
that interprets user actions inside of icons. For example, the line marked with an asterisk in this table 
specifies that when the LeftShift key is down and the user clicks the middle button on the mouse, the 
icon that the mouse is in is opened and given the full column. 
The Viewers Window Package allows programmers to create new classes of viewers by specifying an 
implementation for various operations, such as how to display a viewer that is an instance of this class, 
what cursor shape to display when the user moves the mouse into this viewer, what to do when the user 
clicks the mouse in the viewer, how to scroll the viewer, etc. This facility has been used for implementing 
a wide variety of viewers. These include whiteboards (Figures 5, 6), sliders (used for displaying and 
setting continuous values), histograms, graph browsers, record viewers, plus various tools such as the 
Watch tool (Figure 15), File tool (Figures 2-4), EditTool, TypeSetter, Clock (Figure 2), and games such 
as MazeWar. Tank. and Football (see Figure 54). 
One shortfall in the current implementation is lack of support for subclassing; it is not possible to 
define a new viewer class by specifying only the ways in which it differs from some existing class. For 
example. it would have been very useful if Walnut, the electronic mail reader, could have defined a class 
of viewers called Message Senders, which were like Tioga viewers in every way except that, in addition, 
they supported the operations of Send. Although subclassing in general is not supported in Cedar (the 
------------
t107 The user changes the input focus from one viewer to another simply by clicking the mouse in the corresponding viewer. 
Applications can also change the input focus. For example. when the user clicks Walnut's New Form menu button. a message 
sender viewer is created. and the input focus placed in that viewer. Similarly. when a breakpoint is encountered and a new Action 
Area created (see Figure 24 in "A Tour Through Cedar"), the input focus is automatically placed in the Action Area. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
CEDAR: THE REPORT CARD 
95 
lack of such support is discussed separately below), it would have been possible to provide some form 
of support for subclassing for Viewers. nos This issue has recently begun to receive some attention. 
SELECT TRIGGER FROM 
Left Down 
= ) Select; 
Left Up WHILE Ctrl Down 
=) Delete; 
Middle Up 
= ) SELECT ENABLE FROM 
Ctrl Down =) Open Desktop; 
LeftShift Down 
= ) CloseOthers, Open; 
ENDCASE 
=) Open; 
DEL Down =) Delete; 
L Down 
=) Left; 
M Down 
=) TogglePos; 
o Down 
= ) SELECT ENABLE FROM 
Ctrl Down =) Open Desktop; 
LeftShift Down 
=) CloseOthers, Open, SetlnputFocus; 
RightShift Down =) CloseOthers, Open, SetlnputFocus; 
ENDCASE 
=) Open, SetlnputFocus; 
R Down WHILE Ctrl Down 
=) ResetDesktop; 
R Down 
=) Right; 
S Down 
= ) Save; 
ENDCASE. 
Figure 53 
* 
The Terminal Interface Package facilitates experimenting with user interfaces 
Another shortfall of Viewers is that it is difficult to build complex windows with much internal 
structure such as that employed by the Watch tool (see Figure 15). The principal reason for this is that 
the language by which the client constructs a viewer is imperative rather than declarative: the client 
specifies the algorithm for laying out the display via a sequence of procedure calls which perform the 
layout. As a result, the various decisions about the display' are wired into a program, and hence difficult 
to change. Furthermore, it is difficult for all but an expert to read the program and visualize the resulting 
display. Specifying such a window via a passive data structure which described the desired result and 
was interpreted at run-time might provide a solution to both of these objections. Another approach would 
be to design a tool for constructing such viewers, which would allow the user to experiment interactively 
with various layouts, inserting, deleting and moving the components of the viewer being constructed. 
When a satisfactory result was achieved, the corresponding program or data structure could be constructed 
automatically. (Such a tool has been implemented in another programming environment at Xerox and 
has been enthusiastically received.) A more general solution to this problem would be to allow Tioga 
documents to include viewers and other graphical entities along with text. In this case, the Watch tool 
would simply be a Tioga document, and could be created, edited, and saved accordingly. Future plans 
for Tioga call for such generalized documents. 
--~----~~~ 
n08 In fact. an earlier implementation of a screen manager for Cedar did include support for subclassing. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
96 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Remote Procedure Call 
The ability to call a procedure on another machine as though it were on one's local machine was 
one of the package items in our catalog of capabilities. For those unfamiliar with this notion: 
The idea of remote procedure calls (RPC) is quite simple. It is based on the observation 
that procedure calls are a well-known and well-understood mechanism for transfer of 
control and data within a program running on a single computer. Therefore, it is proposed 
that this same mechanism be extended to provide for transfer of control and data across 
a communication network. When a remote procedure is invoked, the calling environment 
is suspended, the parameters are passed across the network to the environment where 
the procedure is to execute, and the desired procedure is executed there. When the 
procedure finishes and produces its results, the results are passed back to the calling 
environment, where execution resumes as if returning from simple single-machine call. 
[2] 
The primary purpose of RPC in Cedar was to make distributed computation easy. We had observed 
that building communicating programs in our research community was a difficult task, one which was 
attempted only by a select group of communication experts. Even researchers with experience in building 
systems found it difficult to build distributed systems with our existing tools. We considered this state of 
affairs to be very undesirable: 
We have available to us a very large, very powerful communication network, numerous 
powerful computers, and an environment that makes building programs relatively easy. 
The existing communication mechanisms appeared to be a major factor constraining 
further development of distributed computing. Our hope is that by providing 
communication with almost as much ease as local procedure calls, people will be 
encouraged to build and experiment with distributed applications. 
[2] 
We are still in the early stages of acquiring experience with the use of RPC and certainly more work 
needs to be done, but it appears that Cedar RPC has achieved its goals of making distributed computation 
easy. There have already been several projects that have used RPC to implement various distributed 
applications. These include the control communication for an Ethernet-based telephone and audio project 
and the complete communication protocol for Alpine, a file server supporting multi-machine transactions 
and page-level access. Here is a Comment from one of the implementors of Alpine: 
Using RPC has proven valuable for the following two main reasons: l. It frees both 
client and implementor from worrying !lbout the actual format of the bits going over the 
wire. An ordinary Mesa interface module is the total description of the arguments and 
results of all operations performed by the server. Furthermore, the RPC semantics are 
sufficiently complete (Le., similar to single-machine procedure call) that the programmer 
doesn't have to think very much about adapting an interface for remote use. 2. RPC 
takes care of all aspects of remote binding, authentication, and reliable communication. 
One does not need to be a communication wizard in order to communicate. [italics mine] 
Several network games have also been implemented using RPC. The basic paradigm for each of 
these programs is .that there is one server to arbitrate among all of the players. This server acts as a 
clearinghouse for the state of the game. Each player calls in with his state and gets back the state of the 
world. Figure 54 shows a two player football game implemented using this scheme. 
Such applications fall under the category of 'closet' projects: they would never be attempted if they 
looked like large tasks. Here is a testimony from one of the game implementors: "How easy was it to 
use? Astoundingly! The first 90% came in a couple of hours one afternoon (the last 10% dragged on at 
least in part because of irrelevant reasons). Did it help me? I think it made the difference between this 
being a small toy and being a big project" 
Another testimonial to the success of RPC in Cedar is that as a result of our experiences, the RPC 
protocol has been implemented in both Interlisp and Smalltalk, thereby allowing applications running in 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
CEDAR: THE REPORT CARD 
97 
entirely different environments to communicate with one another. 
(home) 
H':'jI,1E" 
FJr~\ ~1J.arler 
\'ISIT')R~: 
12:'1, 
9 
4 
Figure 54 
RPC enables implementing network applications and games 
Version Control 
Cedar programmers work in a distributed computing environment, and have to be able to share 
each other's programs in various stages of development. In this setting, control of versions and file 
management is difficult t109 both because of the large number of files in Cedar and the requirement that 
versions of files must agree. tllo In anticipation of these factors, consistent compilation and version control 
was one of the priority items in the catalog of programming capabilities. 
The principal facility provided by Cedar for dealing with version control is description files (OF 
files). DF files contain information about versions of files needed by a particular application and their 
locations. There are several packages available for manipulating OF Files, of which the most frequently 
used are: BringOver, for retrieving all or some subset of the files specified in a OF File; SModel, for 
storing files on a server; and VerifyDF. for checking that the files mentioned in a particular OF File are 
all consistent. i.e .. that if two files import a common interface, they both use the same version of that 
interface. 
tl09 In fact. the problem of controlling software development in a distributed environment turned out to be sufficiently interesting 
and difficult that it yielded a PhD thesis for one of the Cedar implementors. Eric Schmidt. 
tllO Mesa ensures consistent compilation by placing time stamps on source and object files. and by recording in each object file 
the complete list of time stamps for the files that produced it. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-ll, JUNE 1984 
98 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Based on our experiences with the OF System, we attempted the much more ambitious task of 
providing a complete program management system: 
The user describes his software in system models, which are complete descriptions of a 
software system. Similar to a blueprint or schematic, a model combines in one place 1) 
information about the version of files needed and hints about their locations, 2) additional 
information needed to compile the system, and 3) information about interconnections 
between modules, such as which procedures are used and where they are defined. System 
models are manipulated by the System Modeler, a program that automates development 
of software in the Cedar programming environment. The system modeler is notified of 
new versions of files as they are created by the editor, and automatically recompiles and 
loads new versions of software. 
[26J 
The system modeler has only been used by two or three users, so the verdict is not yet in on its 
utility. However, it is clear that the OF system was a major success in Cedar. Not only did it automate 
version control for system implementors, but users soon found OF files indispensable for managing their 
own private software. This was especially true for users working on public Oorados-machines that were 
shared among several users. Even for those users fortunate enough to have their own private machine, 
the maxim of "Keep your bags packed" turned out to be good advice in an experimental and rapidly 
evolving system such as Cedar, and OF files enabled the user to do just that. 
Remote File Storage 
The original catalog of programming facilities included as a package item Remote File Storage, i.e., 
automating the transfer of files between machines: "The manual transfer of files between machines is a 
significant source of errors and walited time. Such transfers are necessary either because of space problems, 
or because one machine has a capability (such as a printer or high-performance display) not possessed 
by all'' [8J. 
The OF system described above took a large step towards eliminating the manual transfer of files, 
or at least the errors and wasted time associated with this activity. By executing a single BringOver 
operation, the user could reestablish a consistent set of files on a particular machine. tIll 
However, we did not attain the goal of unifying the local and remote file system into a single 
uniform, shared file system, so that the user need never be aware of where files are stored and could 
simply treat his local disk as a form oftemporary memory. Instead, the recently designed and implemented 
Cedar File System (FS) represents a compromise position between such a uniform, shared file system 
and what we had before-completely independent local and remote file systems with manual transfer of 
files - while it eliminates the need for manual transfer of remote files, it does not completely mask the 
existence of the local disk. In some cases the user must be aware of the distinction between files that 
exist in the local file system. For files that exist on the local file system and nowhere else, the user is 
responsible for storing the local file on a remote server. 
The reason for this compromise position was that we wanted to preserve the idea of a strictly local 
file, because users were familiar with it and found it useful. Another reason for not unifying the local 
and remote file system was that we were committed (at least initially) to using an existing file server 
which did not provide support for transactions: the absence of transactions makes it hard to synchronize 
shared file access. 
tIll For those files that are part of the system such as sources and fonts, the user need not be aware of their location, or even 
their existence: Cedar automatically retrieves them when needed without requiring any action by the user. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
CEDAR: THE REPORT CARD 
99 
It is not clear whether we will eventually design and implement a unified file system. It is also not 
clear, given that the FS is only just beginning to be used, how effectively it will allow users to operate 
in a mode in which they do not worry about where files are stored. Success or failure of the latter will 
undoubtedly influence the former. 
Shortcomings 
Building a programming environment is an extremely difficult task. There are no solutions, no right 
or wrong, just choices. Furthermore. the task is unbounded: you never finish a programming environment, 
you simply gradually stop working on it (usually about the time you start planning another). One of the 
most difficult challenges that faced us in the Cedar project was to decide what we would include. There 
was considerable divergence on this subject among individuals in the project. This section reports on 
some of the things that we chose not to do, why we made these choices, and how they have affected the 
overall result. It is perhaps the most subjective part of the paper, and some members of the Cedar project 
might disagree strongly with my conclusions. However, being the only Cedar implementor from the 
Interlisp community, I was in the unique position of being proficient and intimately acquainted with 
both Mesa and Interlisp. This perspective that has emboldened me to set down my observations and 
conclusions in the hopes that they might be of interest or value to designers of future programming 
environments. 
The principal shortcomings of Cedar are in the area of providing support for various aspects of the 
Lisp style of programming (and to a lesser extent Smalltalk), and can be attributed to the selection of 
Mesa as a starting point for Cedar and the fact that the overwhelming majority of the Cedar implementors 
and users came from the Mesa community. These shortcomings include not reaching Cedar's original 
goals with respect to: fast turnaround for small program changes, support for wide range of (i.e., late) 
binding times. easy use of programs as data, and inheritance/defaulting (Smalltalk subclassing). In short, 
with respect to the fundamental principle stated in the EPE report [8] that "the present Lisp, Mesa, and 
Smalltalk programming styles all must be supported in a satisfactory way," it is fair to say that Cedar 
has not (yet) succeeded. 
However. it should be pointed out that while Cedar has not succeeded in these areas with respect 
to the original goals as stated in 1978, these goals themselves were revised and modified as the Cedar 
project developed. For example. in 1980, Jim Morris, then manager of the Cedar project, stated: 
Acceptance of this specific goal of increasing programmer productivity, and its immediacy, 
i.e .. over the next several years, has made us conservative in our designs. In the main, 
we have restricted ourselves to those ideas which can be understood and put to use by 
the intended users in a timely fashion. While it is our business as Computer Science 
researchers to strive for new and revolutionary ideas, they are not required for Cedar. 
Indeed. employing the users of Cedar as guinea pigs for such ideas would tend to decrease 
their programming productivity in the time frame of interest. [21] 
Thus. in 1980 we were already beginning to recognize that we might have been overly ambitious, 
and to reduce our aspirations. By 1982, the Cedar project was being described as "an attempt to take the 
Mesa language and build around it a programming environment based on ideas from Interlisp and 
Smalltalk. while retaining the strong type-checking properties of Mesa" [26]. In other words, by 1982 
the goal of building an environment that would be attractive to both Mesa and Lisp users had been 
discarded. 
It is not the author's intent to cast a value judgment about how Cedar has developed: in the face 
of limited resources, choices must always be made about which areas to attack first. It is only natural 
and proper that such choices be made in terms of the greatest good for the greatest number, and the 
greatest number of users (and implementors) of Cedar came from the Mesa community. 
From the 
standpoint of these users, Cedar has been an unqualified success: they are overjoyed at the increase to 
their productivity that Cedar has provided them when compared with the previous Mesa programming 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
100 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
environment. The fact that we did not achieve certain goals should not be taken as an indication that 
these goals are not attainable in an environment based on a strongly typed language. Some of these goals 
are not even technically difficult compared with some of the things that we did accomplish. We made 
some choices. and this section reports on these choices and their consequences. In the future. we may in 
fact revisit some of these choices - there is still the possibility that as Cedar matures we will address some 
of the shortfalls discussed here. 
Since the shortcomings listed above all relate to lack of support for various aspects of the Lisp 
programming style. before we examine each of these specific areas in detail. it is appropriate to discuss 
the basic differences between the Lisp programming style and that of Mesa. Such a discussion will help 
to explain why the Mesa. and hence Cedar. user community placed less importance on various issues 
that are considered absolutely essential to the Lisp community.t1l2 
A Matter of Style -
Lisp versus Mesa 
The principal differences between the Lisp and Mesa style arise from the types and purposes of the 
programs they write: 
Lisp is used almost entirely as a research tool. ... The average Lisp user writes a program 
as a programming experiment, i.e .. in order to develop the understanding of some task. 
rather than in expectation of production use of the program. The act of developing the 
program. not the act of running it (even for test data). constitutes the experiment. As a 
consequence. the program is likely to be large and complex. to undergo drastic revisions 
while it is being developed. and to be thrown away before it has been "completed" by 
conventional programming standards since it will already have served its purpose before 
then. 
[25J 
tID 
. 
Beau Sheil [27J has called this style of use: 
exploratory programming. the conscious intertwining of system design and implementation . 
... Some applications are best thought of as design problems. rather than implementation 
projects. These problems require programming systems which allow the design to emerge 
from experimentation with the program. so that the design and program develop together. 
Lisp evolved in response to the need for programming environments that facilitated this exploratory 
style of use. For example. Lisp systems were first developed to support research in artificial intelligence. 
where the programmer "invariably has to restructure his program many times before it becomes reasonably 
proficient. In addition. since intelligent activities are complex. programs tend to be very large. yet they 
are invariably built by very small teams. (often a single researcher)" [27J. 
Mesa. on the other hand. evolved in response to a need for producing reliable. robust systems. 
developed by large teams of programmers. and the ability to maintain such systems over a fairly long 
period. often by programmers who were not the original implementors. For example. the mandatory. 
compile-time type checking employed by Mesa is particularly useful in the maintenance of large programs: 
the additional. redundant information contained in the type declarations makes Mesa programs more 
readable by others.t1l4 The type checking also gives greater confidence that when changes are made to 
programs. trivial new bugs will not be introduced. 
t 112 For additional discussion. see the section entitled "Character of the Result." in "The Roots of Cedar." the first paper in this 
report. 
tIl3 Admittedly. this situation has begun changing in recent years. Increasingly. Lisp systems are being used to implement reliable 
programs intended for production use. However. the thrust of the comments here concerning the difference in style between the 
two communities is still valid. 
t1l4 After much experience with both Mesa and Lisp. in the author's opinion. it is a lot easier ,to write and get working your own 
program written in Lisp, but much easier to read or modify someone else's program when it has been written in Mesa. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
CEDAR: THE REPORT CARD 
101 
The Lisp programmer would argue that the advantages provided by type-checking are not significant 
for the kinds of programs that he typically writes: 
The advantages will be small for programs whose "characteristic times" (design, 
programming, checkout, existence, total execution) are all measured in minutes, large if 
they are measured in weeks or months. In an environment where programs are undergoing 
rapid change, [Mesa'sJ mandatory checking mechanisms tend to introduce unnecessary 
overhead by requiring complete internal consistency at every step of the development 
process. [l1J 
In fact. the requirement that the types of all values in Mesa must be specified in advance is 
considered by most Lisp programmers to be a nuisance and an irritant, rather than an attractive feature 
of the Mesa language. Here is a typical comment: "I think that static type-checking is a waste of time; 
it solves a small number of problems while creating many more. I and other Lisp programmers spend a 
very small percentage of time chasing problems static type-checking would catch." 
Because of the need for type declarations and specification of interfaces, Mesa requires more planning 
before a running program is created than does Lisp (some would consider this a disadvantage, others a 
benefit). Similarly, the Mesa programmer tends to put more thought and planning into each change. t1l5 
In compensation, the Mesa programmer is fairly confident that once his program is finished and has 
compiled successfully, he will spend much less time debugging it. t1l6 This is extremely important to the 
Mesa user because the process of finding and fixing bugs in Mesa programs is much more painful and 
time-consuming than it is for his Lisp counterpart, as is discussed in more detail in the next section. 
A definite weakness of the Mesa approach is that it is relatively difficult to add flexibility that was 
not anticipated in the original design. Furthermore, Cedar programmers rarely anticipate and provide for 
generalizations ahead of time - before a particular situation is encountered requiring them - because of a 
viewpoint that is more or less prevalent throughout the Mesa community, and perhaps best summed up 
in [16J: "An interface should capture the minimum essentials of an abstraction. Don't generalize, 
generalizations are generally wrong." This philosophy has also been stated as "If in doubt, leave it out," 
and "KISS: Keep it Simple, Stupid." As a result of this attitude, with which the author disagrees, there 
is often a significant time delay in Cedar between a perceived need and a capability which meets this 
need. This is detrimental: it hinders our ability to experiment. 
The Role of Change in Program Development 
Perhaps the area of greatest difference between the Lisp and Mesa communities is in how each 
views the process of change. The Lisp programmer tends to view change as an integral and desirable part 
of the program development cycle, A typical Lisp debugging session has a "stream of consciousness" 
t1l5 This philosophy of "go slowly. don't make mistakes hecause they are expensive to correct" seems to carryover into the way 
the Mesa/Cedar user interacts with the system. which is at a more deliberate. somewhat slower pace than that of their Lisp 
counterparts. It is perhaps for this reason that DWIM. the automatic error-correction facility, did not receive as widespread 
acceptance in Cedar as in Interlisp. 
t1l6 This is an extremely fuzzy area. It is true that the time a Mesa programmer spends debugging his program is often much 
less than the time spent debugging the corresponding Lisp program. For example. my very first programming effort in Mesa. a 
spelling corrector. took three days to get to compile. a process which I found extremely frustrating (and was undoubtedly aggravated 
by my inexperience with the Mesa syntax). However. once compiled. my program was debugged and running in half an hour. 
However. these times can be misleading because the Lisp programmer starts debugging much earlier in the program development 
cycle. i.e .. at a point where the Mesa programmer is still designing his algorithms and data structures. Debugging and design are 
often intermixed in the Lisp style. In one experiment which compared the overall time from start to finish for a programming 
problem (reading in a text file and performing simple justification). the Lisp programmers in our laboratory did much better than 
Mesa programmers. However. this experiment involved a program whose characteristic time was quite small. and has already been 
pointed out. Mesa's benefits come with larger. longer-lived programs. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
102 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
flavor to it. rather than the deliberate, planned attack that a Mesa programmer is more likely to adopt. 
The Lisp programmer simply starts using his program. and analyzes and fixes problems as they come 
up. While pursuing the first problem he encounters, the Lisp user will often encounter a second, which 
leads to a third, and so on. When this happens, the Lisp user frequently. to use a programming metaphor, 
pushes the original problem onto his stack, and pursues the new one. The facilities of the Lisp system 
supports this paradigm, and also provides tools for the programmer to keep track of what he is doing. 
The Mesa system, especially the multiple threads of control provided by the process mechanism, 
also enables the programmer to suspend a particular debugging path and pursue a new problem that he 
has just encountered. or conversely, to continue pursuing his original problem. while leaving suspended 
the new problem to which he can return later. The key difference between the two systems is that when 
the Lisp programmer analyzes a problem, he (usually) can fix it on the spot and continue his debugging 
session with the fix now in place. t 117 A single Lisp debugging session may last several hours during which 
time the programmer will find and fix a number of problems. The interactive nature of this process is 
especially important given the kind of programs a typical Lisp programmer often writes. where the 
problem being solved. much less the algorithms being used, are not well understood, hence the need to 
"debug the program into existence" by experimenting with various solutions and seeing how they work. 
Lisp systems have been used in this highly interactive fashion for more than a decade. Over that 
period, considerable effort has been devoted to building tools which facilitate this style, especially with 
respect to making changes and continuing the debugging session. For example, the debugger and editor 
are integrated to allow the user, having identified a particular place on the call stack, to edit the 
corresponding expression in the source. (Cedar has a similar facility.) When a problem is not d~tected 
until after the damage has been done, the user can alter the flow of control from the debugger, returning 
the computation to a specified place on the call stack from which he can then continue with the fix in 
place. There is even a facility, the Advise package, which allows the user to experiment with the effects 
of a proposed change without having to perform any edits. Advise operates by redefining Lisp functions 
so that the indicated expressions are evaluated at the entry or exit of a procedure. Advise can also operate 
on a specific call to that procedure, such as the call to Print from within the function Foo. Finally, the 
Interlisp file package keeps track of the changes that the user makes to various program elements, and 
informs the user which files need to be saved. tU8 The file package also notes changes to elements which 
are not associated with any particular file, such as is the case when the user defines new functions during 
the course of a debugging session. All of these facilities allow and encourage the user to find and fix 
many bugs in a single session, building up and retaining as much state and context as he wishes during 
the process. This paradigm seems much more effective than having to break the debugging process up 
into a sequence of small sessions consisting of find some bugs, fix the bugs, start over. 
It is difficult to distinguish cause and effect in the evolution of the Lisp style: did the tools develop 
in support of the exploratory style, or did the existence of these tools encourage the growth of the Lisp 
style? (Probably the former is the case.) Similarly, it is difficult to separate cause and effect in the relative 
lack of support for making changes in the Mesa environment. Historically, making changes was always 
extremely costly in terms of programmer time in the Mesa environment. When a change was required 
in a Mesa program, the programmer had to edit his source, t U9 compile it. correct syntactic errors (except 
tU7 Note that this is not a compiler versus interpreter issue. but one of dynamic relinking. Many times. especially where 
performance is an issue. the Lisp user will take the time to compile his changes. although Lisp does not require it, i.e., interpreted 
and compiled code can be freely intermixed. The important point is that regardless of whether it has been compiled or is being 
executed interpretively. the modified version will be the one that is executed for all subsequent calls to the program. 
tU8 the Interlisp editor operates on the loaded, structure representation of programs, rather than on source files. 
t1l9 In the Alto Mesa world. editing required leaving the debugging environment and running an entirely separate editing system. 
This made making changes even more painful than it currently is in Cedar where the editor and debugger are integrated into a 
single environment 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
CEDAR: THE REPORT CARD 
103 
for minor changes. it is unusual for a program to compile successfully on the first attempt). recompile. 
perhaps several times. and then abandon his current context and start anew in order to load the now 
changed program before he could evaluate the effects of his change. tl20 The absence of an interpreter 
(something that has been corrected with Cedar) meant that the programmer also had to construct and 
debug test programs and data structures for exercising his program.tI21 If the programmer is developing 
a multi-module system which includes various interfaces for communicating between its parts. a simple 
change to one of these interfaces might require recompiling the entire system. (See the discussion 
contained in "Recompiling Interfaces" below.) 
Because making changes was so hard. they were avoided as much as possible. Considerable emphasis 
came to be placed in the Mesa community on "getting it right the first time." For some. it became a 
matter of pride: the Mesa programmer often views the need for a program change as an indictment of 
the original design or implementation. an indication that something was done wrong. t 122 Thus. providing 
facilities that facilitated change tended to be given lower priority than other environmental issues. 
Fast Turnaround for Small Changes 
The key ingredient in the Lisp style discussed above is fast turnaround for small changes: the Lisp 
programmer makes a change and sees the change take effect immediately. When we began work on 
Cedar. the turnaround time for a Mesa program change was often measured in terms of dozens of 
minutes. This time lag forced the programmer to operate in a fashion that resembled batch processing. 
even though he was operating on a personal. dedicated machine. The programmer would identify as 
many problems as possible in a single debugging session. then go off and make the required edits that 
he hoped would fix these problems. and then resubmit his job and see if the changes worked. This 
resulted in a tremendous loss in productivity as compared with a programmer performing a similar task 
in Lisp or Smalltalk. t123 
tl20 For a certain. not terribly well-defined class of programs. it was possible to load multiple instances of a program into the 
same environment. i.e .. on top of one another. However. this was not a practice that was encouraged or widespread because of the 
possibility of confusion as to which instance a particular client was bound. For example. if A calls program B. and B is changed 
and reloaded. program A continues to be bound to the original version of program B. On the other hand. programs loaded 
subsequently. such as a newer version of A. will be bound to the latest version of B. 
tl21 Earlier Mesa environments had an interpreter for a (not well-defined) subset of the Mesa language. However, for the purposes 
of experimentation. this interpreter had two serious shortcomings. First. because the debugger did not share the same address space 
as the client. it was not possible to perform operations involving storage allocation. For example. the user could call a procedure 
on the value of a datum that existed in his current computing context. but he could not construct such a value on the fly to supply 
as the argument to a procedure. Second. it was not possible to save and reuse the values of expressions given to the interpreter. 
e.g. assign the value of an expression to a newly created variable. Thus. the user could not decompose interpreting a complicated 
expression into several simpler operations. The Cedar history facility. combined with the residential nature of the debugger and 
interpreter. has successfully resolved both of these issues. 
t122 An extreme version of this negative point of view regarding making changes easy was presented to me by an Air Force 
Colonel at a programming environment workshop. We were having a discussion about the merits. and drawbacks of the automatic 
spelling correction facility in Interlisp (DWIM). He was concerned about the possibility of DWIM making an inappropriate 
correction to a program. I assured him that the user was always informed. that corrections had to be confirmed. and that they were 
easily undoable. He remained unconvinced. I then proposed that we eliminate spelling corrections to programs. and consider only 
corrections to the instructions that the user gives the operating system. such as load this file. run that program. etc. I maintained 
that correcting such mistakes improved productivity. His position was: "When one of my programmers makes a mistake. I don't 
want the system to help him out. I want him to have to go home and think about it overnight" This point of view is not confined 
to the military. A leading European spokesman for modern programming technology is on record as having stated that programs 
should not have to be debugged. and that the only programming tools a good programmer should need are pencil and paper. 
t 123 Many Mesa programmers were not aware of this loss of productivity -
they had never had the opportunity to develop their 
programs in a truly interactive fashion. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
104 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
In Cedar, we were concerned with rectifying this situation and providing fast turnaround for small 
program changes. "Our concern with fast turnaround comes from the observation that programming 
should be think bound, not compute bound" Mesa offered several medium-size obstacles to fast turnaround 
for changes: the editor was not integrated or even properly packaged, the compiler was not designed to 
compile anything smaller than an entire module, and the system did not provide incremental replacement 
of procedures or even modules. [8] 
The development of the Tioga editor within the Cedar environment overcame the first of these 
obstacles, but we never did mount a serious effort to attack either of the latter two issues: compiling 
individual procedures and replacing modules. Both of these problems were much harder than we originally 
anticipated, partly because of the monolithic nature of the compiler, and the difficulty of changing or 
reorganizing it significantly. 
Instead, the goal of fast turn around for small changes was transmuted to the goal of reducing the 
overall time spent in the edit-compile-reload cycle, i.e., speaking metaphorically, giving the batch 
programmer faster turnaround, rather than providing him with interactive access to the machine. Since 
the editor was resident in the Cedar environment, it was no longer necessary to abandon program state 
while making changes. Since the user was free to perform other tasks such as reading mail, editing, or 
even debugging other parts of his program while waiting for a compilation to finish, the edit-compile 
cycle became significantly less painful. Furthermore, the availability of a checkpoint-rollback facility (in 
Interlisp parlance, Sysout and Sysin) reduced to approximately 30 seconds the time required to return 
the system to a pristine state into which a changed version' of a program could be loaded. Thus, the 
entire edit-compile-reload cycle was reduced to on the order of a very few minutes. t124 Nevertheless, 
the situation was still qualitatively very different from that of the Lisp programmer who could make a 
change and see it take effect immediately. 
Note that the key ingredient here is not necessarily the time required to see a change take effect, 
but whether the change can be made in situ. Even if restarting the entire system and reloading it with 
changed programs could be performed instantaneously, Cedar would still not have achieved its goal of 
providing fast turnaround for small program changes in the sense that it was originally conceived and is 
provided by Lisp and Smalltalk. There would still be a need to replace an instance of a running program 
with a changed version of the same program to preserve valuable program state. For example, over the 
course of a lengthy session, the user may have built up a complicated data structure and program state 
in which he wants to test out the effects of a proposed change. In such cases, it is desirable to replace 
running programs with changed versions, even if this operation takes longer than restarting the system 
and reloading the changed program. Cedar has failed to provide this capability. In the author's opinion, 
this is the single biggest shortfall of the Cedar project. 
t124 To take the example of fixing the ofT by one error in the file UserExecMethodImpl as shown in Figure 27-28 of "A Tour 
Through Cedar," the time required to make the edit itself is 1-3 seconds, to save the file is approximately 10 seconds, to compile 
the file another 25 seconds. (Both of these times obviously will depend on the size of the file. The file in question is larger than 
average by Cedar standards, about 20,000 bytes.) If this were the only change we were going to make and we wanted to test it out, 
we would then have to rebind the configuration which includes this file,. This takes another 20 seconds. Then we would 
rollback - another 30 seconds - and finally run the new configuration, which in the case of the userexecutive takes about 20 seconds. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
CEDAR: THE REPORT CARD 
105 
One final comment on the subject of changes: while Cedar is weak in the area of making changes 
whose implementation should take on the order of minutes, it is very strong, much stronger than Lisp 
or Smalltalk. in the area of making changes which normally take on the order of days or weeks, such as 
drastic reorganizations of basic data structures or algorithms in a large system. This is because the explicit 
notion of interfaces in Cedar, combined with the enforced type checking, serves to detect right away 
most of the problems that would only surface over a period of time if the corresponding changes were 
made in Lisp or Small talk. Furthermore, once the changed system has been successfully compiled and 
loaded. the programmer is fairly confident that it will run, whereas the Lisp or Smalltalk programmer 
must embark on a lengthy checkout operation to make sure all of the things that used to work still do. 
Support for Wide Range of Binding Times 
According to Beau Sheil [27]: 
The key property of the programming languages used in exploratory programming 
systems is their emphasis on minimizing and deferring the constraints placed on the 
programmer. in the interest of minimizing and deferring the cost of making large-scale 
program changes. The languages make extensive use of late binding, i.e., allowing the 
programmer to defer commitments as long as possible .... [One example of late binding 
is] the dynamic typing of variables (associating data type information with a variable at 
run-time, rather than in the program text) and the dynamic binding of procedures. The 
freedom to defer deciding the type of a value until run-time is important because it 
allows the programmer to experiment with the type structure itself. Usually, the first few 
drafts of an exploratory program implement most data structures in general, inefficient 
structures such as linked lists, discriminated (when necessary) on the basis of their 
contents. As experience' with the application evolves, the critical distinctions which 
determine the type structures are themselves determined by experimentation, and may 
be among the last. rather than the first. decisions to evolve. Dynamic typing makes it 
easy for the programmer to write code which keeps these decisions as tacit as possible. 
By contrast. "the Mesa style requires relatively early binding of many aspects of programs that in 
lisp are typically bound during execution" [11]. Thus, it is relatively difficult to add flexibility that was 
not anticipated in the program design, thereby restricting the range of experiments that can be performed 
easily. We were aware of this problem in our early discussions. We agreed that: 
The EPE must support a wide range of binding times, including the Mesa and Smalltalk 
extremes. in a way that allows changes in binding time without structural changes in the 
program. Different choices of binding time by the programmer may lead to different 
turnaround times for apparently minor changes. and to different execution efficiencies, 
but the functional behavior of programs must not depend on such choices. [11] 
We intended that Cedar make provision for binding at a variety of times, but that delayed or 
dynamic bindings would occur at the programmer's request. rather than by default as is the case in Lisp. 
This would allow programmers accustomed to the Mesa style to continue operating in the manner with 
which they were familiar. For those wishing to adopt the Lisp style of delayed binding, tools would be 
available to exploit program redundancy to infer suitable declarations for programs written without them, 
and otherwise make it easy to convert programs originally written in a delayed-binding style to earlier 
bindings for greater efficiency and ease of maintenance. For example, one reason for the addition of REF 
ANY to Cedar's type system was to allow the programmer to defer type checking from compile time to 
run-time. At some later point when the program stabilized, one could imagine a tool which would assist 
the programmer in the task of converting these REF ANY declarations to specific types where appropriate. 
However. we never did get around to building such tools. and as a result, it is unusual for programmers 
to use late binding, and then convert to earlier binding at some later point after the program matured. 
However. as discussed earlier, many programs do use REF ANY for other purposes. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11. JUNE 1984 
106 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Easy Use of Programs as Data 
The keystone of the Interlisp programming environment is its very large repertoire of facilities that 
support the user in the task of program development. These facilities include a sophisticated structure 
editor. a history package that provides both a Redo and Undo capability, automatic error correction, the 
Advise package discussed earlier. a package for analyzing user programs to determine various calling and 
usage relationships. and others. Underlying most of these facilities is the easy use of programs as data, 
i.e .. a convenient. program-manipulable representation of programs. t 125 In fact, in the author's opinion, 
the equivalence of programs and data in Lisp. i.e., the fact that Lisp programs are simply list structures, 
is the single most important aspect of Lisp. tl26 
We wanted to see a collection of facilities comparable to those in Interlisp developed in and for 
Cedar. We also wanted to make it possible for the average user to contribute to this collection of tools: 
"Perhaps the single most important observation about the use of Lisp is that as users become more 
experienced. they start building tools within the system to help them" [11]. Therefore, the issue of 
program-data equivalence received special attention in our early discussions. In particular, we identified 
three major facilities within the Mesa environment that would be necessary to enable treating Mesa 
programs as data: Lisp-style atoms, universal pointers (pointers that carry the type of their referent with 
them). and an S-expression representation of programs. 
Both Lisp-style atoms and universal pointers (REF ANY) were implemented in Cedar and were great 
successes (see discussion in footnotes 60, 61 in "A Tour Through Cedar"). However, we never did get 
around to defining a standard S-expression representation of programs. We had originally intended to 
design a representation other than the parse trees used internally by the compiler, so that the representation 
of parse trees could change as the compiler/language evolved without affecting tools that depended on 
this representation. We did not design such a representation, nor did the fallback position of using the 
compiler's parse trees directly prove workable. The Cedar compiler, having evolved from the Mesa 
compiler. did not use collectible storage, nor was it written in the safe Cedar language. It also was not 
organized in a way that made it easy to pull out pieces of it to use as packages.tl27 Furthermore, as a 
result of its having evolved over several years under several implementors, the compiler had become 
such a monolith that changing or reorganizing it in any significant way was impractical: it would have 
been almost as difficult as starting over. 
As a result of the difficulty of manipulating programs\ tools of this type have not emerged in Cedar. 
However. we have begun to see a great many tools being designed and implemented which exploit the 
high-quality graphics interface. These tools include: an efficient, lightweight tool for checking spelling in 
text. a tool for creating and editing icons, a reminder service, a package for constructing a visual interface 
to a data structure or Cedar program interface which also allows the components to be edited or invoked. 
Another use Lisp makes of the ability to treat programs as data is to provide for more general 
parameterization of tools and packages. For example, the conditions associated with breakpoints can be 
arbitrary Lisp expressions. various editor commands permit their parameters to be computed dynamically 
from expressions that are included in the command, etc. In principal, the Cedar interpreter makes this 
possible. However. this practice has not found widespread acceptance, partly because Mesa programmers 
simply tend to write applications in a different style than Lisp programmers, and partly because not 
enough attention has been given to the packaging of the interpreter in Cedar. 
t125 Other lisp systems such as Maclisp may have fewer facilities and organize them differently. e.g .. as separate programs rather 
than as part of an integrated programming system. but the underlying capability that enables these facilities is still the ability to 
treat programs as data. 
t126 Others would disagree, citing perhaps the simplicity of syntax, or the fact that all expressions are in Polish prefix notation as 
being equally or more important. . 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
CEDAR: THE REPORT CARD 
107 
Inheritance/defaulting (e.g .. Smalltalk subclassing) 
Inheritance/defaulting was one of the items in the original catalog of programming environment 
capabilities [8]: 
Languages that provide for programmer-controlled defaulting or inheritance reduce the 
time and chance for error in the programming process by making it unnecessary to write 
the same code or parameter values over and over again. The basic idea is that one should 
be able to write programs in a way that only specifies how they differ from some 
previously written program. Examples include default standard values for procedure 
arguments (how does this call differ from a "standard" call) variant records (how does 
this particular record distinguish itself from the invariant part) and the Smalltalk subclass 
concept ... Smalltalk seems to derive considerable benefit from [subclassing]. 
[8] 
Nothing was done about subclassing in Cedar, probably for the same reasons that most of the 
Lisp-related issues were not addressed: the majority of Cedar users and implementors had little or no 
direct experience with Smalltalk, and hence did not place as high a value upon this capability as they 
did on others of a more traditional Mesa flavor. tl28 As a result, when a user wants a slight change or 
enhancement to an existing facility in Cedar, and he is unable to persuade the implementor to make the 
change. he simply steals the code, i.e., uses the existing program as a starting point and makes the desired 
changes, thereby producing his own, personalized version of the software. 
The reason this works as well as it does in the Cedar environment is because one of the goals of 
the Mesa language is readability and maintainability by programmers other than the original implementor. 
The type declarations and other redundant information that may have been burdensome for the original 
implementor to specify when he was first constructing the program now pay great dividends. They 
provide a form of documentation, effectively recording certain aspects of the implementor's intent, and 
making the program easier to understand. Furthermore, the automatic type checking assures the borrower 
that when the program he has modified compiles successfully, he will not have to go through a lengthy 
debugging process: he has a high degree of confidence that the program will run correctly, or if there 
are errors, they will be localized in the area of his changes. 
The disadvantage of this procedure is that when repairs or improvements are made to the original 
software. they do not always find their way into the modified version, unless the borrower is diligent 
about tracking changes. Sometimes he may be able to convince the original implementor that the 
modifications he has made are indeed improvements, in which case the changes may be incorporated in 
the original code. For example, guarded buttons (see Figure 11) were introduced into Cedar via this 
path. However, the danger of the proliferation of multiple, renegade versions of standard system software 
makes this procedure not a completely satisfactory substitute for subclassing. 
t 127 Our original strategy called for factoring the compiler into layers. For example. our plan for implementing an interpreter 
called for using the compiler's scanner and semantic analyzer. However; the intractibility of the compiler forced us to implement 
the interpreter as a separate package. 
tl28 Also, providing support for subclassing in Cedar would have been a very difficult task. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
108 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Polymorphism 
The Cedar run-time type system allows programs to manipulate types in a fully general way. 
However. such programs admit the possibility of errors that are not detected at compile time but instead 
occur at run-time. and sometimes only under unusual circumstances. This runs counter to the Mesa 
philosophy that it is better to locate faults statically: "Many faults can be identified in a single run of 
the checker. rather than surfacing one at a time in debugging runs" and perhaps even more importantly, 
"Correctness is a static property of the program text; it is hard to ensure that a program that relies 
heavily on dynamic properties actually does what is intended" [11]. 
We had hoped to make types first-class citizens in Cedar; types would simply be values and could 
be passed as arguments and returned as results. This would enable many operations that would otherwise 
require run-time facilities to be expressed directly in the program text. 
One area where the absence of polymorphism is most noticeable is in the treatment of lists in Cedar. 
A list in Cedar is a REF to a structure consisting of two fields. first and rest (the Lisp CAR and CDR). 
first contains the corresponding element of the list. and rest a REF to the rest of the list. i.e .. its tail. If 
a list consists of elements of a particular type. such as INTEGER. then the type of the list is LIST OF 
INTEGER. If x is declared to be of type LIST OF INTEGER. the static type checking of the language 
guarantees that x.first is of type INTEGER. and x.rest of type LIST OF INTEGER. For example. a procedure 
that reverses a list of integers would be of type PROCEDURE[list: LIST OF INTEGER] RETURNS[L1ST OF 
INTEGER]' However, the absence of polymorphism means that the programmer also has to supply a 
similar procedure for LIST OF REAL. LIST OF CARDINAL. LIST OF CHARACTER. etc. What is really desired 
is a way of defining a procedure which takes the type of the elements of a list as one of its arguments. 
e.g .. PROCEDURE[list: LIST OF T. type: T] RETURNS[L1ST OF T]. 
Our initial plan was to extend the Cedar language and modify the compiler. and we generated some 
proposals for doing this. However. as mentioned earlier. the Cedar-Mesa compiler proved to be intractable 
to any but very straightforward. localized modifications. The extensions necessary to include types as 
values definitely did not fall into this category. We therefore decided to postpone any further incremental 
changes to the compiler. and instead to design a generalized version of the Cedar language called 
PolyCedar which would incorporate a number of the ideas found in languages like Russell [4]. However. 
such a project requires a substantial effort that we have not yet been able to mount. 
Document Editing. Editor Integrated with Language System 
The original EPE report stated: 
Editing is just one function of a language system. carried out using a particular 
sUblanguage. As such. it should be integrated with the rest of the language system in 
that: (1) the user doing editing can call on arbitrary programs to compute commands or 
data needed for the editing process. including the ability to pass selections from the thing 
being edited to the computation as arguments; (2) any program can call on the editor as 
a package. The latter seems very useful and relatively easy to achieve. We agree the 
former is also valuable. but there is disagreement over whether it is merely valuable or 
extremely important. 
[8] 
Cedar users in general agree that Tioga has been an outstanding success both as a text and program 
editor. when viewed as a package invoked by the user. However. Tioga has not achieved the degree of 
integration we aspired to in the original EPE report. Many operations that the user can perform on a 
document cannot be conveniently performed by a program. Although there is a program interface to the 
Tioga editor. it requires for most of its operations that the implicit argument be the current selection. 
Thus. programs cannot operate on documents directly and invisibly. but must effectively simulate the 
actions of a user moving the selection around. and obtain the results of these operations by examining 
the current selection after the operations complete. As a result. there is considerable extraneous (from 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
CEDAR: THE REPORT CARD 
109 
the user's standpoint) screen activity while such an operation is being performed, e.g., selections changing, 
viewers scrolling. etc .. and furthermore. the user cannot be performing at the same time any operations 
that affect the display, such as clicking the mouse or typing characters. Both of these factors tend to limit 
the utility of using Tioga as a callable package to perform editing operations. 
What Next? 
There is no good objective way to evaluate a programming environment. no way of certifying that 
it "works." There are no solutions only choices. The previous section discussed. some of the things we 
decided not to pursue in Cedar. and the shortcomings that resulted. This section briefly lists some tasks 
that. in the author's opinion. might prove fruitful to attack next. 
Access to on-line documentation (Helpsys) 
Good on-line documentation. both for reference and for learning. can greatly reduce the 
need for time spent studying an enormous manual, can provide instant cross-linking of 
related subjects in a way that hardcopy cannot, and can use one's current context to 
implicitly locate relevant material. Interlisp's Helpsys facility is unique in these respects. 
However. creating and maintaining such documentation is a tremendous amount of work, 
even if the process is partly automated. [8] 
No work has been done yet in Cedar on providing convenient access to on-line documentation of 
the type available in Interlisp or Smalltalk. In fact, Cedar suffers from a lack of adequate documentation 
in general. Even where material is documented. it is often hard to find due to lack of coherent 
organization: users have to know where to look. Providing good documentation for Cedar will be one of 
the highest priority items on our agenda of things to do next. 
Masterscope 
Masterscope is an interactive program for analyzing and cross-referencing user programs in Interlisp. 
We recognized the importance and utility of such a facility for Cedar. and envisioned that it would be 
one of the principal clients of the Cedar data-base facility. However, due to various priorities and limited 
resources. nothing has been done about Masterscope yet, a shortfall that Cedar users often bemoan. For 
example. when the author polled the Cedar community for examples of definitions of new Viewer 
Classes. one user responded: "Here's one where I could really use a 'global' Masterscope... I've 
implemented so many viewer classes I'll probably forget some, and it would be very tedious to examine 
all my code by hand." 
Implementing a Masterscope-Iike facility for Cedar would be considerably simplified if there were 
a standard. program-manipulable representation of Cedar programs (see earlier discussion under "Easy 
Use Of Programs as Data"). As is. before one could begin worrying about analyzing a Cedar program, 
it would be necessary to implement a facility for parsing the text of a Cedar program into a structure 
which was program manipulable. 
Altering the Flow of Control from the Debugger 
The ability to alter the flow of control from within the debugger would partially offset the lack of 
support for fast turnaround for small program changes by allowing the user to simulate the effects of a 
change by manually altering data and control from the debugger. In this way, the user would be able to 
see whether the rest of his program would operate in the desired fashion if he made a particular change, 
without having to make the change and start over. 
The simplest form of such a facility is the ability to stop a program at the entry to a procedure, 
execute the procedure, examine its return value(s), and specify different ones. We can do this now in 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
110 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Cedar. but only for certain cases. Even more useful would be the ability to stop at a breakpoint on the 
entry to a procedure. execute the procedure. examine its values/effects. change its arguments. and try 
again. Interlisp provides a more general capability which allows the user to unwind the stack back to an 
arbitrary location from within the debugger. This is particularly useful when a problem is detected after 
the fact. Such a facility would be similar to Mesa's existing signal-handling mechanism, but requires 
being able to generate signals and construct catch phrases at run-time. We believe that such an extension 
to Cedar is straightforward. though non-trivial. 
Recompiling Interfaces 
One of the great strengths of the Mesa programming language is the explicit notion of an interface. 
Separation of Mesa programs into interfaces and implementations of these interfaces enable implementors 
and clients to work independently, and to make changes independently, as long as they respect the 
interface. However. the present need for recompilations of a large number of files whenever a fundamental 
interface is changed in any way is a weakness in Cedar. Not only does every program that depends on 
the interface need to be recompiled. but if any other interfaces depend on the interface, they, and all of 
their clients. must also be recompiled before the system is once again in a consistent state. The existence 
of this tipple effect makes changing a basic interface a major undertaking requiring precise coordination. 
As a result. there is considerable social pressure to freeze program interfaces in Cedar, often before we 
have had ,sufficient opportunity to experiment with the interfaces. 
One improvement that would significantly improve the situation would be to eliminate the need for 
recompilation when an interface is changed in an upwards compatible fashion. The two most common 
examples of such a change are changes to the comments in an interface and the addition of new items 
to an interface. 
Because of the ready accessibility of all program sources in Cedar via the version map, interfaces 
are often their own most frequently used documentation. "A Tour Through Cedar" illustrated how the 
user could readily see not only the type declaration for any item in an interface. but also the comments 
associated with the item. Since documentation often needs to be debugged as much as programs, we 
would like to be able to modify or extend the comments in a fundamental interface without introducing 
the large ripple effect that follows such a recompilation. Currently, Cedar uses as the version stamp for 
an interface the date and time the interface was compiled. One proposal for allowing comments to be 
changed is to compute the version stamp. based on the contents of the interface minus the comments. 
A much more ambitious change would be tokeep version stamps in an interface on an item by item 
basis. In this case. programs would have to be recompiled only when the particular items that they 
actually used from a given interface were changed. This would also allow, as a special case, the addition 
of new items to an interface without affecting existing programs. 
Inter-language communication 
The section "Support for Wide Range of Binding Times" discussed the desirability of being able 
initially to implement a program using late binding to defer various binding decisions in order to 
minimize the constraints on the program, and thereby decrease its resistance to change, and then later 
to bind these decisions earlier in the program to provide for increased efficiency and reliability. Perhaps 
the first such decision that a programmer has to make is what programming language to use. The ultimate 
in delayed binding would be to enable the programmer to change this decision for those parts of his 
program that needed it. for example, initially writing an application in Lisp, and then optimizing those 
parts that need it by recasting them in Mesa. This is an extremely important and challenging area for 
future research. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
CEDAR: THE REPORT CARD 
111 
Conclusion 
Today, in the fall of 1983, Cedar is a reality and, by common consent, one of the most 
advanced programming environments in the world. Visitors from other laboratories are 
envious of Cedar's emphasis on visual interaction; of its support for concurrent tasks; of 
its sophisticated debugging facilities. Above all, the environment does indeed make it 
possible for a researcher to design and implement an experimental computer system and 
get it used and tested in a remarkably short period of time. 
For instance, various 
programmers using the Cedar environment have in the last few months been able to 
build and test two experimental systems for handling electronic mail, one for computer 
storage of voice messages, one for producing raster images, several for VLSI design. 
They all report favorably on the ease with which they could knock together real, 
functioning systems. 
The Cedar project is, however, still far from complete .... There are still many problems 
to be solved, and we have not yet succeeded in meeting all of our goals. We need even 
more memory, both real and virtual. We need a more flexible type system. We do not 
yet have integrated access to databases. We want better ways of manipulating information 
from source programs. We need much faster turnaround for program changes than we 
have yet been able to achieve. And as Cedar begins dramatically to increase our ability 
to build complicated systems, we have come to feel the need for better tools to describe 
and control them. 
[6] 
The Cedar project has been an unusual one from several standpoints. To the author's knowledge, in 
no other case have the goals of an environment been so clearly stated, even before the first line of code 
been written. and in very few caSes have these goals been so ambitious. The successes of Cedar, how 
much effort was actually required to achieve them, the shortfalls of Cedar, why they occurred and the 
effect they had on the resulting environment, all have much to teach us about the design and 
implementation of large programming environments, an area of endeavor that is becoming increasingly 
more important as the plummetting price of computer hardware makes powerful personal workstations 
increasingly accessible to programmers. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
ApPENDIX 1 
113 
Appendix 1: Catalogue of Programming Environment Capabilities 
The following list of desirable capabilities for a programming environment was compiled by the first 
Experimental Programming Environment Working Group. The complete results of their findings are 
contained in [7]. 
Virtual machine/programming language 
Large virtual address space (~ 24 bits) 
Direct addressing for files 
Well-integrated access to large, robust data bases 
Memory management-object/page swapping 
Object management-garbage collection, reference counting. 
Some support for interrupts 
Adequate exceptional condition handling 
User access to the machine's capability for packed data 
Program-manipulable representation of programs 
Run-time availability of all information derivable from source program (e.g., names, 
types, scopes) 
Statically checked type system 
Self-typing data (a la Lisp and Smalltalk), run-time type system 
Encapsulation/protection mechanisms (scopes, classes, import/export rules) 
Abstraction mechanisms: explicit notion of "interface" 
Non-hierarchical control (coroutines, backtracking) 
Adequate run-time efficiency 
I nter-Ianguage communication 
Uniform screen management 
Inheritance/defaulting. 
Ability to extend language (e.g .. operator overloading) 
Ability to create fully integrated local sublanguages 
User access to the machine's capability for multi-precision arithmetic 
Good facilities for processes, monitors, interrupts 
Simple unambiguous syntax 
Control over imp6rtation of names 
User packages as "first-class" citizens 
Closures 
Full-scale inter-language communication 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
114 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
User microprogramming 
Clean data and control-trapping mechanisms 
"Good" exceptional condition handling 
Tools 
Fast turnaround for minor program changes (less than 5 seconds) 
Compilerlinterpreter available with low overhead at run time 
Cross-reference/annotation capability 
Prettyprinter 
Consistent compilation 
Version Control 
Librarian, program-oriented filing system (including Browser) 
Source-language debugger 
Dynamic measurement facilities 
Checkpoint. establishing a protected environment 
History and undoing 
Editor integrated with language system 
More optimizing compiler if user willing to bind more tightly-with full compatibility 
Aids for incremental development (stubs, outstanding task list) 
Regression testing system 
Random testing aids 
(high capability) Masterscope 
Access to on-line documentation (Helpsys) 
Static analyzers: verifier, performance predictor 
Packages 
Text objects and images 
Line objects and images 
Scanned (bitmap) objects and images 
Formatted document files 
More elaborate screen management 
Remote file storage 
Small data base manager 
Message transmission system 
Remote procedure call 
Event logging 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
Background processing 
Generalized cache 
Document editing 
Forms 
ApPENDIX 1 
Menus and other standard user interfaces 
History lists 
User access to full bandwidth of disk 
(English) dictionary service 
Teleconferencing 
Audio 
User access to full bandwidth of networks 
Other 
Adequate reference documentation 
"Efficient" interface for experts 
Uniformity in command interface 
"Self-teaching" interface, for beginners 
Good introductory documentation 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
115 
116 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
Appendix 2: Prioritized Catalogue of Programming Environment Capabilities 
The following is the same list that appears in Appendix 1, sorted by the priorities assigned to each 
capability by the EPE Working Group. 
Priority A 
Object management-garbage collection, reference counting. 
Statically checked type system 
Memory management-objectlpage swapping 
Abstraction mechanisms; explicit notion of "interface" 
Fast turnaround for minor program changes (less than 5 seconds) 
Adequate run-time efficiency 
Large virtual address space (~ 24 bits) 
Priority B 
Encapsulation/protection mechanisms (scopes, classes, import/export rules) 
Well-integrated access to large, robust data bases 
Self-typing data (a fa Lisp and Smalltalk), run-time type system 
Consistent compilation 
Version Control 
Source-language debugger 
Text objects and images 
Uniform screen management 
User access to the machine's capability for packed data 
Run-time availability of all information derivable from source program (e.g., names, 
types, scopes) 
Priority C 
Direct addressing for files 
Some support for interrupts 
Compilerlinterpreter available with low overhead at run time 
Adequate reference documentation 
Librarian, program-oriented filing system (including Browser) 
Program-manipulable representation of programs 
Dynamic measurement facilities 
Scanned (bitmap) objects and images 
Formatted document files 
"Efficient" interface for experts 
Line objects and images 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
Remote file storage 
Priority D 
Inter-language communication 
History and undoing 
ApPENDIX 2 
Non-hierarchical control (coroutines, backtracking) 
Ability to extend language (e.g., operator overloading) 
Ability to create fully integrated local sublanguages 
Closures 
Checkpoint, establishing a protected environment 
I nheritance/ defaulting 
Cross-reference/annotation capability 
Prettyprinter 
Menus and other standard user interfaces 
Document editing 
Adequate exceptional condition handling 
Editor integrated with language system 
Remote procedure call 
More optimizing compiler if user willing to bind more tightly-with full compatibility 
Access to on-line documentation (Helpsys) 
Message transmission system 
Event logging 
Generalized cache 
Forms 
Uniformity in command interface 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-11, JUNE 1984 
117 
REFERENCES 
119 
References 
[IJ 
Andrew D. Birrell, Roy Levin, Roger M. Needham, and Michael D. Schroeder. "Grapevine: An 
Exercise in Distributed Computing," Communications of the ACM, Volume 2S, Number 4, April 
1982, pp 260-274. 
[2J 
Andrew D. Birrell, and Bruce Jay Nelson. "Implementing Remote Procedure Calls," CSL-83-7, 
October, 1983 (also in Transactions on Computer Systems, Volume 2, Number 1, February, 1984). 
[3J 
D.G. Bobrow, and M. Stefik, "The Loops Manual," Knowledge Systems Area, Xerox PARC 
1983. 
[4J 
H. Boehm, A. Demers and 1. Donahue, "An Informal Description of Russell," Technical Report 
TR80-430, Computer Science Department, Cornell University, 1980. 
[SJ 
R. G. G. Cattell, "Design and Implementation of a Relationship-Entity-Datum Data Model," 
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center Report CSL-83-4. May, 1983. 
[6J 
Cedar Implementors, "The CSL Cedar Project," Update, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center 
Technical Information Center, January 4, 1984. 
[7J 
Douglas W. Clark, Butler W. Lampson, and Kenneth A. Pier, "The Memory System of a 
High-Performance Personal Computer," Xerox Palo Alto Research Center Report CSL-81-1. 
January, 1981 (also in IEEE Transactions on Computers, Vol. C-30, No. lO, pp. 71S-733, October, 
1981). 
[8J 
L. Peter Deutsch and Edward A. Taft, "Requirements for an Experimental Programming 
Environment," Xerox Palo Alto Research Center Report CSL-80-10. June, 1980. 
[9J 
L. Peter Deutsch and Daniel G. Bobrow, "An Efficient, Incremental, Automatic Garbage 
Collector." Communications of the ACM, Volume 19, Number 7, July, 1976. 
[lOJ 
Adele Goldberg and Dave Robson, Smalltalk-80: The Language and its Implementation, 
Addison-Wesley, 1983. 
[l1J 
1. 1. Homing, editor, "Report from Second Programming Environment Working Group," Internal 
Memo, December 13, 1978. 
[12J 
1. 1. Homing, "Cedar Language Overview," Internal Memo. 1983. 
[13J 
D. H. Ingalls, "The Smalltalk-76 Programming System: Design and Implementation," Proceedings 
of the 5th Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Programing Languages, January 1978, pp 
9-16. 
[l4J 
Interlisp Reference Manual, Xerox Corporation, revised October, 1983. 
[lSJ 
Butler W. Lampson and Kenneth A. Pier, "A Processor for a High-Performance Personal 
Computer," Xerox Palo Alto Research Center Report CSL-81-1. January, 1981 (also in Proceedings 
of Seventh Symposium on Computer Architecture, SigArch/IEEE, La Baule, May 1980, pp. 146-160). 
[16J 
Butler W. Lampson, "Hints for Computer System Design," ACM Symposium on Operating System 
Principles, October, 1983. 
[17J 
Larry Masinter, "Global Program Analysis in an Interactive Environment," Xerox Palo Alto 
Research Center Report SSL-80-1, January, 1980. 
[18J 
John Maxwell, "The Cedar Spy," Internal Memo, 1983. 
[19J 
Scott McGregor "The Viewers Window Package," Internal Memo, 1983. 
[20J 
James G. Mitchell, William Maybury, and Richard Sweet. "Mesa Language ManuaL" Version S.O. 
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center Report CSL-79-3, April 1979. 
[21J 
James Morris, "The Cedar Project," Internal Memo, March 31, 1980. 
[22J 
Bill Paxton, "The Tioga Editor," Internal Memo, 1983. 
[23J 
Lyle Ramshaw, "The Briefing Blurb," Internal Memo, 1983. 
[24J 
David Redell. et. al., "Pilot: An Operating System for a Personal Computer", Communications of 
the Association for Computing Machinery, Vol. 23, No.2, February, 1980. 
XEROX PARCo CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
120 
THE CEDAR PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT 
[25] 
Erik Sandewall, "Programming in an Interactive Environment: the 'Lisp' Experience," Computing 
Surveys, Vol. 10, No.1, March 1978. 
[26] 
Eric Emerson Schmidt, "Controlling Large Software Development In a Districtubed Environment," 
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center Report CSL-82-7, December, 1982. 
[27] 
Beau Sheil, "Environments for Exploratory Programming," Datamation, Vol. 29. No.2, February, 
1983, pp 131-144. 
[28] 
M. Stefik, D.G. Bobrow, S. Mittal, and L. Conway, "Knowledge Programming in Loops: Report 
on an Experimental Course," AAAI Magazine, Vol. 4, No.3, Fall 1983. 
[29] 
Warren· Teitelman, "A Display Oriented Programmers Assistant," Proceedings of the Fifth 
International Joint Conference on Aritifical Intelligence, August, 1977 . 
[30] 
Warren Teitelman, The Interlisp Reference Manual, revised 1978, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center. 
[31] 
Warren Teitelman and Larry Masinter, "The Interlisp Programming Experience," Computer, Vol. 
14, No.4, April 1981, pp 25-33. 
[32] 
C. P. Thacker, E. M. McCreight, B. W. Lampson, R. F. Sproull, D. R. Boggs, "Alto: A Personal 
Computer," 
CSL-79-11. August, 1979 (also in Computer Structures: Readings and Examples. 
second edition, by Siewiorek, Bell and Newell). 
[33] 
John Warnock and Douglas K. Wyatt, "A Device Independent Graphics Imaging Model for Use 
with Raster Devices," Computer Graphics, Volume 16, Number 3, July, 1982. 
XEROX PARC, CSL-83-H, JUNE 1984 
