 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
 
SIAM Review  Vol. 55, Issue 4 (December 2013) 
 
Book Reviews 
Introduction, 789 
 
Featured Review: Visual Complex Functions: An Introduction with Phase Portraits (Elias Wegert), 
Lloyd N. Trefethen, 791 
 
Combinatorics of Permutations. Second Edition (Miklós Bóna), Michael Albert, 797 
Quasi-Stationary Distributions: Markov Chains, Diffusions and Dynamical Systems (Pierre Collet, Servet 
Martinez, and Jaime San Martín), Wael Bahsoun, 799 
Continuous-Time Markov Chains and Applications: A Two-Time-Scale Approach. Second Edition (G. George 
Yin and Qing Zhang), Vladimir Gaitsgory, 799 
Improving Risk Analysis (Louis Anthony Cox, Jr.), Charles R. Hadlock, 801 
Nonlinear Inclusions and Hemivariational Inequalities: Models and Analysis of Contact Problems (S. Migórski, 
A. Ochal, and M. Sofonea), Weimin Han, 803 
Invisible in the Storm: The Role of Mathematics in Understanding Weather (Ian Roulstone and John 
Norbury), Robert E. O’Malley, Jr., 804 
A Primer on Mathematical Models in Biology (Lee A. Segel and Leah Edelstein-Keshet), Robert E. O’Malley, Jr., 
804 
Differential-Algebraic Equations: A Projector Based Analysis (Rene Lamour, Roswitha Marz, and Caren 
Tischendorf), Robert E. O’Malley, Jr., 805 
The Divergence Theorem and Sets of Finite Perimeter (Washek F. Pfeffer), William P. Ziemer, 805 
 
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
Nick Trefethen’s featured review of Elias Wegert’s Visual Complex Functions is both
very enthusiastic and well illustrated.
One knows that we must move away from
Ahlfors, when we compare the tables of Abramovitz and Stegen and the richness found
in its successor, the NIST Digital Library of Mathematical Functions.
The other reviews in the issue treat combinatorics of permutations, quasi-
stationary distributions, two-timing for Markov chains, risk analysis, contact problems,
differential-algebraic equations, the history of weather forecasting, mathematical mod-
eling for biologists, and the divergence theorem from the perspective of geometric
measure theory.
We’ll expect most of our readers will want to buy one or more of these recom-
mended new publications.
Bob O’Malley
Section Editor
bkreview@amath.washington.edu
789
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
SIAM REVIEW
c⃝2013 Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
Vol. 55, No. 4, pp. 791–809
Book Reviews
Edited by Robert E. O’Malley, Jr.
Featured Review: Visual Complex Functions: An Introduction with Phase Por-
traits. By Elias Wegert. Birkh¨auser/Springer Basel AG, Basel, 2012. $59.95. xiv+360 pp.,
softcover. ISBN 978-3-0348-0179-9.
I don’t read many mathematics books cover to cover, but I just ﬁnished Elias Wegert’s
Visual Complex Functions. Four young colleagues and I studied it section by section
over a period of a few months. What an experience! Anyone who works with complex
variables should read this book.
Wegert’s theme is that to understand functions in the complex plane, we should
look at them. Now it is not news that complex analysis is a geometric subject, and in
fact, Riemann’s investigations in this area played a role in the creation of the ﬁeld of
topology. But when it comes to actually plotting a complex function f(z), the tradi-
tion is sparse. Part of the problem is that since the domain and range spaces are each
two-dimensional, the graph of f(z) is four-dimensional. So what exactly can we plot?
There are some classic answers, like the beautiful ﬁgures in Tables of Functions
with Formulae and Curves by Jahnke and Emde in 1909, which became the very ﬁrst
book republished by Dover Publications after they set up operations in 1941. Figure 1
shows Jahnke and Emde’s iconic image of the absolute value of the gamma function
in the complex plane, produced in an era of hand calculations and expert technical
artists.
Fig. 1
Gamma function from Jahnke and Emde.
Times have changed, and computers with omnipotent color graphics are every-
where.
Wegert’s book is built on the idea of what he calls a phase portrait of a
function. (He is not the ﬁrst to work with such plots, but has carried the idea the
Publishers are invited to send books for review to Book Reviews Editor, SIAM, 3600 Market St.,
6th Floor, Philadelphia, PA 19104-2688.
791
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
792
BOOK REVIEWS
Fig. 2
Phase portraits of z and log(z).
furthest.) This is a 2D plot in which the color at each point z shows the phase of
f(z), that is, the number θ for which f(z) = r exp(iθ) with r > 0. To explain the
code, Figure 2(left) depicts a phase portrait of f(z) = z. Red corresponds to values
of f(z) that are positive real, light green to positive imaginary, cyan to negative real,
and violet to negative imaginary.
In Figure 2(right), we see the function f(z) = log(z). Note the zero at z = 1,
with the same sequence of colors around it as for f(z) = z at z = 0. To the right
the color is red, since log(z) is positive real for z > 1, and to the left it is cyan, since
log(z) is negative real for 0 < z < 1. Further left we see the branch cut along (−∞, 0].
Above the branch cut, the predominant color is green, indicating a phase in the upper
half-plane, and below it is violet, showing a phase in the lower half-plane.
After this warmup we can begin to make sense of more complicated functions,
and my colleagues and I soon grew happily skilled at this. Consider, for example,
the function f plotted in Figure 3(left). In the upper middle of the frame, f has a
triple zero, that is, a zero of multiplicity 3. One sees this because the colors appear
three times in sequence as one traces around the center point, with yellow to the left
of red. In the right part of the frame it has a double pole, a pole of multiplicity
2.
This is apparent because the colors are traced out twice in the reverse order,
with yellow to the right of red. Near the bottom, it has an essential singularity, an
isolated point singularity that is not a pole. The function shown in Figure 3(right) is
f(z) = exp(1/z), the simplest example of a function with an essential singularity. I
remember as a graduate student sensing a deep mystery in Picard’s theorem, which
asserts that all complex values except possibly one are attained in every neighborhood
of an essential singularity. When you study ﬁgures like these, Picard’s theorem begins
to seem less mysterious.
Phase portraits don’t show magnitudes directly, but they show them indirectly.
We know that if yellow is to the left of red, this signiﬁes a zero, implying that |f|
grows as one moves away from the zero. This happens on the left of the origin in the
plot of exp(1/z), indicating the growth of this function there from values near zero as
z moves leftward. To the right of the origin, yellow is to the right of red, indicating
the decay of the function from values near inﬁnity. Sometimes one might prefer to see
the modulus directly, but Wegert makes a compelling case that there is usually more
precise information in a phase portrait.
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
BOOK REVIEWS
793
Fig. 3
Poles, zeros, and essential singularities.
In Figure 4(left), we see f(z) = sin(z).
(This image is what Wegert calls an
“enhanced phase portrait,” with additional shading to further mark phase and ampli-
tude.) The 2π-periodicity in the complex plane is evident, and one is reminded that
sin(z) maps half-strips to half-planes. The point z = 0 at the center of the plot, for
example, lies at the bottom of a half-strip that maps to the upper half-plane, whose
predominant colors are orange, yellow, and green. The experienced eye can also infer
from the colors the exponential increase of | sin(z)| as one moves away from the real
axis, since yellow lies to the left of red in each parallel channel.
The right image in Figure 4 shows the Riemann zeta function ζ(z) in the region
−40 < Rez < 10, −2 < Imz < 48. Notice that yellow is to the left of red at every
rainbow point except one: these are the trivial zeros on the negative real axis and the
nontrivial ones with Rez = 1
2. The exceptional point has yellow to the right of red,
and this is the simple pole of ζ(z) at z = 1. In the left half-plane we see exponential
growth in modulus as one moves leftward, since yellow again lies to the left of red in
each channel.
Fig. 4
sin(z) and ζ(z).
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
794
BOOK REVIEWS
Portraits like these can give added depth to our understanding of many of the
functions that have been studied by mathematicians in the past 200 years. Some of the
functions explored in Wegert’s book, at his Phase Plot Gallery at www.visual.wegert.
com, and in his annual calendars of “Complex Beauties” coauthored with Gunter
Semmler, include Bessel, Neumann, and Airy functions; theta, Bernoulli, and Painlev´e
functions; Fresnel integrals, elliptic functions, and continued fractions.
But Wegert’s purpose is more than just the exploration of particular functions,
for phase portraits can teach us fundamental principles of complex analysis. The two
images shown in Figure 5 explore the idea of multivaluedness, on the left by following
a chain of function elements twice around a square root singularity, and on the right
with a 3D plot of the Riemann surface for the cube root. If you circle around twice
on the left, or three times on the right, you return to your starting color.
Fig. 5
Multivalued functions z1/2 and z1/3.
The plot in Figure 6(left) shows an analytic function f in the unit disk with a
countably inﬁnite set of zeros lying along a curve that spirals out to the unit circle.
This picture makes it easy to understand that the circle is a natural boundary for
this function, meaning that f cannot be analytically continued anywhere outside.
This function happens to be an inﬁnite Blaschke product, with constant modulus
Fig. 6
Blaschke products in the disk and on the Riemann sphere.
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
BOOK REVIEWS
795
in the limit as |z| →1, as is reﬂected in the color boundaries meeting the circle at
right angles. In Figure 6(right), a simpler Blaschke product is shown, a ﬁnite one,
analytically continuable to a meromorphic function on the whole Riemann sphere,
i.e., a rational function. One sees an elegant symmetry of zeros in one hemisphere,
poles symmetrically located in the other.
Phase portraits reveal fascinating properties of Taylor series as they converge to
analytic functions.
In Figure 7(left), f(z) is the degree 60 Taylor polynomial for
1/(1 −z). Inside the unit circle, the series closely represents the limit function, but
outside it becomes a circus tent growing at the rate |z|60 (yellow to the left of red
in each channel). The transition from one behavior to the other is marked by a line
of zeros that converges to the circle of convergence; this is Jentzsch’s theorem. In
Figure 7(right), the middle of the image looks like exp(z): the stripes are 2πi-periodic
and the growth is exactly exponential as one moves to the right, since the stripes
are parallel with yellow to the left of red. Outside a certain curve of zeros, however,
the behavior changes completely, and in fact, what is plotted here is not exp(z) but
its Taylor polynomial of degree 60.
Since exp(z) is entire, Jentzsch’s theorem is
inapplicable, and the curve in question moves out to ∞as the degree increases. This
curve was analyzed by Szeg˝o and later generalized for Pad´e rational approximations
of exp(z) by Saﬀand Varga.
Fig. 7
Taylor polynomials of 1/(1 −z) and exp(z).
One of the central techniques of complex variables is the construction of functions
via Cauchy integrals. For example, suppose we consider a Cauchy integral deﬁned
by integrating the constant function 1 over the unit interval [−1, 1]. The resulting
function f(z), plotted in Figure 8(left), is a branch of log((z −1)/(z + 1))/2πi with a
branch cut along [−1, 1]; the Plemelj–Sokhotsky jump relation tells us that f jumps
by exactly 1 across the interval. What if the same function 1 is used along a diﬀerent
contour? We get a less standard branch of log((z −1)/(z + 1))/2πi, as shown in
Figure 8(right). Until I saw such pictures, Cauchy integrals never seemed so simple.
For a numerical analyst like me, these ideas become especially intriguing when
Cauchy integrals are combined with discretization. The plot shown in Figure 9(left)
shows a certain Cauchy integral approximated by the 200-point trapezoid rule over a
contour that winds around twice. The resulting function f(z) is a rational approx-
imation to the function deﬁned by the exact Cauchy integral, with 200 poles along
the contour and corresponding zeros lining up nearby outside. In Figure 9(right),
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
796
BOOK REVIEWS
Fig. 8
Two branches of log((z −1)/(z + 1))/2πi.
Fig. 9
Discretized Cauchy integrals.
the number of quadrature points has increased to 800, and the pole-zero pairs have
come closer together. In the limit they deﬁne a layer potential of the kind familiar
in the ﬁeld of integral equations, and pictures like these reveal connections between
integral equations, complex variables, quadrature theory, rational functions, potential
theory, digital ﬁltering, the theory of hyperfunctions, . . . it is hard to know where to
terminate the list!
Visual Complex Functions is a beautiful and careful presentation of an entire
advanced introduction to complex analysis based on phase portraits and, where ap-
propriate, other kinds of computer-generated pictures. The book is mathematically
complete, with theorems and proofs as well as pictures. It treats series, products,
singularities, analytic continuation, conformal mapping, Riemann surfaces, and many
other topics always from a fresh and compelling point of view. My understanding of
many ideas and phenomena deepened through reading this book.
Although Wegert’s aim was to produce a volume that could be used as a main or
companion text for an introductory course, my colleagues and I felt that this aim is not
realized. It is hard to imagine learning complex variables for the ﬁrst time with this
book, for the treatment—however enlightening and exciting—is just too idiosyncratic.
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
BOOK REVIEWS
797
A few of the deﬁnitions (for example, of paths, curves, arcs, and traces), while carefully
thought through, seem not quite standard and potentially confusing for a beginner;
occasionally one ﬁnds a term imperfectly translated from German, like ring instead
of annulus or neutral element instead of identity. But for anyone who has already had
a ﬁrst exposure to complex variables, this book oﬀers a thrilling second journey, or
a third. Remarkably, despite 360 pages of beautiful glossy color, it sells for less than
$50. An epilogue shows how to draw your own phase portraits, and MATLAB-based
software is available at www.visual.wegert.com.
I would like to thank my young colleagues for their contributions to this review:
Anthony Austin, Mohsin Javed, Georges Klein, and Alex Townsend.
When I went oﬀto graduate school in 1977, a good fraction of the way back to the
era of Jahnke and Emde, I loved complex variables and wanted to work with them
on the computer. Sometime during my ﬁrst semester a friend from undergraduate
days wrote and asked, “Are you skiing on the complex functions yet?” With Wegert’s
extraordinary book, at last I am skiing on the complex functions.
LLOYD N. TREFETHEN
University of Oxford
Combinatorics of Permutations. Second
Edition. By Mikl´os B´ona. CRC Press, Boca Ra-
ton, FL, 2012. $89.95. xiv+458 pp., hardcover.
ISBN 978-1-4398-5051-0.
In a ﬁrst combinatorics or discrete mathe-
matics course a student will learn the for-
mula n! for the number of permutations
of n objects. Aside from using this as an
annoying correction factor in counting un-
ordered arrangements of various types, the
next and last exposure to the combinatorics
of permutations will often be to the formula
for the number of derangements presented
as an illustration of the use of the princi-
ple of inclusion-exclusion. This is a shame
because the combinatorial theory of permu-
tations contains a wealth of interesting and
accessible results using methods from all the
drawers of the combinatorial tool chest, and
often suggesting surprising connections and
relationships between apparently unrelated
structures.
This book attempts to ﬁll in some of
those gaps while acknowledging that the
area as a whole is still so broad that com-
plete coverage is impossible. Of course this
means that the selection of topics is some-
what according to the author’s tastes, but
certainly B´ona has done an excellent job of
choosing a variety of areas to discuss. The
introduction suggests that the material was
developed for a graduate class in combina-
torics, but it could just as easily be adapted
to an advanced undergraduate course, or for
independent study by a motivated student.
Chapters 1 and 2 deal with permutations
thought of as sequences from the ordered set
1 < 2 < · · · < n. First, descents, i.e., ad-
jacent inversions are discussed, and then
inversions in general are considered. The re-
sults discussed are largely enumerative, but
the mix of techniques (surjections and bi-
jections, generating functions, recurrences)
already illustrates one of the main themes
of the book. Chapter 3 turns to the familiar
decomposition of permutations as products
of cycles and investigates various questions
one might ask about properties of such de-
compositions, or the permutations whose
representations are of a particular type. In
particular we return to the derangements,
but in a much more general setting which
permits one to see striking results like Ex-
ample 3.58, that the exponential generating
function for permutations whose cycle de-
composition consists of cycles of odd length
only is

(1 + x)/(1 −x).
Chapters 4 and 5 (and the reviewer must
declare an interest) turn to the less familiar
area of pattern avoidance. This again deals
with permutations thought of as sequences
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
798
BOOK REVIEWS
from a linearly ordered set. In that context,
any subsequence can also be thought of as a
permutation in its own right based simply
on the relative order of its elements. For
instance, the subsequence 351 of the per-
mutation 35421 contains the pattern 231
since it begins with its middle element (by
value), then its greatest element, and then
its smallest element. This relationship gives
a partial order on permutations, and the
(initial) objects of study are the collections
of permutations which avoid (i.e., do not
contain) certain patterns. Beginning with
a basic discussion of these ideas, and some
early results, Chapter 4 culminates with the
proof by Marcus and Tardos of the Stanley–
Wilf conjecture, which states that there is
an exponential bound on the number of per-
mutations avoiding any single pattern. This
proof, if not from “the book,” is from a very
nearby shelf and illustrates beautifully how
the right change of perspective, together
with extremely clever but elementary ar-
guments, can cut through some seemingly
intractable combinatorial problems.
Chapters 6 and 7 deal with random per-
mutations and the algebraic combinatorics
of permutations. As the author indicates in
the preface these are two enormous areas of
study, and to some extent these chapters can
only skim the surface of some selected top-
ics. The somewhat lighter Chapter 8 turns
to algorithms for generating and sorting
permutations (which has connections with
the material on pattern avoidance). Finally
Chapter 9 turns to an “application” of the
combinatorics of permutations in certain
(rather constrained and somewhat artiﬁ-
cial) models of genome rearrangements.
There are a few criticisms that can be
made of this book.
First, on the non-
mathematical side, despite the fact that it is
a second edition, a worryingly large number
of typographical and similar errors remain
which should have been caught by careful
proofreading. The typographical ones are
easily spotted by an experienced mathe-
matician, but would be more confusing for
a student. Others, such as the repetition of
the deﬁnition of northeastern lattice path on
page 17, are just annoying. The subject is
one where proofs and examples are usefully
supplemented by key diagrams, but in this
book the quality of the typesetting of the di-
agrams is quite poor—they look rather out
of place in comparison with the main body
of text. In a somewhat similar vein, the
overall layout of the pages is very dense, and
the frequent use of in-line formulas leads to
some rather choppy line spacings and atten-
dant diﬃculties in reading ﬂuidly. Finally,
the index is rather sketchy (though on the
other hand the references are excellent!). As
regards the actual content, the only criti-
cism is that there is a certain lack of ﬂow
and development, either in terms of topics
or diﬃculty. To some extent this is simply
a consequence of the survey nature of the
book as a whole, but already parts of Chap-
ter 1 are quite dense and technical—this
sort of take-no-prisoners approach might
discourage a student. Beginning the book
with the rather lighter material of the ﬁnal
two chapters might have made a diﬀerence
here. Of course this is something that an
instructor can easily take into account as
well.
On the other hand, there are many, many
positive things to be said.
Its principle
contribution is to provide an overview of
(parts of) this rich area of combinatorial
knowledge which has not been previously
available in textbook form. The topics cho-
sen form a good representation of starting
points for further research in the area, and
to some extent illustrate the interconnec-
tions between them. There is a rich supply
of interesting and well-chosen exercises. Of
particular note are the “Problems Plus”
sections, which provide a wealth of further
topics to explore—often linking directly to
the research literature. For an interested
student, or as a source for ideas for presen-
tations or essays (as opposed to the usual
weekly exercise sheets), these are invalu-
able.
Overall, I think this is an excellent book
and well worth considering for an appro-
priate course, or as a recommendation to a
student for independent study. It’s a shame
that some rather minor technical issues de-
tract from its attractiveness, but on the
whole its positive aspects far outweigh the
negative ones.
MICHAEL ALBERT
University of Otago
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
BOOK REVIEWS
799
Quasi-Stationary Distributions:
Markov
Chains, Diffusions and Dynamical Sys-
tems. By Pierre Collet, Servet Martinez, and
Jaime San Mart´ın. Springer, New York, 2013.
$129.00. xvi+280 pp., hardcover. ISBN 978-3-
642-33130-5.
This book is concerned with Markov pro-
cesses and dynamical systems whose orbits
get killed (or terminated) once they hit a
trap. In the area of Markov process this
topic has deep roots and goes back to Kol-
mogorov’s work in 1938 (see the book under
review and references therein). While in the
area of dynamical systems, research on this
topic started in the late 1970s [4]. In both
areas this topic is currently one of the most
active branches of research. This is in part
due to its interesting applications in other
sciences. In mathematical biology Markov
processes and dynamical systems with a
trap has applications in birth-death pro-
cesses (see the book under review and ref-
erences therein). In physics, among a vast
literature on applications, it found applica-
tions in transport in heat conduction [2]. It
also plays an important role in astronomy
[5]. More recently, this topic has provided
insights into the study of metastable dynam-
ical systems which behave approximately
like a collection of dynamical systems with
traps: the infrequent transitions between
almost invariant regions in a metastable sys-
tem are similar to infrequent escapes from
associated systems with traps [3, 1].
Over the last 20 years, the authors of the
book have made remarkable contributions
to this topic of research, and this book cul-
tivates their work to date. The book starts
by introducing the main tools needed to
study the long-term behavior of Markov
process and dynamical systems with traps.
This is done by introducing the deﬁnition
of the so-called quasi-invariant distribution
(QSD) and its associated exponential rate
of survival, which are indeed the main tools
needed to describe the long-term statis-
tics of a Markov process (and for dynam-
ical systems) with a trap. Then the book
presents results on the problem of existence
of QSD and its associated exponential rate
of survival in discrete-time Markov chains
on a countable state space, N-dimensional
Brownian motion, although, in the latter,
more emphasis is put on the 1-dimensional
case. Moreover, it brieﬂy touches on dy-
namical systems, such as iterated maps and
ﬂows, where the trap is often called in the
dynamical systems literature a hole.
The book under review is well written
and to a certain extent is self-contained.
The authors of the book are leading experts
in the area, and they made all the eﬀort to
make the book accessible to everyone, from
graduate students to researchers, working
in this area. Chapter 8 is the only place
where I would have liked more material on
dynamical systems with holes. Neverthe-
less, this is an important, unique book. To
the best of my knowledge I have never seen
a book which is devoted only to the study of
QSD and which covers both Markov process
and dynamical systems.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Bahsoun and S. Vaienti, Escape rates
formulae and metastability for ran-
domly perturbed maps, Nonlinearity, 26
(2013), pp. 1415–1438.
[2] P. Gaspard and T. Gilbert, Heat conduc-
tion and Fourier’s law by consecutive
local mixing and thermalization, Phys.
Rev. Lett., 101 (2008), 020601.
[3] G. Keller and C. Liverani, Rare events,
escape rates, quasistationarity: Some
exact formulae, J. Stat. Phys., 135
(2009), pp. 519–534.
[4] G. Pianigiani and J. Yorke, Expanding
maps on sets which are almost invari-
ant: Decay and chaos, Trans. Amer.
Math. Soc., 252 (1979), pp. 351–366.
[5] H. Waalkens, A. Burbanks, and S. Wig-
gins, Escape from planetary neighbour-
hoods, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 361
(2005), pp. 763–775.
WAEL BAHSOUN
Loughborough University
Continuous-Time Markov Chains and Ap-
plications: A Two-Time-Scale Approach.
Second Edition. By G. George Yin and Qing
Zhang. Springer, New York, 2013. $129.00.
xxii+427 pp., hardcover.
ISBN 978-1-4614-
4345-2.
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
800
BOOK REVIEWS
The book is devoted to a study of continu-
ous time singularly perturbed (SP) Markov
chains and their applications in problems of
control and optimization.
Singularly perturbed systems arise in
modeling “real life” systems appearing in
a variety of applications (physical, biolog-
ical, and management sciences, electrical,
chemical, and mechanical engineering, and
others).
Due to its importance for applications
and due to the mathematical challenges it
is presenting, singular perturbations theory
has been studied intensively in the litera-
ture. Numerous papers and a good number
of books have been devoted to this topic
over the years; see, e.g., Bensoussan [1],
Dontchev [2], Kabanov and Pergamensh-
chikov [3], Kokotovic, Khalil, and O’Reilly
[4], Kushner [5], O’Malley [6], Pervozvan-
ski and Gaitsgory [7], Plotnikov, Plotnikov,
and Vituk [8], Vasil’eva and Butuzov [9],
and Yin and Zhang [10].
The distinctive feature of the book under
review is that it is devoted exclusively to
the in-depth study of SP continuous time
Markov chains and their applications. This
makes the book complementary to the ex-
isting literature.
SP Markov chains are characterized by
the fact that their generators Qϵ depend
on a small parameter ϵ > 0 in a “singular”
way. Namely,
Qϵ = 1
ϵ
˜Q + ˆQ,
where ˜Q and ˆQ are generators themselves.
The dynamics of the state probabilities vec-
tor p(t) is described by the diﬀerential equa-
tion
dp(t)
dt
= (Qϵ)T p(t),
with the presence of the small parameter
implying that some linear combinations of
the state probabilities vector may change
their values with the rates of the order
O( 1
ϵ ), while the rates of changes of some
other such combinations are of the order
O(1). The decomposition of the state prob-
abilities dynamics into fast (of the order
O( 1
ϵ )) and slow (of the order O(1)) parts is
most distinctive in the case in which ˜Q has
a block-diagonal structure,
˜Q = diag( ˜Q1, ˜Q2, . . . , ˜Ql),
where Qk, k = 1, . . . , l, are irreducible
generators of suitable Markov chains. The
block-diagonal structure of ˜Q implies that
the set M of states of the corresponding
Markov chain is decomposed into l subsets,
M = M1 ∪· · · ∪Ml.
The fast dynamics in this case is repre-
sented by frequent transitions between the
states within each subset Mi. These tran-
sitions are governed by the Markov chain
with the generator 1
ϵ ˜Qi + O(1), and are re-
sulted in that the probability distribution
within Mi becomes approximately equal to
the stationary distribution of the Markov
chain with the generator ˜Qi (i = 1, . . . , l).
The slow part of the dynamics is associ-
ated with “rare” transitions between the
states belonging to diﬀerent subsets. The
process of moving from subset to subset
is approximately described by the “aggre-
gated” Markov chain, the elements of the
generator of the latter being obtained via
summing up appropriate elements of ˆQ with
weights deﬁned as stationary distribution
within the subsets.
The book contains a number of exam-
ples illustrating possible applications of SP
Markov chains in control and optimization
problems. One of these is the problem of
minimization of the expected cost,
min
u(·) E
 T
0
G(x(t), u(t), αϵ(t))dt,
considered on the solutions of the system
dx(t)
dt
= f(x(t), u(t), αϵ(t)),
x(0) = x0,
where x(t) is the state variable (or vector
of state variables), u(t) is the control func-
tion, and αϵ(t) represents random distur-
bances, the latter being modeled by an SP
Markov chain. Assuming that the generator
of this Markov chain has a perturbed diag-
onal structure (as in the example above),
it is natural to conjecture that a near op-
timal control can be found via solving an
averaged optimal control problem, in which
the SP Markov chain is replaced by the
Markov chain with adequately aggregated
states. The fact that the number of aggre-
gated states is generally much less than the
number of states in the original SP chain has
a potential to greatly simplify the analysis.
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
BOOK REVIEWS
801
The veriﬁcation of this and similar con-
jectures about dynamical systems driven
by SP Markov chains is based on in-depth
understanding of asymptotic properties of
such chains, the methodical study of which
is the main focal point of the book.
The book consists of three parts. Part I
provides background material. It exposes,
in particular, a number of models and ex-
amples of Markov chains (including birth
and death processes, queueing systems with
ﬁnite capacities, optimal control of jump
linear systems, and others). Part II is the
largest of the three, and it is devoted to
a thorough analysis of various asymptotic
properties of SP Markov chains. Among
the topics studied here are SP chains with
recurrent states, SP chains having absorb-
ing states, SP chains containing transient
states, and SP chains with perturbed block-
diagonal structure (the consideration in-
cluding the case when the number of blocks
is inﬁnite). Part III deals with some ap-
plications including Markov decision pro-
cesses, near optimal control of stochastic
dynamical systems, numerical solutions of
control and optimization of Markov chains,
and hybrid two-time-scale LQG problems.
The ﬁrst edition of the book was very
well received by the research community.
It has provided a valuable reference and
stimulated research in the area. There is no
doubt that this second, revised and updated
edition will be also well received by the in-
tended audience (researchers and graduate
students in applied mathematics and con-
trol engineering interested in modeling and
optimization of complex stochastic systems)
and will excite further interest to the topic.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Bensoussan, Perturbation Methods in
Optimal Control, John Wiley, New
York, 1989.
[2] A. Dontchev, Perturbations, Approxi-
mations, and Sensitivity Analysis of
Optimal Control Systems, Springer,
Berlin, 1983.
[3] Y. Kabanov and S. Pergamenshchi-
kov, Two-Scale Stochastic Systems,
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2003.
[4] P.
Kokotovi´c,
H.
K.
Khalil,
and
J. O’Reilly, Singular Perturbation
Methods in Control: Analysis and De-
sign, 2nd ed., Classics Appl. Math. 25,
SIAM, Philadelphia, 1999.
[5] H. J. Kushner, Weak Convergence Meth-
ods and Singularly Perturbed Stochas-
tic Control and Filtering Problems,
Birkh¨auser Boston, Boston, 1990.
[6] R. E. O’Malley, Jr., Introduction to Sin-
gular Perturbations, Academic Press,
New York, 1974.
[7] A. A. Pervozvansky and V. Gaits-
gory, Theory of Suboptimal Deci-
sions, Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht,
The Netherlands, 1988.
[8] V. A. Plotnikov, A. V. Plotnikov,
and A. N. Vituk, Diﬀerential Equa-
tions with Multivalued Right-Hand
Sides:
Asymptotic Methods, Astro-
Print, Odessa, 1999 (in Russian).
[9] A. B. Vasil’eva and V. F. Butuzov,
Asymptotic Expansions of Solutions
of Singularly Perturbed Equations,
Nauka, Moscow, 1973 (in Russian).
[10] G. G. Yin and Q. Zhang,
Discrete-
Time Markov Chains:
Two-Time-
Scale
Methods
and
Applications,
Springer, New York, 2005
VLADIMIR GAITSGORY
Flinders University
Improving Risk Analysis. By Louis Anthony
Cox, Jr. Springer, New York, 2013. $179.00.
xxvi+386 pp., hardcover. ISBN 978-1-4614-
6057-2.
This excellent book presents up-to-date ma-
terial, various portions of which are sure
to be of great interest to several distinct
audiences. The primary focus is on sta-
tistical issues and causality, with a sec-
ondary emphasis on decision theory. But
even teachers of game theory and ordinary
diﬀerential equations are likely to ﬁnd in-
teresting examples of methods and contexts
that might ﬁt into their syllabi or make
good case studies for their students to take
on as projects. This diversity of subject
matter should not be surprising since the
wide range of societal decision problems
involving risk includes ﬁelds as diverse as
epidemiology, ﬁnance, industrial safety, de-
fense, and others. Three unifying themes
permeate the text: how statistical methods
can be used and abused, how nonstatisti-
cal methods can complement statistics in
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
802
BOOK REVIEWS
understanding causality, and how analyti-
cal decision support methods, if used cor-
rectly, can enhance human decision making.
The book is full of thorough but accessible
examples and case studies with extensive
references to the literature.
First, let’s look at the big picture. We
make individual and collective decisions
constantly that involve considerations of
risk: what to eat, where to invest, what
to regulate, when to seek help, how strong
to build buildings, how much to spend
for public safety and defense. All of these
decisions are based on information, and
almost all of them take into account po-
tentially conﬂicting information as well as
multiple objectives, such as improving con-
ditions and reducing costs. The fundamen-
tal problem then is that of understanding
the eﬀects of alternative decisions and iden-
tifying an appropriate balance of such ef-
fects. The results of possible decisions can
be investigated by complementary statis-
tical and nonstatistical models targeting
causality, and this can all sometimes be put
together by a formal decision process that is
more eﬀective, eﬃcient, and objective than
less structured individual or group decision
making. After all, for the latter, just recall
some recent market “ﬂash crashes” or large-
scale power outages, where retrospective
analyses clearly indicate human decision
failures (sometimes implemented through
software) in stressful situations, such as fast
moving or unanticipated circumstances. In
other cases, psychological biases or political
pressures can have signiﬁcant negative ef-
fects. The problem of good decision making
is so challenging in the public arena, where
some politicians are likely to fan the ﬂames
of ignorance to their own advantage, that
in more pessimistic moments one might be
tempted to throw in the towel and set alter-
native goals on the belief that ignorance can
be bliss if the majority of people are content
with it. But little by little, I believe our re-
sponsibility as educators and scientists is to
show people how to convert information to
action in rational ways and to instill in the
broader society a reasonable expectation
and conﬁdence that our leaders can do this.
There is much room for improvement here.
This book begins with a wake-up call by
showing in example after example how al-
ternative conclusions have been drawn by
supposed experts on the basis of statistical
analyses of various datasets pertaining to
the same decision problem. The emphasis
here is on health impacts of environmental
agents, such as particulate matter in the
air or antibiotics used in the production of
meat. It’s the repetition of the story we
tell our students from the ﬁrst course in
statistics: association is not causality. It’s
the story they repeat back to us on case
studies and ﬁnal examinations—but then
they run oﬀand do it anyway after the
course is over. That’s because the tempt-
ing combination of statistical associations
and plausible logic can weaken the search for
alternative explanations and become a self-
fulﬁlling prophecy. It doesn’t help objectiv-
ity that there may also be intense pressures
for publication or paying clients who like
what they see. Cox rigorously keeps the
focus on the decision problem: what will
be the likely impact on future outcomes
from alternative decisions about proposed
actions. For this we need to structure the
decision process in a framework that can get
beyond associations and on to causality.
Lots of progress on causality analysis has
been made in the last twenty years, but it’s
still a complex ﬁeld that requires cautious
negotiation by professionals. Fortunately,
some quite recent software packages can be
used to facilitate this work. The author pro-
vides a nice overview of various approaches
(including some older ones): interrupted
time series analysis, change point analy-
sis, quasi-experimental designs, panel data
analysis, Granger causality, conditional in-
dependence tests,
counterfactual regres-
sion models, and graph-theoretic analysis
(chains and networks). This last category,
closely related to the groundbreaking work
of Judah Pearl, is developed through causal
chains, path analysis, structural equations,
directed acyclic graphs, and Bayesian net-
works. One would need to consult the ref-
erences for details on the methods, but
the overview and examples are excellent.
Several very detailed case studies are pre-
sented in later chapters. The complemen-
tarity between statistical investigation and
phenomenological models is shown with the
use of ordinary diﬀerential equations to un-
derstand certain processes as well as game
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
BOOK REVIEWS
803
theoretic and optimization methods. These
latter ﬁt into the picture because the focus
is consistently on making decisions that will
aﬀect the future, not just on interpreting
data from the past.
The Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 has led
to a greater focus on formal risk assessment
within public companies and many other
institutions as a component of responsi-
ble management. This has given birth to
a plethora of tools being marketed by con-
sulting companies for the prioritization of
risk reduction actions. My own experience
suggests that these tools are hard for many
clients to pick from, and those with the
“slickest” human interface or ease of use
may be selected more for that than for
their technical merits. An important con-
tribution of this book is to compare various
approaches to making decisions about risk.
The author shows, for example, the seri-
ous suboptimality of typical risking scoring
systems, which are so common. The chal-
lenge I see is in bridging the gap between
methods that an organization’s leadership
or constituencies will be willing to rely on
and those that derive from a more sophisti-
cated perspective. He discusses some ways
to manage this challenge with more ro-
bust decision frameworks involving multiple
models or adaptive decision stages.
In summary, this is an important contri-
bution to the literature in that it bridges
the gap from theory to practice, includes
many ﬁelds of application, and is accessible
to a wide audience.
CHARLES R. HADLOCK
Bentley University
Nonlinear Inclusions and Hemivariational
Inequalities: Models and Analysis of Con-
tact Problems.
By S. Mig´orski,
A. Ochal,
and M. Sofonea. Springer, New York, 2013.
$169.00. xvi+285 pp., hardcover. ISBN 978-1-
4614-4231-8.
Analysis of models from contact mechanics
has a long history and has attracted much
attention in the research community for over
half a century. A contact problem is nonlin-
ear, featured by its inequality form. When
the problem has a convex structure, the
inequality formulation is a variational in-
equality, and there has been a large amount
of publications devoted to modeling, mathe-
matical analysis, numerical algorithms, and
simulations of variational inequalities aris-
ing in contact mechanics. Presence of a non-
convex term in the problem leads to a hemi-
variational inequality, which is in turn a
nonlinear inclusion associated with a Clarke
subdiﬀerential operator. It is more challeng-
ing to study hemivariational inequalities,
and the size of the literature on hemivaria-
tional inequalities is much smaller than that
on variational inequalities. The book under
review presents a rigorous introduction to
the theory of nonlinear inclusions and hemi-
variational inequalities with applications to
contact mechanics.
The book consists of three parts. Part I
reviews concisely basic notions and results
from functional analysis that is needed later
in the book. This part is intended to make
the book as self-contained as possible. It
covers materials on normed spaces, dual-
ity, measure theory, function spaces, var-
ious diﬀerentiation notions for nonsmooth
functions, and single-valued and set-valued
operators of monotone type. Most of the re-
sults are stated without proof, but extensive
references are provided for the proofs and
for further discussions. The other two parts
are based on the authors’ research work.
Part II provides existence and uniqueness
results for abstract nonlinear inclusions,
both stationary and evolutionary, and ap-
plies the results in the study of stationary
and evolutionary hemivariational inequali-
ties. Detailed proofs of the statements are
given, based on techniques of monotonicity,
compactness, and ﬁxed-point arguments.
The theory developed in Part II is em-
ployed in Part III to analyze some hemi-
variational inequalities modeling static and
dynamic frictional contact problems. The
constitutive law is elastic, or piezoelectric,
or viscoelastic with short-term or long-term
memory. The contact condition is modeled
with normal compliance or normal damped
response, while the friction condition is
modeled with variants or regularizations of
Coulomb’s law. For each contact problem
studied, a hemivariational inequality is de-
rived, and solution existence or both exis-
tence and uniqueness are shown.
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
804
BOOK REVIEWS
The book is very well written. In addition
to a rather comprehensive list of relevant
references, the authors include several pages
of bibliographical notes at the end of each
part to aid the reader for references with
additional information and further study.
The book is highly recommended to re-
searchers, graduate students included, who
are interested in the mathematical theory of
hemivariational inequalities and/or in the
study of contact problems involving non-
monotone and set-valued constitutive laws
or boundary conditions.
WEIMIN HAN
University of Iowa
Invisible in the Storm: The Role of Math-
ematics in Understanding Weather. By Ian
Roulstone and John Norbury. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ, 2013. $35.00. x+325 pp.,
hardcover. ISBN 978-0-691-15272-1.
This is a book about the history of mete-
orology and the essential role mathematics
and computing have played in it. It empha-
sizes the people who developed the subject,
illustrating the ideas with good graphics
and the personalities with stories and de-
scriptions of the work, carried out through
international cooperation and accumulated
understanding and capability throughout
the last century.
The authors convince the reader that the
subject of climate is much more compli-
cated than astronomy and more important
than suggesting what clothes we should
wear. The heroes include the Norwegian
Vilhelm Bjerknes, the British Quaker Lewis
Fry Richardson, the Swede Carl-Gustav
Rossby, and the Americans Jule Charney
and Edward Lorenz. The emphasis is nu-
merical weather prediction, based on sim-
plifying the physics, the global grid, and
data assimilation.
The basic hydrostatic
and geostrophic balances are described, as
is the chaotic behavior of the solutions to
the three-dimensional nonlinear determin-
istic model of Lorenz and the resulting need
for ensemble forecasting. They accomplish
all this with a minimum of technicality.
Readers will realize that much better
forecasting has resulted because of com-
bined progress regarding computers, math-
ematics, and the atmospheric sciences. We
should expect accelerated continuing suc-
cess, based on adequate funding and atten-
tion by all.
Roulstone and Norbury have done an out-
standing job and provide readers a ﬁne bib-
liography to continue their education on
this fascinating topic.
ROBERT E. O’MALLEY, JR.
University of Washington
A Primer on Mathematical Models in Bi-
ology. By Lee A. Segel and Leah Edelstein-Keshet.
SIAM, Philadelphia, 2013. $69.00. xxiv+424 pp.,
softcover. ISBN 978-1-611972-49-8.
Lee Segel (1932–2005) was a superb applied
mathematician and gifted teacher and ex-
positor who modeled problems in biology
and other ﬁelds, and his former student
Leah Edelstein-Keshet of the University of
British Columbia has earned similar recog-
nition. Both are authors of well-known and
often-used textbooks in the SIAM Classics
in Applied Mathematics series. We are very
fortunate that Leah was able to retrieve
Lee’s most recent lecture notes from the
Weizmann Institute and modify and ex-
tend them to provide us this extraordinary
primer, aimed primarily at biology students.
The presentation beneﬁts tremendously by
its large number of illustrations, primarily
generated using Bard Ermentrout’s XPP
software (available online and described in
his SIAM publication).
The result, despite its low level of mathe-
matical prerequisites, is very sophisticated.
Readers really learn and appreciate phase
plane analysis, as well as scaling, limit cy-
cles, bifurcations, etc. Students will es-
pecially be convinced that understanding
solution behavior involves lots of simpliﬁ-
cations and geometric interpretations of the
dynamics. They’ll be provided exposure to
analytical detail by working on the many bi-
ologically meaningful exercises and projects
and consulting the many references, both bi-
ological and mathematical. Applications in-
clude the spread of infections, the extensive
treatment of the quasi-steady state hypoth-
esis in biochemical kinetics, the FitzHugh–
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
BOOK REVIEWS
805
Nagumo equations, and networks of genes
and cells.
The authors don’t preach but convinc-
ingly demonstrate what successful model-
ing is and how essential a role mathemat-
ics (mostly systems of ordinary diﬀerential
equations) plays in the process. They’ve
provided us a new and unique classic!
ROBERT E. O’MALLEY, JR.
University of Washington
Differential-Algebraic Equations: A Pro-
jector Based Analysis.
By Rene Lamour,
Roswitha Marz, and Caren Tischendorf. Springer,
Berlin, 2013. $149.00. xxviii+649 pp., soft-
cover. ISBN 978-3-642-27554-8.
How does one handle a system
F(t, x, x′) = 0
of diﬀerential equations when one cannot
solve for the derivative? What initial con-
ditions should be provided? One could pro-
ceed geometrically or algebraically.
Special cases abound, such as a diﬀeren-
tial equation
y′ = f(t, y, z)
subject to the constraint
0 = g(t, y, z).
They are worthy of study because they are
essential to important applications, such
as circuit theory. Their algebraic analysis
goes back to the work of Weierstrass and
Kronecker on matrix pencils, so it’s ﬁt-
ting that a foremost center for the study of
diﬀerential-algebraic equations (DAEs) de-
veloped at Humboldt University in Berlin,
under the leadership of Roswitha Marz. In-
deed, the 1986 book of Griepentrop and
Marz on DAEs and their numerical treat-
ment (Tuebner, Leipzig) has been very in-
ﬂuential. This big new book brings scholars
up to date on this school’s progress and initi-
ates a Springer series Diﬀerential-Algebraic
Equations Forum, with an international ed-
itorial board.
For linear equations, it’s natural to de-
velop projector-based analyses and related
numerical methods based on the underly-
ing notion of index (related to diﬀerenti-
ating the constraints a number of times,
hoping to specify the solution). The au-
thors present their ideas for a zoo of
speciﬁc problems in detailed step-by-step
fashion, with simple illustrative examples.
Variable coeﬃcients and nonlinearity are
considered, under various restrictive hy-
potheses. Canonical forms, singular points,
regularity, the pseudoinverse, and much new
terminology come into play. A variety of nu-
merical methods are presented, especially
for index-1 problems. The ﬁnal chapter in-
troduces abstract DAEs.
Altogether, the book is well written and
well motivated. Nonetheless, the presenta-
tion is necessarily very technical and far
from an easy read.
ROBERT E. O’MALLEY, JR.
University of Washington
The Divergence Theorem and Sets of
Finite
Perimeter.
By
Washek
F.
Pfeffer.
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2012. $99.95.
xvi+243 pp.,
hardcover.
ISBN 978-1-4665-
0719-7.
This monograph is devoted to the detailed
and comprehensive development of the most
general form of the divergence theorem, a
result of fundamental importance in mathe-
matical analysis. In its simplest form, which
is presented in most calculus books, it states
the following: If f : E →Rn is a smooth
vector ﬁeld deﬁned on a suitably simple set
E ⊂Rn, then
(1)

E
div f(x) dx =

∂E
f(y) · ν(y)d σ,
where σ denotes surface measure. Research
on the problem of ﬁnding the most natural
and general form of the divergence theorem
has been one of the successes of geomet-
ric measure theory, by describing the most
general form of the sets E for which (1)
remains valid. Thus, in order to give the
exposition the greatest clarity, the book is
divided into 3 parts:
1. Extending the family of vector ﬁelds
for which the divergence theorem holds
on simple sets.
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
806
BOOK REVIEWS
2. Extending the family of sets for which
the divergence theorem holds for Lip-
schitz vector ﬁelds.
3. Proving the divergence theorem when
the vector ﬁelds and sets are extended
simultaneously.
Part 1 begins a review of some of the fun-
damental facts of topology, including linear
spaces and their duals as well as the weak*
and strong topologies. All this is followed
by a review of measure theory which in-
cludes a discussion of Hausdorﬀmeasure
and the theorems of Egoroﬀand Lusin and
the Saks–Henstock lemma. The most im-
portant portion of Part 1 deals with a proof
of (1) in which the set E ⊂Rn is replaced
by a ﬁnite union of dyadic cubes and where
f is assumed to be diﬀerentiable on the in-
terior of E with div f ∈L1(E). This result
is important because of the simplicity of
the proof, the fact that it will be used in
establishing the general form of (1), and
the fact that it can be used in the study
of removable singularities of some classical
diﬀerential equations. All the material in
Part 1 should be accessible to a ﬁrst-year
graduate student in analysis.
The material of Part 2 is directed to
the development of material which is nec-
essary to understand the main results of
the book. For this purpose the class of
BV functions f : U →R1 such that the
partial derivatives of f are totally ﬁnite
measures in the sense of distributions are
introduced, as well as their associated sets of
ﬁnite perimeter. A measurable set is said to
have ﬁnite perimeter, P(E) < ∞, if the in-
dicator function χE is of bounded variation.
This is the analytic formulation. There is
also the measure-theoretic version, which is
as follows: The measure-theoretic bound-
ary of a measurable set E is the set of all
x ∈Rn such that x is not a point of density
of E and is not a point of density of the
complement of E. The measure-theoretic
boundary of E is denoted by ∂∗E. The
fact that a set of ﬁnite perimeter is char-
acterized by Hn−1(∂∗E) < ∞is one of the
main results of this section. Related con-
cepts to measure-theoretic boundary are
the analogues of the topological bound-
ary, namely, the sets ext∗E, int∗E, and
cl∗E, which are, respectively, points of dis-
persion of E, int∗E := ext∗Rn \ E, and
cl∗E:=Rn \ ext∗E. In order to exploit the
connection between sets of ﬁnite perime-
ter and BV functions, the author proves
the Fleming–Rishel co-area formula for BV
functions [5]: If f ∈BV , then the set
Et := {f > t} is of ﬁnite perimeter for
almost all t ∈R and ∥Df∥=

R(Et)dt,
where ∥Df∥denotes the total variation of
the gradient measure Df.
The next big step in the development is
the introduction of the reduced boundary of
a set E, which is the set {x: x ∈spt(∥DχE∥)
} such that |νE(x)| = 1 and
(2)
lim
r→0
1
μE(B(x, r))

B(x,r)
νE(y) dμE(y)=νE(x),
where νE(x) is the Radon–Nikod´ym deriva-
tive of DχE with respect to
DχE
. The
notion of reduced boundary is due to [2] and
is denoted by ∂∗E. Note that ∂∗E ⊂∂∗E.
Next, it is shown that ν(E, x) has a geo-
metric meaning. Indeed, it is shown that if
H±(E, x) are the two half-spaces that are
determined by the hyperplane H(E, x) :=
{y ∈Rn : ν(E, x) · (y −x) = 0}, then
H(E, x) is tangent to E at x in the measure-
theoretic sense:
1. Θ(H+(E, x) ∩E, x) = Θ(H−(E, x) \
E, x) = 0.
2. Θν(E, x) = 1/2.
Here, Θ(A, x) denotes the density of a set
A ⊂Rn at x.
These results are very satisfying intuitively,
but their proofs are not easy. They are crit-
ical in establishing the following result, due
to Federer [3, 4].
Theorem 1. If E is a set of ﬁnite perime-
ter and v : Rn →Rn is Lipschitz, then

E
div (x) dx =

∂∗E
v(y)·ν(E, y) dHn−1(y).
Part 3 is concerned with generalizing
Theorem 1 for vector ﬁelds that are more
general than being Lipschitz. The author
considers vector ﬁelds in which each com-
ponent of v ∈BV , and therefore the diver-
gence of v is a signed measure. For such
a vector ﬁeld and for Ω ⊂Rn, a Lipschitz
domain, he proves that the trace of v,
T v(x) = lim
r→0
1
rn−1 ∥Dv∥(Ω ∩B(x, r)),
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
BOOK REVIEWS
807
exists for Hn−1a.e. x ∈∂Ω. Furthermore,
it is shown that whenever v ∈BV (Ω; Rn),
and Ω is Lipschitz and compact, then there
exists C > 0 such that
∥T v∥L1(∂Ω,Hn−1) ≤C ∥v∥BV (Ω;Rn) .
With this notion of trace, the following is
proved.
Theorem 2. If Ω is Lipschitz with com-
pact boundary, then
div W (Ω) =

∂Ω
(T w) · νΩ dHn−1,
whenever w ∈BV (Ω; Rn).1
Since, up to this point, the divergence
theorem is known only for vector ﬁelds, v,
for which div v = μ and for which v ∈L∞,
the author investigates the situation where
v is allowed to be unbounded near cer-
tain singular sets, K. The growth of v
near K is controlled by a suitable power
of the distance from K. The power is de-
termined by M ∗t(K), the upper Minkowski
content of K of dimension t. A mapping
v : E ⊂Rn →Rn is called bounded at
x ∈clE, provided there is a neighborhood
U of x such that
sup{|v(y)| : y ∈E ∩U} < ∞.
The set of x ∈E such that v is not bounded
at x is denoted by E∞.
Let A ⊂Rn be a bounded set of ﬁ-
nite perimeter.
It is shown that if v :
clE →Rn, with compact sets Kj such that
E∞=  Kj, for each j, there are numbers
0 ≤tj < n−1 such that M∗tj(Kj) < ∞and
M ∗tj(Kj, ∂∗A) < ∞, and if there are de-
creasing, integrable functions βj : R1 →R1
such that for w := v|∂∗A
|w(x)| = O(1)βj[d(x, Kj)]d(x, Kj)t+2−n
as x →Kj,
(3)
then under these conditions, it is shown that
when div v is calculated relative to cl∗A it
exists at almost all points of A. Further-
more, if div cl∗A ∈L1(A), then

A
div cl∗Av(x) dx=

∂∗A
v(y)·νA(y)dHn−1(y).
The author pursues another version of
the divergence which may exist at x while
the classical divergence may not. For this he
considers the ﬂux, F, of v ∈L∞
loc(Ω, Hn−1)
which is deﬁned for all dyadic ﬁgures con-
tained in the open set Ω, that is, for the
ﬁnite union of dyadic cubes,
F(A) :=

∂A
v · νA dHn−1.
It turns out that F is an additive function.
For a given set E ⊂Ω, and δ > 0, let
VδF(E) := sup
P
p

i=1
|F(Ci)| ,
where P is a δ-ﬁne partition of Ω. The
critical variation of F is deﬁned as
V F(E) := inf
δ>0 VδF(E).
Interestingly, the author shows that V F is
a Borel measure on Ω. If the measure V F is
absolutely continuous, it is then shown that
the derivative F ′ exists a.e. in Ω, which is
called the mean divergence of v at x. Fur-
thermore, if F ′ ∈L1
loc, then
F(A) =

A
F ′(x) dx.
Thus, we have the following theorem.
Theorem 3. Suppose the ﬂux of v ∈
L∞
loc(Ω, Hn−1) is absolutely continuous on
Ω. Then the mean divergence, div m, exists
1The author notes here that this result has been extended to v ∈L∞(E), independently by [6]
and [1]. The result states that for such a v with div (v) = μ, a signed measure, there is a trace
operator, Tv : ∂∗E →Rn, Tv ∈L∞(∂∗E, Hn−1), which satisﬁes the equation

E
div v := μ(E) =

∂∗E
(Tv) · νE dHn−1.
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
808
BOOK REVIEWS
a.e. in Ω, and if div m ∈L1
lcc(Ω), then

A
div m(x) =

∂A
v · νA dHn−1.
The author brings the book to a conclu-
sion by considering the following question:
How can one characterize those distribu-
tions L for which the divergence equation
div v = L?
Depending on L, the answer is sought for
ﬁnding a v that has some regularity such
as boundedness or continuity, or both. He
begins the discussion by considering the rel-
atively easy case of when L ∈D′
p(Ω), where
D
′
p(Ω) := {L ∈D′(Ω) : ∥L∥p < ∞} and
where
∥Lp∥:= sup

L(ϕ) := ϕ ∈D(Ω) and
∥Dϕ∥Lp
(Ω;Rn) ≤1
	
.
Using the Hahn–Banach theorem, we obtain
the following.
Theorem 4.
Let ∞= q > 1.
The
equation div v = L has a weak solution
v ∈Lq(Ω; Rn) if and only if L ∈D
′
P (Ω).
Moreover the solution v can be chosen so
that ∥v∥Lq(Ω;Rn) = ∥L∥p. Here, 1
q + 1
p = 1.
An
application
of
the
Gagliardo–
Nirenberg–Sobolev inequality yields the fol-
lowing.
Theorem 5. For each f ∈Lp(Ω) with
p ∈(1, n], there exists a weak solution
v ∈Lp∗(Ω) to the equation div v = f such
that
∥v∥Lp∗(Ω;Rn) ≤κ ∥f∥Lp(Ω) .
Here, p∗:=
np
n−p is the Sobolev conjugate of
p.
In order to discuss the harder case of ﬁnd-
ing a continuous weak solution, the notion
of a charge is introduced. A distribution
F ∈D′(Ω) is called a charge if for each
open set U compactly contained in Ω and
ε > 0 there is θ > 0 such that
F(ϕ) ≤θ ∥ϕ∥L1(U) + ε ∥Dϕ∥L1(U;Rn)
for all test functions ϕ ∈D(Ω).
It turns out that the notion of charge
provides an elegant answer to the question
of whether a continuous solution exists.
Theorem 6. Let L ∈D
′(Ω). Then the
equation div v = L has a weak solution
v ∈C(Ω; Rn) if and only if L is a charge in
Ω.
If f ∈Ln
loc(Ω), then it’s an easy conse-
quence of both H¨older’s and Sobolev’s in-
equalities that f is a charge, and therefore
the equation has continuous solutions. In
view of Theorem 5, it has bounded solutions
as well. A result due to T. Depauw shows
that it has a solution that is both bounded
and continuous simultaneously.
Theorem 7. If f ∈Ln(Ω), then there
exists a κ such that div v = f has weak
solution v ∈C(Ω; Rn) with ∥v∥L∞
loc(Ω) ≤
κ ∥f∥Ln(Ω).
In conclusion, this book has admirably
accomplished its goal of the detailed and
comprehensive development of the most
general form of the divergence theorem.
Though this development is necessarily
technical and complex, the author has suc-
ceeded in presenting the material in such a
way as to make it accessible to a ﬁrst-year
graduate student in analysis. This he has
done by providing many examples and in
presenting some of the material in small
print, which may be considered marginal,
but also as an enhancement of the text.
Some of the small-print material would be
of greater interest to the expert in that it
represents mathematics at the frontiers. In
general, because of the importance of the
divergence theorem in mathematics, this
book will appeal to a wide audience of
mathematicians, even those whose primary
interest is not in analysis. I believe this
book will ﬁnd a secure place in virtually
any mathematician’s personal library as an
important reference book.
REFERENCES
[1] G.-Q. Chen,
M. Torres,
and W. P.
Ziemer,
Gauss-Green
theorem
for
weakly diﬀerentiable vector ﬁelds, sets
of ﬁnite perimeter, and balance laws,
Comm. Pure Appl. Math., 62 (2009),
pp. 242–304.
[2] E. De Giorgi, Nuovi teoremi relativi alle
misure (r −1)-dimensionali in uno
spazio ad r dimensioni, Ricerche Mat.,
4 (1955), pp. 95–113.
[3] H. Federer, The Gauss-Green theorem,
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 58 (1945),
pp. 44–76.
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 
BOOK REVIEWS
809
[4] H. Federer, A note on the Gauss-Green
theorem, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 9
(1958), pp. 447–451.
[5] W. H. Fleming and R. Rishel, An inte-
gral formula for total gradient varia-
tion, Arch. Math. (Basel), 11 (1960),
pp. 218–222.
[6] M. ˇSilhav´y Divergence measure ﬁelds and
Cauchy’s stress theorem, Rend. Sem.
Mat. Univ. Padova, 113 (2005), pp. 15–
45.
WILLIAM P. ZIEMER
Indiana University
Downloaded 11/24/13 to 129.67.186.57. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see http://www.siam.org/journals/ojsa.php
