Don’t Be Evil:
Fred Turner on Utopias, Frontiers, and Brogrammers
Fred Turner is one of the world’s leading authorities on Silicon Valley. A 
professor at Stanford and a former journalist, he has written extensively on the 
politics and culture of tech. We sat down with him to discuss how Silicon Valley 
sees itself, and what it means when the tech industry says it wants to save the 
world.
Let’s start with the idea that technology is always a force for good. This 
strain of thought is pervasive in Silicon Valley. Where does it come 
from? What are its origins?
It owes its origins to 1960s communalism. A brief primer on the 
counterculture: there were actually two countercultures. One, the New 
Left, did politics to change politics. It was very much focused on 
institutions, and not really afraid of hierarchy.
The other—and this is where the tech world gets its mojo—is what I’ve 
called the New Communalists. Between 1966 and 1973, we had the largest 
wave of commune building in American history. These people were 
involved in turning away from politics, away from bureaucracy, and toward 
a world in which they could change their consciousness. They believed 
small-scale technologies would help them do that. They wanted to change 
the world by creating new tools for consciousness transformation.
This is the tradition that drives claims by companies like Google and 
Facebook that they are making the world a better place by connecting 
1
people. It’s a kind of connectionist politics. Like the New Communalists, 
they are imagining a world that’s completely leveled, in which hierarchy has 
been dissolved. They’re imagining a world that’s fundamentally without 
politics.
It’s worth pointing out that this tradition, at least in the communes, has a 
terrible legacy. The communes were, ironically, extraordinarily conservative.
When you take away bureaucracy and hierarchy and politics, you take away 
the ability to negotiate the distribution of resources on explicit terms. And 
you replace it with charisma, with cool, with shared but unspoken 
perceptions of power. You replace it with the cultural forces that guide our 
behavior in the absence of rules.
So suddenly you get these charismatic men running communes—and 
women in the back having babies and putting bleach in the water to keep 
people from getting sick. Many of the communes of the 1960s were among 
the most racially segregated, heteronormative, and authoritarian spaces I’ve 
ever looked at.
But how were computers in particular supposed to create a world 
without bureaucracy or hierarchy or politics? How was information 
technology going to facilitate the kinds of transformations the New 
Communalists were looking for?
So the New Communalists failed, in a big way. By 1973, virtually all of the 
communes had disappeared or dissolved.
Through the 1970s and into the early 1980s, most of the folks who used to 
be on the communes are still in the Bay Area. And the tech world is 
bubbling up around them. They need work, so many of them start working 
in the tech world.
2
The folks associated with the commune movement—particularly Stewart 
Brand and the people formerly associated with the Whole Earth Catalog—
begin to reimagine computers as the tools of countercultural change that 
they couldn’t make work in the 1960s.
Stewart Brand actually calls computers “the new LSD.” The fantasy is that 
they will be tools for the transformation of consciousness—that now, 
finally, we’ll be able to do with the computer what we couldn’t do with 
LSD and communes. We’ll be able to connect people through online 
systems and build new infrastructure around them.
Do you think this techno-utopian tradition runs as deep in the tech 
industry today as it did in the past?
It varies depending on the company. Apple is, in some ways, very cynical. It 
markets utopian ideas all the time. It markets its products as tools of 
utopian transformation in a countercultural vein. It has co-opted a series of 
the emblems of the counterculture, starting as soon as the company was 
founded.
At other companies, I think it’s very sincere. I’ve spent a lot of time at 
Facebook lately, and I think they sincerely want to build what Mark 
Zuckerberg calls a more connected world. Whether their practice matches 
their beliefs, I don’t know.
About ten years back, I spent a lot of time inside Google. What I saw there 
was an interesting loop. It started with, “Don’t be evil.” So then the 
question became, “Okay, what’s good?” Well, information is good. 
Information empowers people. So providing information is good. Okay, 
great. Who provides information? Oh, right: Google provides information. 
So you end up in this loop where what’s good for people is what’s good for 
Google, and vice versa. And that is a challenging space to live in.
3
I think the impulse to save the world is quite sincere. But people get the 
impulse to save the world and the impulse to do well for the company a bit 
tangled up with each other. Of course, that’s an old Protestant tradition.
What about techno-utopianism outside of these companies? Do you 
think it’s as strong as it’s been in the past?
Back in the 1990s, the idea that technology was a force for good 
enjoyed broad mainstream appeal. I’m thinking of Al Gore, Wired, the 
hype around the dot-com boom and the “New Economy.”
Today, that narrative hasn’t disappeared—especially within Silicon 
Valley. But overall, the mood of the national conversation has become 
more skeptical. There’s more talk about the dark side of technology: 
surveillance, data mining, facial recognition software, “fake news,” and 
so on. We’ve seen more resistance to the basic utopian line. Where do 
you think that comes from?
I think you can track it directly to the Snowden revelations.
I’ve taught a course every year for fifteen years called Digital Media in 
Society. And when I started teaching the course in 2003, my students were 
always like, “Oh Turner, he’s so negative. It would be such a better course if 
you would just read Apple’s website.” And then more recently, it’s like, “Oh 
Turner, he’s so positive. What’s his problem?”
The turning point was Snowden. In terms of the public conversation, 
Snowden is when people became aware of surveillance and began to see it as 
a problem.
The other thing to say about the utopian idea is that it lives in the Valley 
partly as a marketing strategy. This is a political operation of the first 
importance. If the Valley can convince Washington that the Valley is the 
4
home of the future and that its leaders see things that leaders back in stuffy 
old DC can’t see, then they can also make a case for being deregulated.
Right.
Why regulate the future? Who wants to do that?
So, it’s very tactical. Claiming the high ground of the utopian future is a 
very tactical claim.
It seems that tech companies also prefer the deregulatory approach 
when it comes to what content to allow on their platforms. Their 
default is laissez-faire—to not interfere with what people can post. 
Where does that attitude come from?
I see the laissez-faire attitude as rooted in engineering culture and rewarded 
by business. Some people see it as a very calculating business decision. I 
think there’s an element of that—certainly it’s rewarded—but I see 
something deeper going on.
Engineering culture is about making the product. If you make the product 
work, that’s all you’ve got to do to fulfill the ethical warrant of your 
profession. The ethics of engineering are an ethics of: Does it work? If you 
make something that works, you’ve done the ethical thing. It’s up to other 
people to figure out the social mission for your object. It’s like the famous 
line from the Tom Lehrer song: “‘Once the rockets are up, who cares where 
they come down? That’s not my department,’ says Wernher von Braun.”
So I think that engineers, at Facebook and other firms, have been a bit 
baffled when they’ve been told that the systems they’ve built—systems that 
are clearly working very well and whose effectiveness is measured by the 
profits they generate, so everything looks ethical and “good” in the Google 
5
sense—are corrupting the public sphere. And that they’re not just engineers 
building new infrastructures—they’re media people.
Several years ago, I spent a lot of time around Google engineers who were 
connected to the journalism enterprise early on. They had a robust language 
around information control and management. When the conversation 
shifted to news, however, they had no idea what the conversation was 
about. News was something different.
Engineering-based firms that are in fact media firms like Facebook are really 
struggling to develop new ethical terms for managing the encounter they’re 
having. I give them the benefit of the doubt. I think they are sincerely 
trying to deploy the ethical frameworks that they have from engineering. 
And they are sincerely baffled when they don’t work.
What are those ethical frameworks?
Engineers try to do politics by changing infrastructure.
That’s what they do. They tweak infrastructure. It’s a little bit like an 
ancient Roman trying to shape public debate by reconfiguring the Forum. 
“We’ll have seven new entrances instead of six, and the debate will change.”
The engineering world doesn’t have a conception of how to intervene in 
debate that isn’t infrastructural.
Let’s switch gears a bit back to history. One of the things that I loved 
about your book From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, 
the Whole Earth Network, and the Rise of Digital Utopianism was its 
very measured perspective.
Thanks. I worked really hard at that. I took some lumps inside the left 
academic world where I live for being too nice to Stewart Brand.
6
You seem to have a certain affection—maybe affection is too strong a 
word, but certainly an appreciation—for the tradition that’s identified 
with Stewart Brand, but which also has earlier antecedents like Norbert 
Wiener and others.
But today, techno-utopianism—for lack of a better word—seems pretty 
hollowed out. It’s been weaponized by these big companies to sell 
products and push their agenda. It’s hard not to feel cynical about its 
rhetoric.
So my question is: Is there any hope for techno-utopianism? Can we 
salvage a piece of that original vision, or is it a line of thinking that we 
should try to move on from?
Any utopianism tends to be a totalizing system. It promises a total solution 
to problems that are always piecemeal. So the problem from my perspective 
isn’t the technological part of technological utopianism but the utopianism 
part.
Any whole-system approach doesn’t work. What I would recommend is not 
that we abandon technology, but that we deal with it as an integrated part 
of our world, and that we engage it the same way that we engage the 
highway system, the architecture that supports our buildings, or the way we 
organize hospitals.
The technologies that we’ve developed are infrastructures. We don’t have a 
language yet for infrastructure as politics. And enough magic still clings to 
the devices that people are very reluctant to start thinking about them as 
ordinary as tarmac.
But we need to start thinking about them as ordinary as tarmac. And we 
need to develop institutional settings for thinking about how we want to 
7
make our traffic laws. To the extent that technologies enable new 
collaborations and new communities, more power to them. But let’s be 
thoughtful about how they function.
Utopianism, as a whole, is not a helpful approach. Optimism is helpful. 
But optimism can be partial: it allows room for distress and dismay, it 
allows room for difference. It’s not, as they used to say in the 1960s, all one 
all the time.
What are the “politics of infrastructure”? What does that phrase mean?
It means several different things. First, it involves the recognition that the 
built environment, whether it’s built out of tarmac or concrete or code, has 
political effects. I was joking earlier about reshaping the Forum, but I 
shouldn’t have joked quite so much, because the fact that the Forum was 
round encouraged one kind of debate.
Think about an auditorium where someone sits onstage and the audience 
watches, versus a Quaker meeting where everyone sits in a circle. They’re 
very different.
So, structure matters. Design is absolutely critical. Design is the process by 
which the politics of one world become the constraints on another. How 
are those constraints built? What are its effects on political life?
To study the politics of infrastructure is to study the political ideas that get 
built into the design process, and the infrastructure’s impact on the political 
possibilities of the communities that engage it.
The Electronic Frontier
8
One of the most visible emblems of the techno-utopian tradition is 
Burning Man. You wrote a great article called “Burning Man at 
Google” about what the festival means for Silicon Valley.
I’m never going back. I’ve been three times. I’m done.
What are some of the social practices and cultural institutions around 
the tech industry that come to life at Burning Man?
Burning Man is to the tech world what the nineteenth-century Protestant 
church was to the factory.
In the nineteenth century, if you lived in a small factory town, you’d work 
six days a week through Saturday. Then on Sunday, you’d go to church, and 
the bosses would sit up front, the middle managers would sit right behind 
them, and all the workers would sit in the back. You’d literally rehearse the 
order of the factory. You’d show, in the church, how you oriented all of your 
labor toward the glory of God.
At Burning Man, what you’re rehearsing is project-based collaborative 
labor. Engineers flowing in from the Valley are literally acting out the social 
structures on which Valley engineering depends. But they can do 
something at Burning Man that they can’t do in the Valley: they can own 
the project. They can experience total “flow” with a team of their own 
choosing. In the desert, in weirdly perfect conditions, they can do what the 
firm promises them but can’t quite deliver.
The Valley’s utopian promise is: Come here and build the future with other 
like-minded folks. Dissolve yourself into the project and emerge having 
saved the future. Well, at Burning Man, you can actually do that. You pick 
your team, you make a work of art, people admire your art, and you are in 
9
a self-described utopian community that, at least for that moment, models 
an alternative future.
So Burning Man is a way to fulfill the promise that Silicon Valley makes 
but can’t keep.
Burning Man is the very model of the Puritan ideal. What did the Puritans 
want? The Puritans, when they came to America, imagined that they would 
be under the eye of God. They imagined they would build a city on a hill. 
“The eyes of all people are upon us,” John Winthrop said.
When I went to Burning Man, that’s what struck me: I am in the desert. 
The desert of Israel, from the Bible, under the eye of heaven, and 
everything I do shall be meaningful. That’s a Protestant idea, a Puritan idea, 
a tech idea, and a commune idea. All of those come together at Burning 
Man and that’s one of the reasons I’m fascinated by the place.
Burning Man has many problems, of course, and I am distressed by many 
pieces of it. However, there was a moment I had during my first visit when 
I went two miles out in the desert and I looked back at the city and there 
was a sign that looked just like a gas station sign and it was turning, the 
way gas station signs do. It could’ve been a Gulf or Citgo sign, but it wasn’t. 
It was a giant pink heart. And for just a moment, I got to imagine that my 
suburbs back in Silicon Valley were ruled over not by Gulf and Citgo, but 
by love.
That’s a thread running through Burning Man. And it’s a thread that I 
treasure. In the midst of all the other things that made me crazy.
Burning Man also seems to embody Silicon Valley’s fascination with the 
idea of the frontier. You mentioned John Winthrop, and in From 
Counterculture to Cyberculture, you discuss John Perry Barlow and 
10
Kevin Kelly and the other folks who popularized the notion of the 
internet as an “electronic frontier.”
It certainly became a very popular metaphor in the 1990s—but how do 
you think it’s aged? Would it be fair to say that the electronic frontier 
has “closed” like the physical American one did in 1890—or was it 
never a satisfying metaphor to begin with?
The first thing to know about that metaphor is that it comes not only from 
deep American history but very specifically from the Kennedy era.
After World War II, we transform from being a bush-league country that 
doesn’t even have a unified highway system yet into a place that has enough 
abundance, enough money, and enough technology to do things like send 
hippies out across the country in VW buses for two years to make movies. 
That’s a big transformation. On the industrial and intellectual side, people 
like John F. Kennedy begin talking about the “New Frontier.” They 
promote the idea that space will be the new frontier, that technology will be 
the new frontier, that science will be the new frontier. And the technical 
world in particular becomes preoccupied with that. Those folks from the 
1990s you mention are children of that world.
One of the great myths of the counterculture is that it wasn’t engaged with 
the military-industrial complex. That’s true of the New Left—but it’s not 
true of the New Communalists. The communalists were engaged with 
cybernetics in a big way. They bought deeply into the hope that through 
LSD, they would attend to new psychological frontiers and build new 
social frontiers.
Today, the American rhetoric of a new frontier has disappeared. Trump is 
about making America great again in his retrograde, macho, pseudo-fascist 
kind of way. Nobody thinks they live on a frontier anymore.
11
However, inside the tech world, there are still people microdosing with 
LSD. There are still people experimenting with polyamorous relationships. 
There are still people pursuing the intersection of consciousness change and 
new social structures. And those worlds are still quite tightly intertwined 
with the legacy of the counterculture. So although the language of the new 
frontier has gone, and the frontier itself has been closed off by surveillance 
and commerce, people who work within tech are still treating their lives as 
if they were frontier settlers. And that’s fascinating to watch.
The other aspect of the frontier metaphor is its libertarian politics. 
There’s always been a libertarian core to the techno-utopian tradition. It 
seems to come out of the anti-institutional ethos of the counterculture 
in the 1960s and 1970s, and then morphs into a kind of hippie 
Reaganism in the 1980s and 1990s. That’s how you get Wired running 
these flattering pieces on Newt Gingrich in the 1990s.
Oh, it’s so horrifying.
And that’s why everyone thinks the tech industry is full of libertarians. 
But there’s also a sizable constituency of workers in tech with very 
different politics—people who identify as leftists or socialists. After all, 
a lot of tech workers supported Bernie during the Democratic 
primaries. Do you think new political space has opened up in the 
industry recently? Or was the industry always more politically diverse 
than its reputation?
That wing has always been there. One of the things I’ve been trying to 
figure out is whether it’s changed more recently. The answer to the question 
can be found, more or less, in something called the Silicon Valley Index, 
which is a wonderful demographic study of the Valley. It’s been done for 
about fifteen years, and what it suggests is that the politics of the Valley 
12
have held constant—which surprises me. It has been a liberal, left-leaning, 
Democratic region as a whole pretty steadily for fifteen years.
But the people who get most of the attention in the Valley are the big 
CEOs. I think that the vision of the Valley as a libertarian space is a 
combination of actual libertarian beliefs held by people like Peter Thiel and 
a celebration of libertarian ideals by an East Coast press that wants to 
elevate inventor types. Steve Jobs is the most famous. East Coast journalists 
want to rejuvenate the American hero myth—and they’re going to find a 
world to do it in.
In order to make these heroes, however, they have to cut them off from the 
context that produced them. They can’t tell a context story. They can’t tell a 
structure story. They have to tell a hero story. Suddenly the heroes 
themselves look like solo actors who pushed away the world to become the 
libertarian ideal of an Ayn Rand novel. So I think it’s a collaboration 
between actually existing tech leaders and the press around a myth.
That really resonates with how the press covers someone like Elon 
Musk.
Exactly: Elon Musk is the classic example. And I actually really admire Elon 
Musk. I should say that one of my principles for working on Silicon Valley 
has been to take people at their word.
The first news story I ever did when I was a journalist was about a guy who 
bilked widows out of their houses. My job was to figure out how he did it. 
So I spent all afternoon with him. He was a totally charming man. He 
didn’t lie to me. He told me exactly how he did it. I reported the story and 
I got two kinds of letters. One kind of letter said, “You finally busted the 
prick. You nailed him.” The other kind of letter was written by his friends. I 
13
was sure they were going to hate me. But they said, “You finally showed the 
world what a great businessman he is.”
As we try to figure out Silicon Valley, I think it’s important to pull back a 
bit and try to see it from both sides. That can be tough if you have stakes in 
the debate. But it also gives you more room to see the whole world.
I also wonder whether one of the reasons that tech CEOs dominate the 
media narrative is that the ubiquity of nondisclosure agreements 
(NDAs) make it very hard for rank-and-file tech workers to have a 
public voice.
One of the ironies of the Valley is that the NDAs do prevent the 
transmission of stories from the Valley to Washington, New York, Boston, 
and elsewhere. But within the Valley, everybody knows everybody, more or 
less, so the NDA doesn’t apply.
The Birth of the Brogrammer
Why is the tech industry so young? And why does it put such a 
premium on youth? Is that also the legacy of the 1960s counterculture
—the cult of youth?
The industry wasn’t young during its early days, when it was funded by the 
government. At first, Silicon Valley was dominated by federal funding—
you had big military contractors like Texas Instruments. In the 1970s, 
virtually every chip that’s made gets put in a Polaris missile. There were 
young people, sure, but there were also career-length engineers.
The startup culture we have now only really begins in the 1980s—and with 
it, the project-based work style emerges. That’s when a premium starts to 
get placed on people who can pump out ninety hours a week and don’t 
have kids and also have the most recent technical training from places like 
14
Stanford and Berkeley and Carnegie Mellon and Harvard. That’s when 
youth comes pouring in.
Today, age discrimination is a central feature of the Valley. But another 
thing to remember about the Valley is that people tend not to live there 
forever. They migrate in and out. I often think of the Valley as an island. I 
believe 40 percent of its residents at the moment were not born in the 
United States. People come to the Valley for ten years and then they go 
back to their home country and start a firm. It’s a long-term migrant spot. 
It’s not like my hometown, where people have been there for three 
generations.
So do you think Silicon Valley’s obsession with youth is driven more by 
economic imperatives than the cultural residue of the 1960s?
Our society tends to give permission to younger people to do certain kinds 
of experimenting that also happen to be really valuable inside the tech 
world. So, for example, we give our young people permission not to get 
married or have kids until they’re in their mid-thirties. That gives you your 
whole twenties to live in tech dorms, to try stuff out, to do things that my 
grandmother would have considered screwing up. My grandmother wanted 
to get married by twenty-seven. She was committed to that. And she 
wanted to have stability. She wanted to buy a house. She wanted to grow 
her family. She had a very particular vision of the progress of life.
If your vision of the progress of life includes a long hiatus for your twenties, 
that’s great for tech firms. If you stay all night at Google, that’s great for 
Google. They can bring you the barber. They can bring you the restaurant. 
You can have your love life at the firm. Have multiple partners, they don’t 
care. As long as you are super flexible and committed to the firm.
15
Because you mentioned age discrimination, I wonder if you could 
speak to the prevalence of sexism and sexual harassment in the tech 
industry. There’s been a lot of media coverage recently about a spate of 
recent scandals—but sexism is obviously something that’s been a core 
feature of Silicon Valley for awhile.
Any professional world in which you have extremely powerful men who are 
gatekeepers to lifestyles that young women want, predation occurs. What’s 
particular to the tech world, I think, is the fantasy.
A lot of the guys that I’ve talked to who are tech people are really excited 
about the moment when they turn on a computer that they had built 
themselves and it works. These are men whose careers revolve around 
making stuff do things. And they see the world as a whole that way 
sometimes. They feel a mode of control associated with this kind of God’s 
eye view.
In that kind of world, a man who is a gatekeeper with a lot of power may 
imagine that a young woman can be manipulated like a switch on a 
computer. That she’s part of a system that they can control and manage. 
And they have a need—a need to be gratified. Well, the computer gratified 
them the last time they turned it on. Maybe they can turn a woman on, in 
that same very mechanical sense. That’s what I see.
That’s pretty scary.
I have a theory, and I offer it to you as a pocket theory. I have a category of 
theories that I call pocket theories. Because there is no evidence, no research 
behind them. So my pocket theory is that different eras have different focal 
communities—places they use to think with. In the late nineteenth century, 
it would have been Edith Wharton’s New York. Or maybe a little later, 
Theodore Dreiser’s Chicago.
16
Dreiser’s Chicago became a place that people used to think through the 
consequences of the rise of industry. All sorts of things that weren’t unique 
to Chicago, like immigration, became things that people thought about in 
that space.
I think the Valley is where we do our thinking now about gender and 
sexuality. How people do sexuality has changed enormously with the 
introduction of new media. My wife and I have been married for thirty-
plus years. When we were courting, we wrote beautiful handwritten letters 
on blue paper and mailed them long distance. You’d wait weeks for them. 
You’d fill in every little gap of the page. Now, we FaceTime. There’s no 
withheld gratification.
Romance of the kind that I grew up with was something that took time. It 
required restraining your desires. It required thinking about another person. 
I mean, one of the most erotic things you can do with a person is think 
about them, right? Just think about them. That’s different in a world where 
you can press a button and their face appears. The possibility of push-
button sexuality is very much alive in the Valley.
That mode of sexuality seems like another artifact of the 
counterculture, to return to the beginning of our conversation. Do you 
have any closing reflections on the legacy of the counterculture in tech, 
or on the techno-utopian tradition more broadly?
I want to say one more thing about politics.
One of the legacies of the counterculture, particularly on the left, is the idea 
that expression is action. This idea has haunted those of us on the left for a 
long time.
17
But one of the reasons that the Tea Party came to power was that they 
organized—they built institutions. So the challenge for those of us who 
want a different world is not to simply trust that the expressive variety that 
the internet permits is the key to freedom. Rather, we need to seek a kind 
of freedom that involves people not like us, that builds institutions that 
support people not like us—not just ones that help gratify our desires to 
find new partners or build better micro-worlds.
The New Communalists believed that the micro-world was where politics 
happened. If we could just build a better micro-world, we could live by 
example to create a better world for the whole. I think that’s wrong. Our 
challenge is to build a world that takes responsibility for people not like 
ourselves. And it’s a challenge we won’t meet by enhancing our expressive 
abilities, or improving the technologies of expressive connection.
This piece appears in Logic's issue 3, "Justice". 
https://logicmag.io/justice/fred-turner-dont-be-evil/
18
