Science in Context
20(1), 21–47 (2007). Copyright C⃝Cambridge University Press
doi:10.1017/S0269889706001128
Printed in the United Kingdom
Before Memex: Robert Hooke, John Locke, and
Vannevar Bush on External Memory
Richard Yeo
Centre for Public Culture and Ideas, Faculty of Arts, Grifﬁth University, Brisbane, Australia
Argument
In 1945 Vannevar Bush proposed a machine that acted as a “supplement” to memory and met
the particular information needs of its user. Because this “memex” recorded “trails” of selected
documents, it has been seen as a precursor to hypertext. However, this paper considers Bush
in relation to earlier concerns about memory and information, via the ideas of Robert Hooke
and John Locke. Whereas Bush modeled the memex on the associative processes of natural
memory, Hooke and Locke concluded that an external archive had to allow collective reason to
overcome the limits of individual memory, including its tendency to freeze and repeat patterns
of ideas. Moreover, they envisaged an institutional archive rather than one controlled by the
interests and mental associations of an individual. From this early modern perspective, Bush’s
memex appears as a personal device for managing information that incorporates assumptions
inimical to the strategies required for scientiﬁc analysis.
In the Atlantic Monthly of July 1945, Vannevar Bush, engineer and wartime science
advisor, imagined a microﬁlm machine that stored and retrieved vast amounts of
information:
Consider a future device for individual use, which is a sort of mechanized private ﬁle
and library. It needs a name, and, to coin one at random, “memex” will do. A memex
is a device in which an individual stores all his books, records, and communications, and
which is mechanized so that it may be consulted with exceeding speed and ﬂexibility. It
is an enlarged intimate supplement to his memory. (Bush 1945, 106–7; reprinted in Bush
1946a, 16–38)1
Bush explained that books and documents of various kinds were to be stored and
compressed on microﬁlm: “Only a small part of the interior of the memex is devoted
to storage, the rest to mechanism. Yet if the user inserted 5000 pages of material a day
it would take him hundreds of years to ﬁll the repository” (Bush 1945, 107). On this
principle, “The Encyclopaedia Britannica could be reduced to the volume of a matchbox.
1 For biographical details, see Zachary 1997.
22
Richard Yeo
Fig. 1. “Memex” from Life, 10 September 1945, p. 123.
A library of a million volumes could be compressed into one end of a desk” (ibid.,
103).2 Items from the archive were to be selected and located by rapid scanning far
exceeding the “few hundred a minute” punched-card searching. Bush expected that
“the use of photocells and microﬁlm” would yield a “rate of a thousand a second” (ibid.,
105–6).3 He did not consider any of the above as signiﬁcant innovations; in technical
terms, the memex was merely “the projection forward of present-day mechanisms and
gadgetry” (ibid., 107) (ﬁg. 1).
Bush regarded the notion of “associative indexing” as his key conceptual contri-
bution. As he explained, this was “a provision whereby any item may be caused at
will to select immediately and automatically another. This is the essential feature of the
memex. The process of tying two items together is the important thing.” This “linking”
(as we now say) constituted a “trail” of documents that could be named, coded, and
found again. Moreover, after the original two items were coupled, “numerous items”
could be “joined together to form a trail”; they could be “reviewed in turn, rapidly or
slowly, by deﬂecting a lever like that used for turning the pages of a book. It is exactly
as though the physical items had been gathered together from widely separated sources
and bound together to form a new book” (ibid.).4 The user of a memex could create
2 Bush gave the current reduction factor in microﬁlming as 20, but assumed “a linear ratio of 100 for future
use” (ibid., 103).
3 These were the punched cards invented by Herman H¨ollerith. The memex was never built.
4 The example Bush gives is a quest to ﬁnd information on the relative merits of the Turkish short bow and the
English long bow in the crusades (ibid., 107).
Hooke, Locke, and Vannevar Bush on External Memory
23
Fig. 2. “Memex in Use” from Life, 10 September 1945, p. 124.
personally-selected compilations of information: “Wholly new forms of encyclopedias
will appear, ready-made with a mesh of associative trails running through them, ready
to be dropped into the memex and there ampliﬁed” (ibid., 108)5 (ﬁg. 2).
The title of this oft-cited article invites us to imagine how we may think, not how
we might remember. Bush calls the memex a “device,” a “mechanized private ﬁle,”
rather than a machine; but it takes its place in a system comprised of other machines.
He refers to the visions of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and Charles Babbage and a future
in which machines do routine mathematical calculations, thus leaving the mind free for
more creative tasks (Bush 1945, 102, 104).6 He predicts a machine capable of handling
“formal logic”: “We may some day click off arguments on a machine with the same
assurance that we now enter sales on a cash register” (Bush 1945, 105). The memex
was not this kind of machine, but Time leapt to the conclusion that Bush “predicts
a brain robot that will relieve man of much of the routine spadework of thinking . . .
store facts for ready recall, sort a man’s ideas, even organize them logically” (Anon.
5 The prospect of encyclopaedias on microﬁlm also appealed to H. G. Wells (see Wells [1938] 1994, 60–63,
86–87). For earlier dreams of condensing knowledge, see Yeo 2001.
6 Bush does not seem to mean Leibniz’s quest for “characteristica,” or essential notions, to which signs could
be assigned and then manipulated in a combinatorial system. This did have links with the art of memory, as I
discuss below (see Yates 1966, 365–69; Rossi 2000, chap. 8; for Bush’s “invention” of a differential analyzer, see
Zachary 1997, 49–53, 73–79).
24
Richard Yeo
1945a, 41).7 Bush did not conﬂate these functions, but he did see the memex as
facilitating more effective thinking by responding to information overload. The latter
was a restraint on innovative thought: “There is a growing mountain of research. But
there is increased evidence that we are being bogged down today as specialization
extends. The investigator is staggered by the ﬁndings and conclusion of thousands
of other workers – conclusions which he cannot ﬁnd time to grasp, much less to
remember” (Bush 1945, 101).8 Bush characterized selection and manipulation of data –
in both the sciences and the humanities – as “repetitive processes of thought”
that were best “relegated to the machines” (ibid., 104). By proposing the memex
in an article liberally sprinkled with various mechanical supplements to thought
and communication, Bush identiﬁed the concept of externalized memory with an
integrated system of technical devices that interact with the brain of the user.9
In his Cybernetics (1948), Norbert Wiener, a colleague of Bush at MIT, did not
refer to the memex, but its status is easily handled by his dictum that “information
is information, not matter or energy” (Wiener [1948] 1973, 132; also 11–12 for his
coining the term “cybernetics” from the Greek kuberne, steersman). On this view, a
blind man’s cane is part of the cybernetic system that includes the cane, his mind,
and his body. In Natural-Born Cyborgs, Andy Clark elaborates on this by afﬁrming
that a cyborg mind need not sport electro-chemical implants; rather, the brain can
have systemic dependence on, and interaction with, various kinds of external storage
devices (Clark 2003; see also Clark and Chalmers 1998).10 This “extended mind”
hypothesis contends that cognitive processes extend into the world when we use tools
of various kinds; that our brains employ stable features of the physical environment
to freeze thoughts, as in images on stone or canvas, writing on paper, or as ﬁles in a
computer.11 As one of these external aids, the memex offered two kinds of help: ﬁrst,
it stored data in stable and accessible form; second, and more signiﬁcantly for Bush,
it captured creative associative links made by the brain or recalled from memory – in
“trails [that] do not fade” (Bush 1945, 107). These associative trails have been seen
7 Life magazine carried a version of Bush’s article, with illustrations, including a summary of “What Dr. Bush
foresees,” including “A Thinking machine: A development of the mathematical calculator. Give it premises and
it would pass out conclusions, all in accordance with logic” (Anon. 1945b, 113).
8 Bush mentioned this issue in an article of 1933 (see Bush [1933] 1946b, 9–10).
9 In one of his last published deﬁnitions, Bush did use the term “machine”: “the idea of a machine that should
be an extension of the personal memory and body of knowledge belonging to an individual” (Bush 1970,
190).
10 Cyborg, a portmanteau of “cybernetic organism.” For its coinage, see Clynes and Kline 1960. There is an
earlier use of it in the New York Times, 22 May 1960. Both are cited in the Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edn.
(more generally, see Pickering 1995; Hayles 1999).
11 The background here includes Karl Lashley’s coinage of “engram” to denote a single entry in the biological
memory system. The partner of this term in more recent cognitive psychology is “exogram” – namely, an
external prompt, such as a rhyme, diagram, or notebook. Exograms embody memories and combine with the
distributed “engrams” in the brain (see Lashley 1960; Donald 1991, 308–333; Menary 2006).
Hooke, Locke, and Vannevar Bush on External Memory
25
as the anticipation of electronic hypertext.12 Consequently, Bush’s ideas are usually
approached as foundational or prophetic, with discussion turning on the extent to
which he anticipated later developments.13
Rather than viewing Bush as a precursor of what followed in the digital age, I
want to look back, to situate him in the long tradition of speculation about ways
of assisting natural memory. G. Pascal Zachary declares that “Bush took his place in
the grand tradition of what historian Frances Yates called ‘the art of memory.’ His
memex, in this context, was a modern-day ‘memory theater’” (Zachary 1997, 262).
As a suggestive remark in a biography, this statement is acceptable; but as intellectual
history it requires considerable qualiﬁcation and explanation. What were the principal
features of the classical art of memory? There were two main components. The key
surviving text from the classical period, Ad Herennium, referred to these as background
or places (loci) and images (imagines).14 The practitioner imagined a structure of some
kind, such as a palace with several rooms, and took care to furnish it with clearly
marked places, such as “an intercolumnar space, a recess, an arch, or the like.” These
places had to be memorized as an ordered series, thus forming a familiar, permanent
mental background. In the next stage, specially chosen vivid images (imagines agentes)
were deposited in these places as reminders of the things or speeches or arguments to be
recalled. When one walked mentally through this imagined space in a strict sequence,
the images in each of the places gave up their associated content. A crucial additional
point is that the choice of images was an individual affair: as the author explained, an
image “that is well-deﬁned to us appears relatively inconspicuous to others. Everybody,
therefore, should in equipping himself with images suit his own convenience” (Anon.
1954, Book III, 207–25, 233).15 Thus the art of memory itself imposed a load on
memory: it involved the double task of remembering the stable background (usually
a shared one based on common physical structures) and a personal set of mental
associations between images and content. The payoff was that this background could
be internalized as mental scaffolding or wallpaper; it could then function as a virtual
externalized prompt for the recollection of names, quotations or arguments (see Sutton
2002, 136–7; for a detailed account, see Carruthers 1990).
If we tune into conversations in mid sixteenth-century Europe, we hear the art
of memory being disparaged. Agrippa waited until the last chapter of his cautionary
12 See, for example, Landow 1992, 14–18; Kitzmann 2001. For disavowal of the hyperbole in some of this
literature, see Kendrick 2001.
13 But see Buckland 1992 for his immediate precursors. For a valuable collection of sources and commentary,
see Nyce and Kahn 1991.
14 This anonymous work dates from about 86–82 BC. The title indicates that it is addressed to Gaius Herennius.
This text was contemporary with the works of Cicero and mistakenly attributed to him in the thirteenth
century. Another inﬂuential Latin work is Quintilian’s Institutio Oratoria (end of the ﬁrst century AD), although
his support of the technique was somewhat muted (see Yates 1966, 35).
15 For an account of a person who used a similar technique, apparently without prior knowledge of the ancient
art, see Luria 1975. On visual encoding as the key feature, see Schacter 1996, 46–8.
26
Richard Yeo
account of the arts and sciences to debunk it. His point was that artiﬁcial memory
techniques depended on the foundation supplied by natural memory, which itself
might be cluttered by the required stock of places and images:
It [artiﬁcial memory] cannot stande without natural Memorie, whiche oftentimes is
dulled with monstrouse Images, that oftentimes it causeth madnesse, and fresie in steede
of profounde and sure Memories, to wite, whilest that it burdeninge the natural Memories
with the Images of inﬁnite things, and wordes, causeth them to become madde with Arte,
that abide not content with the limittes of nature. (Agrippa [1531] 1569, 24–5)16
By at least the early seventeenth century, the reputation of topical, or place, memory
had substantially faded, although its emphasis on the importance of order remained
inﬂuential.17 The notion of places (topoi or loci) as described in the art of memory is
a plausible ancestor of the concept of “common places” (loci communes) of rhetoric, as
taught by Cicero and Quintilian (Sorabji 1972, 29–31).18 By the Renaissance, these
commonplaces were increasingly interpreted as collections of quotations from the
major classical texts entered in a commonplace book under thematic Heads. From the
1500s, this practice of commonplacing became the central pedagogic framework of
Western education (Moss 1996; Goyet 1996).19 Advocated by leading humanists such as
Agricola, Erasmus, Melanchthon, and Vives, who largely rejected classical mnemonic
rules, such notebooks were seen as ways of training a capacious memory; they were
prompts to recollection, not substitutes for it.
Bush was thus the inheritor of a set of intellectual conditions that allowed him to
make assumptions not so easily available to those in classical, or even early modern,
times. Take, for example, this comment:
[Man] has built a civilization so complex that he needs to mechanize his records more
fully if he is to push his experiment to its logical conclusion and not merely become
bogged down part way there by overtaxing his limited memory. His excursions may be more
enjoyable if he can reacquire the privilege of forgetting the manifold things he does not need
to have immediately at hand, with some assurance that he can ﬁnd them again if they
prove important. (Bush 1945, 108; emphasis added)
Bush enjoyed the beneﬁts of print culture – not only the legacy of techniques for note
taking but also the existence of public libraries, catalogs, and archives. He could retrieve
16 The original Latin version was De Incertitudine et Vanitate Scientiarum et Artium (Paris, 1531).
17 Of course, manuals on memory arts continued to appear, as they still do today.
18 Erasmus stressed ordering, but shared Quintilian’s reservations about the visual images used in mnemonic arts
(Yates 1966, 133–4, 313).
19 The legacy of this practice is manifest in Bush’s own suggestion that users of the memex annotate and cross-
reference the texts they store on microﬁlm: “As he has several projection positions, he can leave one item in
position while he calls up another. He can add marginal notes and comments. . . . Thus he builds a trail of his
interest through the maze of materials available to him” (Bush 1945, 107).
Hooke, Locke, and Vannevar Bush on External Memory
27
information from external deposits rather than needing to recall it from memory. Why,
then, describe the memex as “an enlarged intimate supplement” to memory – as if
books, journals, and notebooks were not similar aids? One likely reason is that he
conceived the memex not only as an external store of information drawn from various
sources, but as a preserver of the user’s own mental associations between various pieces
of information, between “trails” of document searches that served as an external record
of trains of thought. In this respect, Bush emphasized the individualistic element in
the art of memory, the idiosyncratic associations that prompted recall for each person.
Signiﬁcantly, he also denigrated, at least by implication, the other component of the
classical art – the value of a stable background framework, such as agreed subject
classiﬁcations. If the memex is a modern memory theater, it is one in which little of
the public features of the theater remain.
In this article, I want to bring the inventor of the memex into confrontation
with Robert Hooke (1635–1703) and John Locke (1632–1704).20 These two avid
collectors of information might well have embraced such a device. Like Bush, they
were concerned about information overload and the desirability of efﬁcient methods
of storing and ﬁnding data. Of course, the theological and philosophical contexts
in which these three individuals worked were very different; and there is a risk of
anachronism in comparing them. Nevertheless, I think it is worth viewing Hooke
and Locke as working towards “the privilege of forgetting” – a notion that, unlike
Bush, they could not take for granted. Both seventeenth-century ﬁgures commented
on the principles and practices of note taking. Hooke did so in a long piece entitled “A
General Scheme, or Idea of the Present State of Natural Philosophy,” probably written
in 1666, but only published in his Posthumous Works, edited by Richard Waller (1705).21
Locke did this in his ﬁrst mature appearance in print: “A New Method of a Common-
Place-Book,” published in the Biblioth`eque Universelle of 1686, and later in English
in his Posthumous Works (1706). During the Renaissance commonplace books were
primarily conceived as prompts for what should be memorized; by the seventeenth
century, they came to be regarded as containers in which information is stored for later
retrieval.22 Breaking with the rhetorical purpose of commonplaces, Locke and Hooke
began to think in terms of retrieval from external sources, rather than recall from
memory.
By considering these three thinkers together, some signiﬁcant, perhaps unexpected,
contrasts emerge. Hooke and Locke worked towards the importance of externalized
20 Hooke and Locke shadowed each other throughout their lives, from their time together at Westminster
School, London, then Christ Church, Oxford, where Hooke was a choral student and Locke studied for a
Bachelor of Arts, and subsequently held a “Studentship” (or fellowship) and various teaching posts. Finally, they
were fellows of the Royal Society of London: Hooke was elected in June 1663; Locke in November 1668. For
their common early education, see Smith 2006.
21 Of course, Hooke kept a diary (see Hooke 1968; Mulligan 1996).
22 For methods of note taking in this period, see Blair 2004; Malcolm 2004; Yeo 2004. For a comment, see
Daston 2004.
28
Richard Yeo
memory after an examination of novel ways of getting information into the mind
and retaining it in memory; these included mechanical (and other) enhancements.
They discerned two seemingly opposed features of natural memory: the well-known
tendency to forget, but also the rigidity of the patterns, both temporal and associative, by
which it did store and recall ideas. They diagnosed these patterns as obstacles to rational
and scientiﬁc inquiry and stressed the need to reclassify and compare data collected
in collaborative Baconian projects. Some 250 years later, Bush was able to assume the
notion of externalized memory without argument and to take advantage of far more
powerful techniques for storing and searching information. However, he conceived the
memex as a device for ﬁxing the associative patterns of natural memory. As he wrote:
“One cannot hope thus to equal the speed and ﬂexibility with which the mind follows
an associative trail, but it should be possible to beat the mind decisively in regard to
the permanence and clarity of the items resurrected from storage” (Bush 1945, 106).
It is, therefore, the two early modern authors who moved more radically away from
natural memory as the basis of information management. Hooke and Locke accepted
the importance of external memory after exploring, and rejecting, the possibility of
augmented natural memory, whereas Bush modeled the search strategies of his memex
on the associative processes of natural memory.
I pursue this set of comparisons and contrasts in the following sections. I follow
Hooke and Locke on their path toward acknowledgment of the inadequacies of natural
memory, its possible improvement, and the need for external archives. I identify some
disagreement between them by discussing parts of Locke’s Essay Concerning Human
Understanding (1690) as a response to Hooke’s Micrographia (1665). I then analyze
the early modern authors’ privileging of reason and judgment over memory. Whereas
Locke believed that personal note taking was the best insurance against a poor memory,
Hooke sought to apply some of the lessons of the art of memory to the task of managing
information gathered in collective Baconian research. He stressed the importance of
shared, but revisable, categories that allowed reason to analyze and reorganize data in
an institutional archive. In this way, he hoped, the community of researchers could
overcome the limits of individual memory, one of which was the repetitive character of
its links between ideas. Finally, I return to Bush, arguing that some crucial assumptions
in his writings about memex are more sharply delineated when compared with those
of Hooke. Whereas Bush’s memex was a personal device anchored to an individual
memory, Hooke imagined an external repository that might function as an institutional
memory.
Robert Hooke: Enhancing the Senses and Memory
Bush again provides a vivid entry point. He predicted the arrival of photographic
devices, worn by an observer, which immediately transferred to ﬁlm anything chosen
for recording:
Hooke, Locke, and Vannevar Bush on External Memory
29
Fig. 3. “A Scientist of the Future” from Life, 10 September 1945, p. 112.
The camera hound of the future wears on his forehead a lump a little larger than a
walnut. . . . On a pair of ordinary glasses is a square of ﬁne lines near the top of one lens,
where it is out of the way of ordinary vision. When an object appears in that square, it is
lined up for its picture. As the scientist of the future moves about the laboratory or the
ﬁeld, every time he looks at something worthy of the record, he trips the shutter and in
it goes, without even an audible click. (Bush 1945, 102) (ﬁg. 3)
This camera headgear would have appealed to Robert Hooke, master of contraptions
and gadgets, “London’s Leonardo” (Inwood 2002; Bennett et al. 2003). It might well
have enabled him to draw with greater ease his images of magniﬁed ﬂeas, spores,
insects, stinging nettles, and human hairs.
Hooke began his Micrographia by declaring that it was the privilege and duty of
mankind to understand nature. He then immediately stressed the weaknesses of man’s
senses, a condition brought about both by “corruption, innate and born with him,” and
also by negligence and disregard of those precepts available in the Scriptures (Hooke
1665, “Preface,” sig. a1r). This is an allusion to the effects of Original Sin. It was
a standard tenet of both Catholic and Protestant theology that Adam and Eve were
endowed with perfect senses. As Martin Luther declared of Adam: he could “see objects
a hundred miles off better than we can see them at half a mile, and so in proportion
with all the other senses” (cited in Harrison 2002, 242; also Harrison 1998, 211–22).
Due to the Fall, however, Adam’s progeny had inherited a corrupted set of faculties. In
Protestant England, there was a hopeful interpretation of this postlapsarian condition,
30
Richard Yeo
albeit one premised on the acknowledgment of impaired faculties. As Joseph Glanvill
put it, “Adam needed no Spectacles. The acuteness of his natural Opticks . . . shew’d
him much of the Coelestial magniﬁcence . . . without a Galileo’s tube” (Glanvill 1661,
5; a revised version appeared as Scepsis Scientiﬁca in 1665). However, members of the
Royal Society promoted Francis Bacon’s view that in man’s state of probation on Earth,
God’s command to work and seek Redemption included the duty to understand and
control Nature, thus producing some improvements to the human condition. In this
way, an acceptance of the effects of the Fall could be turned into a positive scientiﬁc
endeavor to attain a partial restoration of prelapsarian knowledge.
With Glanvill and others in the Royal Society, Hooke urged enlarging “the
dominion, of the Senses” so as to “recover some degree of those former perfections,”
thus “rectifying the operations of the Sense, the Memory, and Reason.” He imagined
extensions to natural capacities that conjure up a cyborg future: “The next care to be
taken, in respect of the Senses, is a supplying of their inﬁrmities with Instruments, and,
as it were, the adding of artiﬁcial Organs to the natural” (Hooke 1665, “Preface,” sig.
a1r and a2r and v; emphasis in original).23 There was a more general rationale for this,
as he explained in the opening lines of the Micrographia:
It is the great prerogative of Mankind above other Creatures, that we are not only able to
behold the works of Nature, . . . but we have also the power of considering, comparing,
altering, assisting, and improving them to various uses . . . By the addition of such artiﬁcial
Instruments and methods, there may be, in some manner, a reparation made for the
mischiefs, and imperfection, mankind has drawn upon it self . . . whereby every man, both
from a deriv’d corruption, innate and born with him, and from his breeding and converse
with men, is very subject to slip into all sorts of errors. (Hooke 1665, “Preface,” sig. a1r)
Just as telescopes and microscopes extended vision, Hooke expected that similar
improvements could be made for hearing, and also for memory. But what are
these artiﬁcial memory aids? What was the equivalent of spectacles, the microscope,
telescope, or the ear-trumpet? One obvious answer must be the classical mnemonic
techniques; but Hooke did not pursue this option in the Micrographia.24 What did attract
him was self-experimentation in search of ways to extend his own senses and mental
faculties. As we know from his diary, Hooke regularly subjected his body to various
chemicals and medicines, and so it is not surprising that he looked in this direction for
a way of improving memory. In the entry for 11 September 1677, he writes:
Mr. Melancholy told me that a freind of his had been recoverd of a bad memory and
severall other distempers by carrying a small box full of very ﬁne ﬁlings of the best
reﬁned silver and now and then licking of it with his ﬁnger and swallowing it. It seems
23 On Hooke’s approach to the problem of writing about visual evidence, see Harwood 1989; Dennis 1989.
24 Hooke did not discuss classical “topical” memory techniques; however, he was interested in the mnemonic
features of artiﬁcial languages. I return to this below.
Hooke, Locke, and Vannevar Bush on External Memory
31
very probable that this may be a very efﬁcatious medicine, as is steel . . . and the other
medicines and minerals, of this query further. (Hooke 1968, 311–12; for the full range
of self-experimentation, see Mulligan 1996; Jardine 2003)
Hooke realized that memory posed special issues. Whereas various instruments, or
drugs, might magnify the input of each of the ﬁve senses, the role of memory is to retain
information from all the senses. In the much-cited Book X of the Confessions, Saint
Augustine outlined his conception of memory as “awe-inspiring,” its “vast cloisters”
unfathomable, mysteriously outreaching the capacities of the human mind in which it
seemingly resides (Augustine 1961, Book 10; also Coleman 1992, chap. 6). In contrast,
Hooke regarded memory as a far more humble faculty, both unreliable in retaining ideas
and also prone to preserve useless “things” rather than the information that “Reason”
requires. He spelt this out in a passage following the discussion of the weaknesses of
the senses:
The like frailties are to be found in the Memory; we often let many things slip away from
us, which deserve to be retain’d; and of those which we treasure up, a great part is either
frivolous or false; and if good, and substantial, either in tract of time obliterated, or at best
so overwhelmed and buried under more frothy notions, that when there is need of them,
they are in vain sought for. (Hooke 1665, “Preface,” sig. a1v)
Hooke was preoccupied with the load on memory, as indicated in one of his
“Lectures of Light” presented as part of the Cutlerian lectures. In the lecture delivered
on 21 June 1682, he advanced a physical account of memory, treating it as a material
organ having “its Situation somewhere near the Place where the Nerves from the other
Senses concur and meet.” Memory was a “Repository of Ideas.” Hooke regarded these
“Ideas” as corporeal, but he kept a role for the “Soul” as the agent of “Attention”
that received impressions from the senses, formed ideas, and renewed them by a kind
of “Radiation” akin to the action of the Sun (Hooke 1705b, 138–48; Singer 1976;
Richards 1992, 67–9; Draaisma 2000, 53–8).25
Having envisaged the memory and the ideas it held as material, Hooke confronted
the fact that the capacity of memory was necessarily constrained by the volume of the
brain that housed it. He did not ﬂinch. Calculating the number of “Ideas” stored in
the memory of an average person over a year, deducting time asleep, when no Ideas
are registered, he concluded that we add to this “Store” by “about one Million of
Ideas” each year. This ﬁgure frightened him and he settled on “one hundred for every
Day,” so that a person would gather almost two million ideas over ﬁfty years (Hooke
1705b, 143). His microscopic observations inspired the conﬁdent assurance that “we
shall not need to fear any Impossibility to ﬁnd out room in the Brain” for even more.
25 For primary documents and commentary, see Oldroyd 1980, 17–32. I return to some of the details of Hooke’s
account below.
32
Richard Yeo
We only had to consider “in how small a bulk of Body there may be as many distinct
living Creatures as here are supposed Ideas” (Hooke 1705b, 143–44). Yet for Hooke
any amazement at the capacity of memory was accompanied by awareness of its ﬁnite
limits. We might also infer that if the senses were improved as Hooke contemplated,
they would take in more impressions from the world, thus creating more ideas. In other
words, more acute senses would exacerbate the burden on memory.
Hooke seems to have arrived at this conclusion, and he looked for ways to help the
memory retain and recollect the most important things:
The next remedies in this universal cure of the Mind are to be applyed to the Memory,
and they are to consist of such Directions as may inform us, what things are best to be
stor’d up for our purpose, and which is the best way of so disposing them, that they may
not only be kept in safety, but ready and convenient, to be at any time produce’d for use,
as occasion shall require. (Hooke 1665, “Preface,” sig. b1v)
Read out of context this passage might seem to be another attempt to improve indi-
vidual memory; but seen as part of Hooke’s mission of “rectifying the operations of the
Sense, the Memory, and Reason” it was more than this (Hooke 1665, “Preface,” sig. a1r).
Hooke realized that for the effective management of large amounts of information (as
expected in Baconian science) individual memory had to be orchestrated by social
and institutional conventions. In this way, memory could contribute to, and rely on,
an external repository. Thus the start of the Micrographia certainly invites comparisons
with Bush’s dream of individuals, aided by devices such as cameras ﬁtted to spectacles,
recording all the data of their experience and storing this in their personal memex.
However, in his “General Scheme” (c.1666), Hooke concluded that the external
storage of information has to be governed by collective, rather than individual, interests
and that these might include shared categories and principles of classiﬁcation.26 I return
to this below.
John Locke: the Limits of Memory
In Locke’s Essay there are some important passages on augmented faculties, including
memory, which can be understood as responses to Hooke’s comments in the
Micrographia. Locke cautions against cyborg fantasies as solutions to man’s fallen
condition in this “state of mediocrity” (Locke [1690] 1975, IV.xiv.2). We don’t have
perfect vision or hearing, and certainly not perfect memory. Our state of probation is
one that we have to endure, even though it is legitimate to seek some improvements.
26 In the Micrographia, he alludes to “another Discourse” (Hooke 1665, “Preface,” sig. b1v), which must be “A
General Scheme,” probably written in about 1666, and published posthumously (Hooke 1705a).
Hooke, Locke, and Vannevar Bush on External Memory
33
However, Locke does not expect any enhancements of the senses to give access to the
inner nature of things. Such knowledge was not part of God’s plan:
The inﬁnite wise Contriver of us, and all things about us, hath ﬁtted our Senses, Faculties,
and Organs, to the conveniences of Life, and the Business we have to do here. We are able,
by our Senses, to know, and distinguish things . . . But it appears not, that God intended,
we should have a perfect, clear, and adequate Knowledge of them. (Ibid., II.xxiii.12)
Locke indulges in some virtuoso thought experiments about enhanced human faculties.
His contention is that these improvements would not be adaptive in this world: “If
our sense of Hearing were but 1000 times quicker than it is, how would a perpetual
noise distract us. And we should in the quietest Retirement, be less able to sleep
or meditate, than in the middle of a Sea-ﬁght” (ibid.). Touching closely on Hooke’s
project, he then considers “that most instructive of our Senses, Seeing.” Locke does
seem to concede that if a person’s vision were a 100 or 1000 times more acute than the
“best Microscope” then he would “come nearer the Discovery of the Texture and the
Motion of the minute Parts of corporeal things.” However, a man with “Microscopical
Eyes” would also be ill-suited to this world: he “would be in a quite different World
from other People: Nothing would appear the same to him, and others . . . So that I
doubt, Whether he, and the rest of Men, could discourse concerning the Objects of
Sight” (ibid.).27
How does memory ﬁt into this argument? The short answer is that even if our
senses were perfect and capable of penetrating to the “real essences” of things, our
weak memories would not be able to retain and use the richer data. I think Locke
regards the prospect of perfect memory as a more complex case than that of perfect
senses. It is not clear whether he believes that the possession of perfect hearing or
vision would alter our ontological status, although he certainly says that both would
be non-functional capacities in this world. However, perfect sight, for Locke, is still
sight, perhaps akin to Adam’s vision; but perfect memory bears no relation to human
memory. Locke stresses that forgetting is a central fact of the human condition. Indeed,
he incorporates the weakness of memory into his account of how language works:
names for general concepts allow us to forget particulars that would quickly tax the
memory. As Locke explains, “general Notions,” to which we attach abstract names,
allow us to “disburden the Memory of the cumbersome load of Particulars” (ibid.,
IV.xii.3; see Borges 1964, 93 for a reference to Locke).
In Locke’s view, human knowledge would be restricted even if our ﬁve senses were
perfect, or artiﬁcially extended – because of the limits of memory. However, his starting
point is that memory is a crucial faculty: without it we could not build up knowledge
27 Locke insists that even if we could extend our senses we could not achieve knowledge of “real essences” (see
Locke [1690] 1975, III.vi.1–3; also II.xxiii.4). On his caveats about the microscope in this regard, see Alexander
1985, 184–7, 296; Wilson 1995, 238–43.
34
Richard Yeo
from sensations and ideas, by compounding and reﬂection. In short, “Memory, in an
intellectual Creature, is necessary in the next degree to Perception. It is of so great
moment, that where it is wanting, all the rest of our Faculties are in a great measure
useless” (ibid., II.x.8).28 And yet memory is imperfect. Locke catalogues its weaknesses,
such as slowness in retrieval and decay over time. The ideas we do at various times
perceive and entertain soon fade and can be lost entirely; some, like the “Children,
of our Youth,” are lost before we die (Locke 1975, II.x.4–5). As Locke reﬂects, “it
would be well with us, if our Knowledge were but as large as our Ideas.” However, our
memories cannot reliably recall and compare the number of ideas that pass through our
minds. These are the grounds on which he declares “the extent of our Knowledge comes
not only short of the reality of Things, but even of the extent of our own Ideas” (ibid.,
IV.iii.6; emphasis in original).
Locke underlines this fragile capacity of memory as a way of distinguishing
ontologically between humans and other superior intellectual beings, such as angels.
In fact, he regards memory as required only because of the limits of human mental
capacity: “For the narrow Mind of Man, not being capable of having many Ideas under
View and Consideration at once, it was necessary to have a Repository, to lay up those
Ideas, which at another time it might have use of ” (ibid., II.x.2). He calls memory
“the Store-house of our Ideas,” thus adopting a metaphor from the art of memory,
although in his account this storehouse runs a poor second to what it might have been
(ibid., II.x.2; also II.xxxii.7). Locke’s point of comparison is the capacity of “some
superiour created intellectual Beings” whose minds can hold “constantly in view the
whole Scene of all their former actions, wherein no one of the thoughts they have ever
had, may slip out of their sight” (ibid., II.x.9). It is not merely that such minds have
the ability to “see and know the Nature and Inward Constitution of things”; rather, it
is that they also have “a larger Comprehension, which enables them at one Glance to
see the Connexion and Agreement of very many Ideas, and readily supplys to them the
intermediate Proofs, which we by single and slow Steps . . . hardly at last ﬁnd out, and
are often ready to forget one before we have hunted out another” (ibid., IV.iii.6; see also
Yolton 2004). In other words, angels do not need memory; we do, but it often fails us.29
Memory and Archives
One result of this theological and philosophical speculation about the limits of memory
is that Hooke and Locke both came to accept the need for reliance on external
28 For other notices of the crucial role of memory in knowledge, see Locke [1690] 1975, IV.i.8–9; IV.xi.11.
29 Locke admits that there are examples of extraordinary memory among mortals and gives the case of the French
mathematician, Blaise Pascal, reciting the claim of Pascal’s sister that until the decline of his health her brother
“forgot nothing of what he had done, read, or thought in any part of his rational Age” (Locke [1690] 1975,
II.x.9). But Locke decides that Pascal was blessed with a gifted natural memory, not an artiﬁcially enhanced one.
Locke added this passage to the chapter “Of Retention” in the second edition of the Essay (Locke 1694, 72–3).
Hooke, Locke, and Vannevar Bush on External Memory
35
archives of information. With many of their contemporaries, they believed that the
classical art of memory was of little use in dealing with the mass of particulars
required, for example, in natural history and chemistry. They thought in terms of
the postlapsarian situation and asked whether it was possible, and desirable, to enhance
our senses, and memory. Locke said no to all of this; Hooke said yes, and risked
his health by imbibing various substances. Both also decided that improved memory
was not the simple equivalent of augmented vision and hearing. Memory stored and
revived ideas gathered by the ﬁve senses, and it supplied ideas to Reason. But since
memory was obviously unreliable, human understanding and knowledge would be
fatally compromised without corrective measures. My key point in this section is that
Hooke and Locke both distrusted the temporal and associative character of memory and
concluded that external storage and retrieval processes must break with such patterns.
As mentioned earlier, it is Bush who wanted to preserve these patterns in his memex.
Some further background is necessary here.
When Thomas Hobbes sought to explain a “Trayne of Thoughts” in the mind he
alluded to the associative character of memory (Hobbes [1651] 1996, 20). He gave this
example: “from St. Andrew the mind runneth to St. Peter, because their names are
read together; from St. Peter to a stone, because we see them together; and for the
same cause, from foundation to church, from church to people, and from people to
tumult.” Hobbes did not claim that this sequence was “casual and incoherent, as in
dreams for the most part,” but rather that its coherence, or the connection between
one idea and the next, was determined by a link made “at that time when they were
[ﬁrst] produced by the sense.” He reasoned that “according to this example, the mind
may run almost from any thing to any thing” (Hobbes [1650] 1928, 10–11).30 We
need to add here that according to Ren´e Descartes’ trace theory of memory (known
to Hobbes, Hooke, and Locke), such paths will be laid down in the porous matter of
the brain and followed again and again (Sutton 1998; Gaukroger 2002, 204–6; Clarke
2003, 93–105).
In his De Memoria et Reminiscentia, Aristotle distinguished between remembering
and recollection (reminiscentia) – the latter being a deliberate search for something
stored in memory (Sorabji 1972, 52–60). Aquinas used Aristotle’s distinction to classify
recollection (including artiﬁcial memory) as a rational capacity and natural memory
as belonging to the sensitive part of the soul, and therefore subject to the effects
of bodily humours, such as choler (or bile) – the basis of a melancholic disposition
(Yates 1966, 76–92; Carruthers 1990, 61–70). The early modern thinkers I discuss
here also made this distinction, but they did not regard the task of recollection as being
substantially aided by mnemonic rules which, they contended, were additional burdens
on natural memory. Furthermore, they warned that the trains of association, such as
those described by Hobbes, might easily skew any deliberative chain of recollection.
30 William James cited the passage from Leviathan on train of thoughts, and gave his own account of both
retention and recollection in terms of “habit-worn paths of association” (James 1890, I: 655).
36
Richard Yeo
Locke was especially concerned by this. Even before the chapter “Of the Association
of Ideas” was added to the fourth edition of the Essay (1700), he displayed anxiety
about disorderly habits of mind. In Of the Conduct of the Understanding (begun in
1697), at one point intended as a chapter of the Essay,31 he gave examples of how the
“association of ideas” could produce “unnatural connexions,” usually peculiar to the
individual. Indeed, the inﬂuence of custom, or “the empire of habit,” produced “a
disease of the mind as hard to be cured as any” (Locke [1823] 1963, 276, 283–84). In
the Essay, Locke separated this erroneous association from the “natural correspondence
and connexion” of ideas that reﬂect real unions in the world that reason must seek to
discover. When he spoke of the “association of ideas,” Locke referred to “the wrong
connexion in our minds of ideas in themselves, loose and independent one of another”
(Locke [1690] 1975, II.xxxiii.4 and 9; also II.xi.13). On this basis, he diagnosed the
associative character of memory as a barrier to clear analysis and novel connections.
Of course, reason and judgment needed access to ideas held in memory; the strategy,
therefore, especially for the new sciences, was to externalize data for the purposes of
resorting, comparison, and generalization.32 Locke’s recommendations about the use
of commonplace books can be seen in this context.33
Hooke reached a similar conclusion. Although attracted by the promise of enhancing
individual memory, he gave more prominence to the needs of “Reason,” or “the
Understanding,” in his methodological stipulations. To some extent, this direction was
foreshadowed in the Micrographia where he called for a thoroughgoing reform of all
human senses and faculties, because “the whole chain is in danger of being dissolv’d;
it is to begin with the Hands and Eyes, and to proceed on through the Memory, to be
continued by the Reason” (Hooke 1665, “Preface,” sig. b2r). He also indicated that
this reform should move beyond individual memory so that reason had a collective
memory at its disposal: “What ought to be thought of that man, that has not only a
perfect register of his own experience, but is grown old with the experience of many
hundreds of years, and many thousands of men” (Hooke 1665, “Preface,” sig. d1r).
In the “General Scheme,” he concentrated on the methods of storing, arranging, and
analyzing this information (Hooke 1705a).34 Expressing his debt to Bacon, Hooke
stressed the collaborative aspects of scientiﬁc inquiry and admitted that the capacities
of individuals, however strong, were not sufﬁcient:
31 For Locke’s note that “Of the Conduct of the Understanding” would be chap. 20 in Book IV, see MS Locke
e.1, p. 62, Bodleian Library, Oxford; and Locke to William Molyneux, 26 April 1695, in Locke 1976–1989,
vol. 5: letter no. 1887.
32 Descartes made a similar point in his Regulae ad Directionem Ingenii (c. 1619–28), rule 7 (see Descartes [1701]
1985, 25). A Dutch translation appeared in 1684, and the ﬁrst Latin translation in 1701 (see Gaukroger 1995,
111–15, 434). It is unlikely that either Hooke or Locke had access to the manuscript prior to publication.
33 There is no space to treat this here, but see Yeo 2004.
34 For Hooke’s note-taking in this context, see Mulligan 1992a; Yeo 2007.
Hooke, Locke, and Vannevar Bush on External Memory
37
For where the Examination and Comparison of so great a Number of Particulars is
requisite, and where the Process is long, and the Informations but thinly scatter’d, and
those also in the Dark, ‘tis not to be expected from the most subtile Wit, that the whole
Operation should be only performed by the Strength of its Memory, and the Activity of
its Ratiocination, though each of them in the greatest pitch of Perfection. (Ibid., 5)
In any case, at the individual level, memory and reason were often unequally repre-
sented – as epitomized, Hooke noted, in the proverb that “good Wits have ill
Memories” (ibid.). In collective inquiries, the capacities of individuals had to be
marshaled in a methodical fashion for the good of science. Here he made memory
subordinate to reason:
. . . the Ratiocination is helped ﬁrst, by being left alone and undisturbed to it self, having
all the Intention of the Mind bent wholly to its Work, without being any other ways at
the same time imployed in the Drudgery and Slavery of the Memory, either in calling
particular things to Memory, or ranging them in Order, or remembring such things as
belong to another Head, or in transposing, jumbling, ranging, methodizing, and the like.
(Ibid., 34)
The importance of ensuring that reason was not constrained by memory was,
I suggest, reinforced by Hooke’s own theory of the physical workings of memory
outlined about ﬁfteen years later in his “Lectures of Light.” In the seventh of these
lectures, he suggested that the memory receives ideas in temporal order, linked to
one another and so forming a “Chain of Ideas coyled up in the Repository of the
Brain, the ﬁrst end of which is farthest removed from the Center or Seat of the Soul
where the Ideas are formed; and the other End is always at the Center, being the last
Idea formed” (Hooke 1705b, 140).35 Each idea carries its content and a marker of its
position in the chain, “disposed in some regular Order; which Order I conceive to
be principally that according to which they are formed” (ibid.).36 However, scientiﬁc
inquiry into the patterns and laws of the natural world demanded an ability to reorder
this temporal chain of ideas for analysis. I think that M. M. Slaughter overlooks this
disparity when she says that “in his treatise ‘On Memory’ . . . he [Hooke] discusses the
formation of ideas noting that these dispose themselves in an order such that there is
a continued chain of ideas in the brain. This mental ordering of elements presumably
matches the ordering of nature” (Slaughter 1982, 183). But Hooke believed that this
was not the case: the chain of ideas in memory was laid down in chronological order;
it did not mirror the true patterns in nature. When lamenting the various weaknesses
35 Hooke used this notion to explain our sense of temporal duration. On Hooke’s weather clock as an analogue
of memory in this respect, see Wilding 2006, 124.
36 Hooke thought of memories as discretely localized; whereas Descartes possibly allowed for superimposition
and distribution throughout the brain (see Sutton 1998, 134–5,137–8, 151–2). Hooke was therefore less worried
about what Glanvill called “a disorderly ﬂoating” or “Chaos of confusion” (Glanvill 1661, 36–89).
38
Richard Yeo
of memory, he was not merely worried about the tendency to forget; in addition, as he
put it, the memory “cannot so well propound all it does remember, to be examin’d at
once by the Judgment; but prefers some things ﬁrst in order, before others, and some
things with more Vehemence and greater concern” (Hooke 1705a, 6).37 On this basis,
he concluded that the natural processes of memory could not provide a sound basis for
the work of reason. What was to be done?
Hooke used the word “Repository” to describe both individual memory and the
collection of papers and objects owned by the Royal Society. His method of collective
inquiry called for this storehouse to be conceived as an externalized memory of material
able to be analyzed and re-arranged by reason. In this way, scientiﬁc analysis would
transcend the temporal or associative patterns of natural memory. This project required
a generally agreed set of categories under which information could be gathered and
stored. In his role as Curator of the Royal Society’s Repository, Hooke used the
taxonomy in John Wilkins’ Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language
(1668). Thomas Sprat reported on this in his History of the Royal Society (1667): “This
Repository he [Hooke] has begun to reduce under its several heads, according to the
exact Method of the Ranks of all the Species of Nature, which has been compos’d
by Doctor Wilkins, and will shortly be published in his Universal Language” (Sprat
[1667] 1959, 251). Wilkins was not merely seeking a lingua franca to replace Latin,
nor was he hoping to recover the lost pristine language of Adam. The crucial point
was that the symbols of his universal character reﬂected a general classiﬁcation of both
“Notions” and “Things.”38 Wilkins proposed “40 common Heads or Genus’s” and,
following Aristotle, subdivided these into “Differences” and “Species.” Symbols or words
(respectively, for the written and spoken versions) were allocated on the basis of this
framework. These then not only denoted a notion or a thing, but also the place of
the referent in the wider classiﬁcation. For example, in the spoken version, the word
“Zana” combines “Za” (the genus ﬁsh); “n” indicating “squamous river ﬁsh,” the
ninth “Difference”; and “a,” pinpointing the second species, the salmon “of a reddish
ﬂesh” (Wilkins 1668, 142).39 Wilkins explained the advantages of this method: “But
now if these Marks or Notes could be so contrived, as to have such a dependance upon,
and relation to, one another, as might be suitable to the nature of things and notions
which they represented . . . and we should, by learning the Character and Names of
37 I take this to indicate that, in addition to the problem of the order of recollection, there were also biases
produced by individual interests and passions – although as far as I can tell Hooke did not use the term
“association” in this context.
38 The scholarship on universal languages is considerable (see, for example, Aarsleff 1970–90, 361–81; Knowlson
1975; Salmon 1988; Rossi 2000; Maat 2004). The best account of the connection with the sciences is Slaughter
1982.
39 For the taxonomy of the plant and animal kingdoms, Wilkins relied on John Ray and Francis Willughby
(see DeMott 1957, 3–12; Slaughter 1982, 62–3, 184–6). Nehemiah Grew, who catalogued the Royal Society
collection, agreed with Wilkins’ approach to classiﬁcation: “So that the Names of Things should always be taken
from something more observably declarative of their Form, or Nature” (Grew 1681, “Preface,” sig. A32v).
Hooke, Locke, and Vannevar Bush on External Memory
39
things, be instructed likewise in their Natures, the knowledg of both which ought to
be conjoyned” (ibid., 21).40 In turn, he argued that once the systematic ordering of
the main categories was grasped, this would “much facilitate the ﬁxing of them in the
memory” (ibid., 441).
As Slaughter has suggested, it is quite feasible that Hooke’s ideas about how to build
and organize a scientiﬁc repository were indebted to Wilkins’ scheme (Slaughter 1982,
159). The nomenclature of this universal character, based on a ﬁxed classiﬁcation of
the world, allowed mnemonic possibilities.41 Such a taxonomy offered one way of
both guiding the collection of information and arranging it. The many references in
the “General Scheme” to natural order resonate with this, as does Hooke’s undelivered
promise of a “Philosophical Algebra” that would act as an aid to both memory
and thinking in all “Natural Inquiry” (see Hesse 1966; Mulligan 1992b). He also
suggested the use of symbols and shorthand as a way of saving time, space, and pressure
on memory; the result, he said, might “not improperly be call’d a Philosophical
Algebra, or an Art of directing the Mind in the search after Philosophical Truths”
(Hooke 1705a, 6–7).42 Of course, these symbols (as in Wilkins’ scheme) required
the prior establishment of fundamental categories. Here there was a need to pause.
Although Hooke sketched out “Heads of Inquiry” for the compilation of ﬁfty-six
natural histories, he acknowledged that these Heads might need revision as further
“Observations and Experiments” superseded earlier material. He proposed keeping a
large book into which slips of “very ﬁne Paper” could be inserted; this would facilitate
the process of continual sifting and reshufﬂing, which could not be accomplished by
memory. Thus data could be moved around so that information “which was plac’d ﬁrst
may be plac’d middle-most, or last, or transpos’d to another Head” (ibid., 64).
We might say that Hooke envisaged a large collective memex. However, Hooke’s
thinking conﬂicted with the assumptions underlying Bush’s proposal in at least two
fundamental respects: he stressed the importance of shared classiﬁcation; and he saw this
as a protection against both the rigid and the idiosyncratic patterns of natural memory.
40 Locke was not conﬁdent that our knowledge of universals was sufﬁciently secure to ground a general
classiﬁcation. He attacked universal languages in the Essay (Locke [1690] 1975, III.xi.2). However, when asked
by his friend, Nicolas Toinard, about George Dalgarno’s, Ars Signorum (1661), Locke recommended that he look
at “le livre du Dr Wilkins le seu Evesque de Chester qu il a ecrit in folio en Anglois de Charactere universali. . .”
(see Locke to Nicolas Toinard, 30 August 1681, in Locke 1976–1989, vol. 2, letter no. 656).
41 Wilkins was Hooke’s mentor at Oxford, and Hooke’s abiding interest in artiﬁcial languages is well documented
(see, for example, Hooke 1726, 142–50; Hooke 1686; and Hooke 1968 for many diary entries between 1673
and 1680).
42 In a letter to Leibniz he called this “the Algebra of Algebras or the Science of methods” (see Robert Hooke to
G. W. Leibniz, 15 May 1681, Royal Society of London, Letter Book, EL/H3/64. See also Hooke’s unpublished
“Mathematical Language,” Royal Society Classiﬁed papers, xx, no. 72, cited in Slaughter 1982, 183). Leibniz
was enthusiastic about Wilkins’ contribution “towards creating a perfect language for philosophical purposes”
but maintained that more could be done to develop the real character into an instrument of thought (see Leibniz
to Henry Oldenburg, 13 July 1670 in Oldenburg 1965–86, 7: 67 [trans. from the Latin original by the editors];
also Fontenelle [1818] 1968, 246–7).
40
Richard Yeo
As noted earlier, Bush mentioned Leibniz’s plans for a calculating machine, but he
seemed to divorce this from its connection with the philosopher’s attempt to analyze
and classify the relationships between primitive ideas as the groundwork of a symbolic
logic.43 Bush’s memex recorded previous searches of an individual mind; in this sense,
it registered associations between ideas, but it did not order them by logical or other
criteria. In contrast, Hooke’s archive incorporated the empirical information supplied
by individuals and the categories gradually established by collective effort. Potentially,
the existence of such an organized repository might inﬂuence the manner in which
individuals stored information in memory – namely, under the categories agreed on by
a community. But the fact that it was an active repository meant that any reconﬁguring
of its contents had to be carefully monitored. From what is known of Hooke’s attitudes,
it is likely that his ideal archive was a controlled one. In this sense, he was thinking
of an “institutional” repository, not one open to any “public” (see Feingold 1998;
Johns 1998, 475–87; Wilding 2006, 131–33). In contrast, for Bush, the memex was a
personal tool entirely under the dominion of its owner – even though an institutional
version might well have appealed to corporate and military organizations of his time.
Vannevar Bush: Memory as a Model for Memex
There are ambiguities in the name Bush gave to the device he described as “an
intimate supplement to memory.” His biographer says that he “considered the memex a
mechanical aid to memory (hence its name)”; and similarly, others have understood this
term as a contraction of “memory extended” (Zachary 1997, 262).44 However, another
interpretation is that memex stands for “memory index”: thus mem(ory) (ind)ex
(Buckland 1992, 285). I think this latter view is more plausible because Bush attacked
conventional indexing: “When data of any sort are placed in storage, they are ﬁled
alphabetically or numerically, and information is found (when it is) by tracing it down
from subclass to subclass. . . . Having found one item, moreover, one has to emerge from
the system and re-enter on a new path.” He then made this contrast: “The human
mind does not work that way. It operates by association. With one item in its grasp, it
snaps instantly to the next that is suggested by the association of thoughts, in accordance
with some intricate web of trails carried by the cells of the brain” (Bush 1945, 106).45
In a later version of his article, Bush sketched a more sophisticated “Memex II”:
43 For the connection between this attempt and Leibniz’s interest in artiﬁcial or philosophical languages, see
Maat 2004, chap. 5.
44 See, for example, Rheingold 2000, 175: “Because one of its functions was to extend human memory, Bush
called his hypothetical machine a memex.”
45 In a letter of 19 November 1944, Bush wrote: “When items are thus tied together in a chain, when any item
in the chain can be caused to be followed by the next, instantly and automatically, wherever it may be, there is
formed an associative trail through the material. It is closely analagous [sic] to the trail formed in the cells of the
brain, and it may be similarly employed” (cited in Nyce and Kahn 1991, 58; see also Bush 1970, 190–1).
Hooke, Locke, and Vannevar Bush on External Memory
41
Many years ago I described a machine, called the Memex, which I conceived of as a
device that would supplement thought directly rather than at a distance. It abandoned
the usual indexing schemes in handling data, and substituted the construction through
the data of trails of association which it included in its memory. . . . The time has come to
it try again . . . thanks to the psychologists and the neural physiologists, we have a clearer
conception of how the brain actually functions, and hence a better chance of joining it
with a machine which can truly supplement because it does things in much the same
way. (Nyce and Kahn 1991, 166)46
Bush forecast that Memex II (using magnetic tape) would learn and guess on the basis
of past commands: “For the machine remembers what it has been caused to do. Thus,
when left to itself, stepping along some indicated trail, it will pause and explore a side
trail if that has been its experience often when the trail was followed under orders”
(ibid., 176). The upgraded memex was better at capitalizing on associative links than
the brain which it imitated:
The machine’s primary service lies primarily in extending the mass of recollection, and in
rendering this explicit rather than vague. It also provides a memory which does not fade,
and by causing it to be more promptly accessible than by the somewhat haphazard trails of
association in the brain itself . . . .This, in turn, remolds the trails of the user’s brain, . . . For
the trails of the machine become duplicated in the brain of the user, vaguely as all memory
is vague, but with a concomitant emphasis by repetition, creation and discard, reﬁnement,
as the cells of the brain become realigned and reconnected, better to utilize the massive
explicit memory which is its servant. (Ibid., 177–8).47
This ﬁnal vision reveals a tension in Bush’s position. In the original article
he distinguished between creative and mechanical processes (including routine
mathematical and logical ones), stating that associative thinking was of the former
kind. The problem was that although natural memory often recalled by way of such
association, these links could fade. The memex preserved trails of such associative
connections, thereby allowing its user to ﬁnd and retrace them. However, in “Memex
II,” he asserted that the brain (and natural memory) is trained by the memex,
or that there is a tight cybernetic bond between them. Since the spontaneity and
unpredictability of associations were the features of human thinking and memory that
Bush sought to preserve in the memex, it is odd that a repetitive machine almost came
to be the master of its user’s mind. Another striking consequence is that a memex is a
memento, not only of past documentary searches, but of its owner’s thought processes:
46 This is from the unpublished draft intended as a proposal for “Memex II,” 27 August 1959 (MIT Archives
MC78, box 21).
47 Two relevant points which I cannot discuss here are: i) Bush’s own preference for analog technology;
ii) Norbert Wiener’s notion of “servomechanisms” that effaced the distinction between human and machine
(see Zachary 1997, 273–6; Nyce and Kahn 1991, 61–4; Galison 1994).
42
Richard Yeo
Can a son inherit the memex of his father, or the disciple that of his master, reﬁned
and polished over the years, and go on from there? In this way can we avoid some of
the loss which comes when oxygen is no longer furnished to the brain of the great
thinker? . . . Can the race thus develop leaders, of such power of intellect, and such forces
of conviction, that the world can be saved from its follies? (Ibid., 183)
Concluding Remarks
I do not pretend that these snapshots, separated by almost three centuries, can
produce convincing generalizations about the changing relations between memory
and information. However, despite differences in the sophistication of theories about
memory processes and technologies for storage and retrieval of information, they
indicate that in such a history there are some ubiquitous issues that can be discussed
under the following themes.
Classiﬁcation and Searching
We have come to expect that improvements in information technology weaken the
connection between classiﬁcation and retrieval of data. In our digital world, searches
by word or letter combination render subject categories almost superﬂuous. Neither
Hooke nor Locke were prepared to go this far, even though they did break with
the notion of a standard set of commonplace Heads, as found in both scholastic
and humanist pedagogy. Subject or topic headings remained important as a means of
grouping empirical particulars; such arrangements could be revised, but not abandoned.
In contrast, Bush regarded the classiﬁcation of information in terms of subject matter,
or discipline, or proximity on some map of knowledge as largely irrelevant to effective
retrieval. This was despite the fact that users of memex depended initially on general
categories to assemble the ingredients of their personal encyclopedias. But once started,
the memex allowed individuals to index and locate documents solely in terms of afﬁnity
to some theme chosen and named by them. The trail of documents was determined
by searches under this theme, irrespective of disciplinary boundaries.
Individual versus Collective Repositories of Information
Both Hooke and Locke reﬂected on the use of personal notebooks as a way of managing
the amount of information required by scientiﬁc research. Hooke, in particular, also
discussed the concept of an archive, arranged by agreed categories, acting as an external
reference point for the collection of information. In the search for new relationships,
this archive could be re-organized more easily than any individual could re-order his
or her own memory. There was the possibility that individuals could beneﬁt from
such a collective effort, accepting the categories and the patterns that emerged and
Hooke, Locke, and Vannevar Bush on External Memory
43
disciplining their own memories accordingly. With this much at stake, permission to
reassign material to different categories was likely to be an institutional decision. In
contrast, Bush regarded the memex as a personal, even private, device in the battle
against information overload – a problem not adequately addressed, in his opinion, by
library catalogs. His focus was on personal users who needed to keep track of their
own thoughts and information gathered for a special purpose.48 By repeating the trails
of its owner’s previous searches, the memex was a strangely personal machine, forever
adding to and retracing old trails, only rarely embarking on new lines of inquiry, and
never reorganizing data under different headings, as Hooke demanded.
The Role of Memory in Information Management
Hooke and Locke lived in a culture in which a strong memory was highly valued –
despite the waning proﬁle of the classical art of memory. It is not surprising, therefore,
that they explored the possibility of improving natural memory. However, when
considering how information, especially scientiﬁc data, should be stored and organized,
they made a radical break with natural memory. They stressed the externalization
of information in a manner that attempted to ensure against the fragilities and
idiosyncrasies of memory. The surprising fact is that Bush sought to recapitulate
the associative patterns of individual memory in the search functions of the memex.
Regarding this invention as an analog of memory, he came to see it as reliable retainer
of the creative, though often arbitrary, connections made by the mind, so that “there
are built up trails of association in the memory, of brain or machine” (Bush 1970, 191).
Although all three thinkers began with the perception that the mass of information
outstripped the capacity of individual memory, they arrived at different conclusions.
Hooke and Locke gave priority to reason and judgment over memory; Bush made
natural memory the model for an externalized memory device more powerful than his
seventeenth-century predecessors could have imagined.
Acknowledgments
The research for this article was made possible by an Australian Professorial Fellowship
awarded by the Australian Research Council. For access to material in their custody,
I am grateful to the Royal Society of London, the British Library, and the Keeper
of Modern Western Manuscripts, Bodleian Library, Oxford. I thank the Warden and
Fellows of All Souls College, Oxford, for their support while I was a Visiting Fellow
48 Nevertheless, Bush did canvas the possibility of creating a discipline-based memex (see Nyce and Kahn 1991,
173–4). Yet, even later when he reﬂected on the use of large digital computers in industry, Bush reserved a
distinctive role for a personal machine along the lines of memex (see Bush [1967] 1991, 211; for the original
version, see Bush 1967, 75–101).
44
Richard Yeo
during 2004–5. For helpful comments and suggestions, I am grateful to two anonymous
referees and the editors of this journal.
References
Aarsleff, Hans. 1970–90. “Wilkins.” In Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography, edited by Charles C. Gillispie,
18 vols., 14:361–81. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons. Reprinted in his From Locke to Saussure: Essays
on the Study of Language and Intellectual History, 239–277. London: Athlone Press.
Agrippa, Henricus Cornelius. [1531] 1569. Henrie Cornelius Agrippa, Of the Vanitie and Uncertaintie of the
Artes and Sciences, Englished by Ja. San. gent. London: Henry Wykes.
Alexander, Peter. 1985. Ideas, Qualities, and Corpuscles: Locke and Boyle on the External World. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Anon. 1945a. “A Machine That Thinks.” Time, 23 July, p. 41.
Anon. 1945b. “What Dr. Bush Foresees.” Life, 10 September, pp. 112–124.
Anon. 1954. Ad Herennium. De ratione dicendi. With an English Translation by Harry Caplan. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Augustine, Saint, Bishop of Hippo. 1961. Confessions. Translated with an introduction by R. S. Pine-
Cofﬁn. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Bennett, Jim, Michael Cooper, Michael Hunter, and Lisa Jardine. 2003. London’s Leonardo: the Life and
Work of Robert Hooke. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Blair, Ann. 2004. “Note Taking as Transmission.” Critical Inquiry 31:85–107.
Borges, Louis. 1964. “Funes the Memorius.” In Labyrinth, edited by Donald A. Yates and James E. Irby,
87–95. London: Penguin Books.
Buckland, Michael K. 1992. “Emanuel Goldberg, Electronic Document Retrieval, and Vannevar Bush’s
Memex.” Journal of the American Society for Information Science 43:284–291.
Bush, Vannevar. 1945. “As We May Think.” Atlantic Monthly (July):101–108.
Bush, Vannevar. 1946a. Endless Horizons. Washington, D. C.: Public Affairs Press.
Bush, Vannevar. [1933] 1946b. “The Inscrutable Past.” In his Endless Horizons, 1–15. Washington, D. C.:
Public Affairs Press.
Bush, Vannevar. 1967. Science Is Not Enough. New York: William Morrow.
Bush, Vannevar. 1970. Pieces of the Action. New York: William Morrow.
Bush, Vannevar. [1967] 1991. “Memex Revisited.” In From Memex to Hypertext: Vannevar Bush and the
Mind’s Machine, edited by James M. Nyce, and Paul Kahn, 197–215. Boston: Academic Press.
Carruthers, Mary. 1990. The Book of Memory: a Study of Memory in Medieval Culture. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, Andy. 2003. Natural-Born Cyborgs: Minds, Technologies, and the Future of Human Intelligence. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Clark, Andy, and David Chalmers. 1998. “The Extended Mind.” Analysis 58(1):7–19.
Clarke, Desmond. 2003. Descartes’s Theory of the Mind. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Clynes, Manfred E., and Nathan S. Kline. 1960. “Cyborgs and Space.” Astronautics (September):26–27,
74–75.
Coleman, Janet. 1992. Ancient and Medieval Memories: Studies in the Reconstruction of the Past. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Dalgarno, George. 1661. Ars Signorum, Vulgo Character Universalis et Lingua Philosophica. London: J. Hayes.
Daston, Lorraine. 2004. “Taking Note(s).” Isis 95:443–448.
DeMott, Benjamin. 1957. “Science versus Mnemonics.” Isis 48:3–12.
Dennis, Michael A. 1989. “Graphic Understanding: Instruments and Interpretation in Robert Hooke’s
Micrographia.” Science in Context 3:309–64.
Hooke, Locke, and Vannevar Bush on External Memory
45
Descartes, Ren´e. [1701] 1985. “Rules for the Direction of the Mind.” In The Philosophical Writings of
Descartes, 3 vols., translated by John Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch, vol. 1, 7–76.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Donald, Merlin. 1991. Origins of the Modern Mind: Three Stages in the Evolution of Culture and Cognition.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Draaisma, Douwe. 2000. Metaphors of Memory: a History of Ideas about the Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Feingold, Mordechai. 1998. “Of Records and Grandeur: the Archive of the Royal Society.” In Archives
of the Scientiﬁc Revolution: the Formation and Exchange of Ideas in Seventeenth-century Europe, edited by
Michael Hunter, 171–184. Woodbridge: Boydell Press.
Fontenelle, Bernard Le Bovier de. [1818] 1968. “´Eloge de M. Leibnitz.” In Oeuvres Compl`etes, edited by
G. B. Depping, 3 vols., vol. 1, 226–252. Geneve: Slatkine Reprints.
Galison, Peter. 1994. “The Ontology of the Enemy: Norbert Wiener and the Cybernetic Vision.” Critical
Inquiry 21(1):228–266.
Gaukroger, Stephen. 1995. Descartes: an Intellectual Biography. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gaukroger, Stephen. 2002. Descartes’ System of Natural Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Glanvill, Joseph. 1661. The Vanity of Dogmatizing: or Conﬁdence in Opinions. London: E. C. for H. Eversden.
Goyet, Francis. 1996. Le sublime du lieu commun. L’invention rh´etorique dans l’Antiquit´e et `a la Renaissance.
Paris: Honor´e Champion.
Grew, Nehemiah. 1681. Musaeum Regalis Societatis. Or a Catalogue and Description of the Natural and Artiﬁcial
Rarities Belonging to the Royal Society. London: W. Rawlins.
Harrison, Peter. 1998. The Bible, Protestantism, and the Rise of Natural Science. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Harrison, Peter. 2002. “Original Sin and the Problem of Knowledge in Early Modern Europe.” Journal
of the History of Ideas 63(2):239–259.
Harwood, John T. 1989. “Rhetoric and Graphics in Micrographia.” In Robert Hooke: New Studies, edited
by Michael Hunter and Simon Schaffer, 119–147. Woodbridge: Boydell Press.
Hayles, N. Katherine. 1999. How We Became Post Human: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature and
Informatics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hesse, Mary. 1966. “Hooke’s Philosophical Algebra.” Isis 57:67–83.
Hobbes, Thomas. [1650] 1928. Human Nature. In The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic, edited by
Ferdinand T¨onnies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hobbes, Thomas. [1651] 1996. Leviathan. Edited by Richard Tuck. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Hooke, Robert. 1665. Micrographia, or, Some Physiological Descriptions of Minute Bodies Made by Magnifying
Glasses. London: J. Martyn and J. Allestry.
Hooke, Robert. 1686. “Some Observations, and Conjectures Concerning the Chinese Characters.”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 16:63–78.
Hooke, Robert. 1705a. “A General Scheme, or Idea of the Present State of Natural Philosophy.” In The
Posthumous Works of Robert Hooke, edited by Richard Waller, 1–70. London: S. Smith and B. Walford.
Hooke, Robert. 1705b. “Lectures of Light, Explicating its Nature, Properties, and Effects.” In The
Posthumous Works of Robert Hooke, edited by Richard Waller, 71–148. London: S. Smith and B. Walford.
Hooke, Robert. 1726. “Dr. Hook’s Discourse to the Royal Society, May 21, 1684 Shewing a Way How
to Communicate One’s Mind at Great Distances.” In Philosophical Experiments and Observations of the
Late Eminent Dr. Robert Hooke, edited by William Derham, 142–150. London: W. and T. Innys.
Hooke, Robert. 1968. The Diary of Robert Hooke 1672–1680. Edited by H. W. Robinson and W. Adams.
London: Wykeham Publications.
Inwood, Stephen. 2002. The Man Who Knew Too Much. London: Macmillan.
James, William. 1890. The Principles of Psychology. 2 vols. London: Macmillan.
46
Richard Yeo
Jardine, Lisa. 2003. “Hooke the Man: His Diary and His Health.” In London’s Leonardo: the Life and Work
of Robert Hooke, Jim Bennett, Michael Cooper, Michael Hunter, and Lisa Jardine, 163–206. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Johns, Adrian. 1998. The Nature of the Book: Print and Knowledge in the Making. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Kendrick, Michelle. 2001. “Interactive Technology and the Remediation of the Subject of Writing.”
Conﬁgurations 9:231–251.
Kitzmann, Andreas. 2001. “Pioneer Spirits and the Lure of Technology: Vannevar Bush’s Desk, Theodor
Nelson’s World.” Conﬁgurations 9:441–459.
Knowlson, James. 1975. Universal Language Schemes in England and France, 1600–1800. Buffalo: University
of Toronto Press.
Landow, George, P. 1992. Hypertext: the Convergence of Contemporary Critical Theory and Technology.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lashley, Karl S. 1960. “In Search of the Engram.” In The Neuropsychology of Lashley: Selected Papers of
K. S. Lashley, edited by Frank A. Beach, Clifford T. Morgan, and Henry W. Nissen, 478–505. New
York: McGraw Hill.
Locke, John. [1690] 1975. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Edited by Peter H. Nidditch.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Locke, John. 1694. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, 2nd edn. London: A. and J. Churchil.
Locke, John. 1976–1989. The Correspondence of John Locke. Edited by E. S. de Beer, 8 vols. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Locke, John. [1823] 1963. Of the Conduct of the Understanding. In The Works of John Locke. A New Edition,
Corrected, 10 vols., vol. 3, 205–289. Darmstadt: Scientia Verlag Aalen.
Luria, A. R. [Luriya, Aleksandr Romanovich] 1975. The Mind of a Mnemonist: a Little Book about a Vast
Memory. Translated by L. Solotaroff. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Maat, Japp. 2004. Philosophical Languages in the Seventeenth Century: Dalgarno, Wilkins, Leibniz. Dordrecht
and Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Malcolm, Noel. 2004. “Thomas Harrison and his ‘Ark of Studies’: an Episode in the History of the
Organization of Knowledge.” The Seventeenth Century 19:196–232.
Menary, Richard, ed. 2006. The Extended Mind. Aldershot and Burlington: Ashgate Publishing.
Moss, Ann. 1996. Printed Commonplace-books and the Structuring of Renaissance Thought. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Mulligan, Lotte. 1992a. “Robert Hooke’s ‘Memoranda’: Memory and Natural History.” Annals of Science
49:47–61.
Mulligan, Lotte. 1992b. “Robert Hooke and Certain Knowledge.” The Seventeenth Century 7:151–169.
Mulligan, Lotte. 1996. “Self-Scrutiny and the Study of Nature: Robert Hooke’s Diary as Natural History.”
Journal of British Studies 35:311–342.
Nyce, James M., and Paul Kahn, eds. 1991. From Memex to Hypertext: Vannevar Bush and the Mind’s Machine.
Boston: Academic Press.
Oldenburg, Henry. 1965–86. The Correspondence of Henry Oldenburg. Edited and translated by A. Rupert
Hall and Marie Boas Hall, 10 vols. Madison: University of Wisconsin.
Oldroyd, D. R. 1980. “Some Philosophical Scribbles Attributed to Robert Hooke.” Notes and Records of
the Royal Society of London 35:17–32.
Pickering, Andy. 1995. “Cyborg History and the World War II Regime.” Perspectives on Science 3:
1–48.
Rheingold, Howard. 2000. Tools for Thought: the History and Future of Mind-expanding Technology.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Richards, Graham. 1992. Mental Machinery: the Origins and Consequences of Psychological Ideas, Part 1:
1600–1850. London: Athlone Press.
Rossi, Paolo. 2000. Logic and the Art of Memory: The Quest for a Universal Language. Translated by Stephen
Clucas. London: Athlone Press.
Hooke, Locke, and Vannevar Bush on External Memory
47
Salmon, Vivian. 1988. The Study of Language in 17th-Century England. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Schacter, Daniel. 1996. Searching for Memory: the Brain, the Mind, and the Past. New York: Basic Books.
Singer, B. R. 1976. “Robert Hooke on Memory, Association and Time Perception.” Notes and Records of
the Royal Society of London 31:115–31.
Slaughter, Mary. 1982. Universal Languages and Scientiﬁc Taxonomy in the Seventeenth Century. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Smith, Edward. 2006. “Hooke and Westminster.” In Robert Hooke. Tercentennial Studies, edited by Michael
Cooper, and Michael Hunter, 219–232. Aldershot and Burlington: Ashgate Publishing.
Sorabji, Richard, ed. 1972. Aristotle on Memory. London: Duckworth.
Sprat, Thomas. [1667] 1959. History of the Royal Society. Edited by Jackson I. Cope, and Harold Whitmore
Jones. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Sutton, John. 1998. Philosophy and Memory Traces: Descartes to Connectionism. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Sutton, John. 2002. “Porous Memory and the Cognitive Life of Things.” In Preﬁguring Cyberculture:
an Intellectual History, edited by Darren Tofts, 130–41. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press; Sydney: Power
Publications.
Waller, Richard, ed. 1705. The Posthumous Works of Robert Hooke. London: S. Smith and B. Walford.
Wells, H. G. [1938] 1994. “The Brain Organization of the Modern World.” In his World Brain, 116–118.
London: Adamantine.
Wiener, Norbert. [1948] 1973. Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine,
2nd ed. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Wilding, Nick. 2006. “Graphic Technologies.” In Robert Hooke: Tercentennial Studies, edited by Michael
Cooper, and Michael Hunter, 123–134. Aldershot and Burlington: Ashgate Publishing.
Wilkins, John. 1668. An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language. London: S. Gellibrand
and J. Martyn.
Wilson, Catherine. 1995. The Invisible World: Early Modern Philosophy and the Invention of the Microscope.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Yates, Frances. 1966. The Art of Memory. London: Routledge.
Yeo, Richard. 2001. Encyclopaedic Visions: Scientiﬁc Dictionaries and Enlightenment Culture. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Yeo, Richard. 2004. “John Locke’s ‘New Method’ of Commonplacing: Managing Memory and
Information.” Eighteenth-Century Thought 2:1–38.
Yeo, Richard. 2007. “Between Memory and Paperbooks: Baconianism and Natural History in
Seventeenth-Century England.” History of Science.
Yolton, John. 2004. The Two Intellectual Worlds of John Locke: Man, Person and Spirits in the “Essay.” Ithaca
and London: Cornell University Press.
Zachary, G. Pascal. 1997. Endless Frontier: Vannevar Bush, Engineer of the American Century. New York: Free
Press.
