> 
> 
 
( 
I 
;, 
JOURNAL OF RESEARCH of the Notional Bureau of Standards - A. Physics and Chemistry 
Vol. 74A, No.2, M arch-April 1970 
The Band Structure Problem* 
J. M. Ziman 
H. H. Wills Physics Laboratory, Bristol, BS 8, 1 TL, England 
(October 10, 1969) 
The num erical solution of the Sc h r;;di ll ~e r equation for a n electron in a dense assembl y of atoms 
(i. e. a solid o r liquid meta l or semicondu cto r) has made great pro~ ress in th e past ten years. This is not 
me re ly a consequ cnce of great e r co mputing power; we now ha ve a mu ch bett e r grasp of the mathemati-
cal th eo ry of suc h solut ions. 
By 1960 a number of prac ti cal methods had been de vised fo r the comput ation of the electron ic 
structure of o rd e red crystals, bu t th ese lacked intuiti ve int e rp retation. The first adva nce was to re write 
the O PW me t hod in te rms of pseudopote nt ials, thu s making sense of the f ree-clect ron t heo ry of me ta ls. 
This de velop me nt has proved partic ul a rl y valuable in se miquan titat ive and e mpiri ca l in vesti ga tio ns of 
Fe rmi s urfaces, transport properties, lattice d yna mics, co hesio n, el c. , but we ha ve had to wait unt il 
recentl y for a ri gorou s ana lysis of th e c riteria for converge nce of th c various t ypes of llI ude l potc nt ial or 
pseudopote nti al that have been postu lated. 
The nex t s te p was to s how th at th e KKR (G rce n fun ction) mcth od could a lso be expressed as a 
pseudopotenti a l, and then to de mons tra te th at thi s was also a form of APW ex pansion. The relati vc 
comp utati unal power of th ese two meth ods ca n thus be a nalyzed, and questions a ns we re d conce rnin g 
the fulfillm e nt of th e empty latti ce tes t, the appa rent lack of uniqu eness of th e cxpans ions, th e ad-
vantages of " folding" matrix e le ments from di sta nt point s of the reciproca l latti ce, and the introdu cti un 
of contributi ons from the inters titi al pote nti al. 
At thi s s tage, the connecti ons between th e band structure proble m and the t-matri x theory of scat-
tering were unco vered, a nd d-bands were see n to arise as resonances of thc muffin-tin we lls. T he KKR 
ma trix co uld now be rewritt en as a mi xture of pseudo pote nti a l a nd tight -b ind ing e le me nts, in harm ony 
with the e mpirical model Hamiltoni an represent ations of hybridised So p a nd d-ba nd s. Th is method not 
only pe rm its more rapid comput ations, but s ho ws c learl y how th e width and positio n of s uch bands 
shou ld de pend on th e atomic potenti al. 
So me proble ms still re main. Fo r exa mple, present techniques do not seem adequate for first-princi-
ples ca Iculations on molec ul ar crystals, wh ere the a nisotropy of th e int e rst it ia l potent ia l (i. e. eas y cha n-
ne ls a lo ng bonds, but hi gh hills be twee n layers or chains) is probabl y the domina nt feature. 
As for disordered syste ms- we know little for ce rtain and nothing qu antit atively. T he linear cha in 
1lI0dei has been fu ll y s tudied but is quit e irrelevan t to the three-dimensional case. The present theoreti-
cal confusion is exemplified by the equi concentrati on s ubstitutional alloy in th e ti ght-binding li mit; 
some formulae give onl y one band, ot hers a llo w two. Again , the very possibilit y of producing band gaps 
by diffraction of free electron s in a topologicall y disordered syste m (e.g. amorphous Ge) has not been 
de mon strate d mathematicall y with a ny rigor. 
Key words : APW; band structure; de nsity of states; disordered systems; KKR; pseudopotential ; 
t-matrix; molecul a r crystals. 
1. Algebra vs. Arithmetic 
the Electronic De nsity of States to an unprejudiced 
tribunal? 
Any scientific problem or puzzle can seem interest-
i' ing and significant if one gets sufficien tl y involved in it: 
the diffic ulty sometimes is to persuade other people of 
this importance. How should we defend our interest in 
Not, surely, in terms of immediate use, but of long 
term understanding. Electrons being the gl ue of a ll 
" materials", their states within condensed ma tter are 
of fundamental importa nce. No quantitati ve estima te 
of any property of a metal, semiconductor , insul ator, 
glass, liquid , mineral, et c., can begin without informa-
tion about these states. In fact, we want all the wa ve 
~ ---
*An in vited pa pl'1" prl'sen tt,d a t 111(' 3d i\'latcrials I\esea r('h Sy mpos ium . Electronic Den -
sity of Stales, Nove mbe r :3-6 , 1969. Ca i t hc r s bu r~ . .'vld. 
241 
----------
functions of all the electrons outside of the closed 
shells - a tall order, which cannot be fulfilled by direct 
experiment. The next best thing is the energy spec-
trum , or "density of states," although as we shall learn 
in the course of this symposium, that cannot always be 
deduced unambiguously from observed phenomena_ 
Progress in this field therefore depends on sound 
theoretical analysis of the hypothetical possibilities, as 
well as careful experimental investigation of the facts_ 
The calculation of electronic band structure is thus the 
central mathematical problem of solid state physics_ 
Every "exciting" topic or mysterious phenomenon - su-
perconductivity, the Kondo effect, ferromagnetism , 
Fermi s urfaces, the Cunn effect, Josephson tunnelling, 
et c_,-eventually depends for its computable parame-
ters on this mundane task. 
It is sometimes argued, by the deeply unimaginative 
follower of scientifc fashion , that this problem has been 
solved long ago, and can safely be left to the brute 
strength of more and more powerful computers_ This is 
quite wrong; these elephants must be goaded and 
guided by experienced mahouts, whose skill is to see 
in advance the type of answer that is to be obtained, 
and then to deploy the minimum of force to lever away 
the obstacles_ A ream of computer print-out is useless 
unless it agrees so perfectly with experiment that we 
need never look back and see why and how it went 
wrong_ Our task is to devise techniques for the theoreti-
cal mastery of ever more complex systems, which 
requires at every stage that we know exactly what we 
are doing, analytically as well as numerically_ 
This is well illustrated by the recent history of our 
subject. Let me express this in personal terms_ A little 
more than ten years ago, in gathering material for a 
monograph [1] of which one chapter covered this topic, 
I found that many techniques of band structure compu-
tation had been proposed and tried out, but that there 
were very few cases where the results had been con-
firmed experimentally, or where they gave an insight 
into the actual electronic structure of the materials_ It 
was si mply not obvious , for example, that almost all the 
calculated band structures for metals could have been 
derived from the free electron system by perturbation 
effects at the zone boundaries, because nobody had 
programmed his computer to print out the data in that 
form_ We knew from the success of the free electron 
modeL that this could not be very far from the truth, 
but we had not the imagination to rewrite the algebra so 
as to see how this must arise within whatever method 
of calculation we might happen to use_ 
In the past decade, of course, computational 
techniques have improved enormously in accuracy and 
power, so that a whole body of expertise is now availa-
ble for application in any particular case [2] - Given the J
exact one-electron potential of a crystalline solid, we , 
can compute the band structure to almost any desired :
degree of accuracy_ But the trouble is that we do not al- I
ways have this potential, complete with all the electron-
-1-
electron terms, spin-orbit interaction, core polarization, 
exchange and correlation effects and so on, so that our J 
first-principles computations just miss the answers we 
are seeking_ Without an appeal to the basic algebraic 
principles and governing features of the model, we then 
flounder around, trying to adjust the parameters by trial / 
and errOL Somebody else, using a different "method" -> ' 
may get a different answer: is this due to deep discrep-
ancies in the fundamental assumptions, or to errors of 
approximation, or just numerical mistakes? 
2. Pseudism 
Now recall how our minds have been liberated by the 
pseudopotential concept. There is no need to explain 
this to the present audience_ Let us suppose that we 
had tried to express the Bloch function of wave vector _
k by a sum of simple plane waves 
IJik = ~
. 
Q' ei(k+g) r 
g 
g 
, 
(1) 
where g runs through the reciprocal lattice: we should > 
have to solve the infinite set of linear equations 
where r (g- g') is a Fourier component of the periodic 
potential in the lattice and iff is the energy of the state <
we are after. By rewriting the equations in terms of 
orthogonalized plane waves we can show that the whole 
problem is equivalent to solving a very similar set of -< 
equations 
(3) 
1
in which the pseudopotential components fml' are much 
I 
smaller than the original set r (g- g')_ Thus, the whole ; 
problem is equivalent to the perturbation of free elec- I
tron waves by a weak pseudopotential and can be 
solved by elementary computation_ For a perfect / 
Bravais lattice the value of r (g- g') or of filII' is a func-
'1 
tion only of the potential associated with a single atom 
or ion - in the language of x-ray diffraction, it is just the '''" 
"atomic form factor" in the formula for diffraction by 1
an assembly of such objects at the appropriate Bragg 
angle_ The band structures of most ordinary metals, --
and many semiconductors, can be read at a glance_ Not 
only 
does 
this 
provide 
us 
with an admirable 
242 
parametrization of Fermi surfaces, optical spectra, 
~ et c., in perfect crystals, but can be extended to include 
almost all the properties of thermally excited, im pure 
or disordered materials - electron-phonon interactions, 
T electrical conductivity of solid and liquid metals, lattice 
dynamics, phase stability of alloys, etc. In moments of 
enthusiasm [3,4,5J we may perhaps be forgiven for pre-
) tending that all the problems of the theory of metals are 
cured by a strong dose of "pseudism". It is a wonderful 
)- model for zeroth order calculations, and the ideal do-it-
i yourself kit for the enthusiastic amateur. It had the ef-
.-' fect of turning band structure theory from a rule of 
" thumb technology into an elegant science. 
/ 
Nevertheless, the pseudopotential method is not the 
ultimate solution to the band structure problem. In the 
first place, the program of replacing the true atomic 
, potential by a localized pseudo potential, independent 
of energy and momentum, cannot be fulfilled exactly. 
If, like Herman and his colleagues [6J one is trying to 
make very accurate first principles calculations, 
nothing is gained by rewriting the OPW equations in 
this form. Indeed, there is a danger that the apparent 
simplicity and rapid convergence of the pseudopoten-
tial equations may seduce us into further approxima-
tions which hide important effects; once having lost 
touch with the exact equations, we slide easily into a 
)t sloppy mess where qualitative and quantitative, first 
principles and parametrized, features are inextricably 
confused. 
> 
> 
> FIGURE 1. 
The true wave function t/J(") in the true potentiaL 0(,') is 
replaced by the pseudo wove function q,(" ) in the pseudopoten· 
tial w( ,·). 
This type of confusion is compounded by the non-
uniqueness of pseudo potentials. The original algebraic 
proof of this arbitrariness came as something of a sur· 
prise, but it is really quite obvious. We are asked, in ef. 
fect to construct a weak potential that will reproduce 
the effect of a strong potential on an electron wave of 
given energy impin ging on the atom. The boundary con· 
dition on the pseudo wave function-that it should 
match the true wave function on the outside-is very 
weak, and amounts to little more than fixing the value 
of a few integrals over the pseudo potential. We know, 
for example, that the s-wave scattering phase shift of 
the true potential will be reproduced at low energies if 
we choose the spatial average of the pseudopotential 
correctly- and so on. Almost any fun ction containing 
a few adjustable parameters can be made to fit these 
conditions. Of course the problem of finding a fixed 
local pseudo potential that will imitate the effects of the 
true potential over a wide range of energy is much more 
difficult, and has not been solved, but that is not what 
we are asked to do. 
This arbitrariness was exploited to the full by Heine 
and Abarenkov [7] who chose the most elementary 
pseudopotential functions so as to simplify the rest of 
the algebra. It was natural to reproduce the core poten· 
tial of a metallic ion with a square well of depth A{(g'), 
which could be continued outwards as a simple 
Coulomb potential; or as a screened Coulomb potential, 
according as one is thinking of an isolated free atom or 
of a "pseudo atom" in a condensed phase (fig. 2). In 
fact, the value of A{(g') for a given angular momentum 
can then be estimated from the optical term values, 
in the tradition of the quantum defect method of Kuhn 
and Van Vleck. 
S uch a " model potenti al" is obviously good physics, 
and can be more or less justified mathematically. It 
copes very elegantly with one of the most diffi cult 
aspects of the whole theory - the self-consiste ncy 
proble m for the valence electrons - abo ut which, for 
reasons of brevity, I shall say ver y little here. According 
to Shaw [8] , the screening corrections can be calcu-
lated accurately, although it pays to eliminate the 
discontinuity at the surface of the squa re well by treat-
RM 
~ __________ o~_____________ r 
\ 
\ 
\ 
I 
/ 
-zr 
F IGURE 2a. 
Heine·Abarenkov pseudo(Jotential; before screening. 
, .. r 
-RM 
o 
FI GU RE 2b. After screening (from [5]). 
243 
ing the radius of this internal flat region as another ad-
justable parameter, depending also on energy and mo-
mentum (fig. 3). 
E 
r---- -- --, 
I 
I 
\1 
" 
\ 
\ 
\ 
/ 
I 
F IGUR E 3. 
Shaw pseudofJotential. 
Notice, however, the dangers of overelaboration. An 
arbitrarily defined model pote ntial in real space is valu-
able only in proportion to its algebraic or geometrical 
simplicity, and will not bear much "improvement" in 
the name of numerical precision or in order to get 
better agree ment with experiment. In the event the 
electronic structure depends on the " form factor" - the 
Fourier transform of the pseudopotential- which might 
then just as well be derived directly from the true 
potential by some more powerful method, or which we 
could also re present by som e simple empirical fun ction 
[9] . 
From a fOTl)1al point of view, the arbitrariness of the 
pseudopotential is certainly quite worrying. How can 
the electronic band structure de pend uniquely on the 
periodic lattice potential if this arbitrary function can 
be interposed in the calculation ? Well now, suppose we 
had tried to solve the equations (2) for the Bloch func-
tions expanded in simple plane waves. Since these are 
an infinite set we should have had to proceed by suc-
cessive approximations, just as if we are trying to sum 
a series term by term. But these equations really have 
many solutions of much lower energy than the one we 
are looking for, corresponding to all the narrow tight-
bound bands and an expansion in powers of r (g- g ') 
simpl y does not converge for energies in the valence 
band. We are trying to sum the Born series for scatter-
ing by one of the atomic potentials, ignoring the fact 
that it has numerous deep bound states. The pseu-
dopotential trick removes all the effects of these bound 
states, and gives us a convergent series. It is rather like 
wanting to evaluate l/(l+X) when X is about 10: a power 
series in X will not conve rge, but we can easily con· 
struct a new series in some new variable y = (X- a), 
say, which can be made to converge in the region of in· 
terest. The actual terms in the series will depend on the 
value of a, which may be any arbitrary number larger 
than about 5 - but the fin al answer will be independent 
of this choice. Thus the final value of the energy as a 
function of wave vector comes out the same, whatever 
II 
form of pseudo potential we introduce into the equa- < 
tions. 
This suggests a possible criterion for a "best" pseu-
dopotential: choose the fo rm of rgg' that causes the se-
ries expansion for the Bloch functions to converge most 
rapidly. There is a rather elaborate mathematical 
I
theory of the Born series, due to Weinberg, which can 
be applied to this proble m [10] and which does dis-
criminate in principle between various formulae. These ~­
investigations are not, perhaps, of very great practical ) 
value to the horny-handed programmer of computers, 
but they are healthy in establishing the basic mathe-
matical foundations of the whole technique. 
--: 
3. The Problem of Bound Bands 
The most serious limitation of the pseudopotential 
concept is that it applies only to the so-called "simple" 
metals - those without d-states in the valence band. 
There is, of course, a long tradition of representing 
such states by the tight binding method, as a linear 
combination of atomic orbitals. The coefficie nts a/. in '
such combinations then have to satisfy a set of linear ' 
equations of the form 
where the index L stands for different angular momen-
tum and magnetic quantum numbers; for example, the 
five values of the component of angular momentum in 
a band of d-states. The original bound state at WI. is 
broadened into a band by the various overlap integrals ~ 
r l•u (k), which can in principle be evaluated, although 
in practice this is so complicated and inaccurate that 
one treats them as adjustable parameters. 
It used to be thought that all the states in metals 
could be described in this way, by bringing in enough 
different atomic orbital s. The picture of states over-
lapping and broadening to make nice valence and con-
duction bands illustrates one of the nursery rhymes of 
our subject (fig. 4). Unfortunately, this is quite mislead- , 
ing. What happens is that as the atomic potentials 
overlap, and the barriers fall between atomic cells" 
most of these atomic bound-state orbitals disappear. 
The ordinary s and p valence levels of the atoms vanish 
into a nearly free-electron band which can only be 
described if one includes 'propagating wave functions 
from above the spectrum of bound states of the 
separate ions or atoms. 
244 
) 
, I 
) 
> 
( 
> 
p 
s 
r 
FIGURE: 4. 
Conventional pictare of energy bands from overlap 0/ 
atomic orbitals. 
We thus arrive at an impasse: we can describe ordi· 
nary s - p bands in pseudopotential language, and 
d-bands in tight binding language, but there seems no 
common tongue, even when these bands overlap and 
hybridize as in the transition metals. 
4p 
This difficulty never seems to have worried the ac-
tive calculators of band structures: they used two 
techniques that gave good numerical results in all 
cases -the augmented plane wave method and the 
Green function method. One of the main developments 
in ba nd structure theory in the past 5 years has been to 
show the mathe matical connections between these use-
ful techniques and the concepts of pseudopotential and 
tight-binding. 
The idea of an augmented plane wave is quite si mpJ e. 
At some given energy iff, one solves the Schriidinger 
equation inside a spherical potential well, of radius 
Rs, say. The solution is a linear combination of products 
or radial functions and spherical harmonics of different 
values of angular momentum. Now determine these 
coefficients so that this solution matches on to a plane 
wave of wave vector k outside the sphere. This function 
is still not an exact solution of the Schr(idinger equa-
tion , and has a discontinuity of slope at Rs; but we can 
build up our Bloch function by combining a set of 
these with wave vectors k, k + g, etc. just as in (1) 
and then using the variational principle for the energy. 
The coefficients satisfy a set of equation s exactly like 
the pseudopoten tial equations (3) so that we can find 
s-p band 
(a) 
k 
(b) 
FIGURE: 5, 
(a) Conventional LCAO description 0/ formation 0/ metallic conduction band; (b) DescrilJtion in terms 0/ maDin-tin 
potentials. 
245 
FIGURE 6. 
An augmented plane wave. 
the energy g' as a function of k by finding the roots of 
the determinant in the usual way. 
The actual formula for r gg,A PW is rather elaborate, so 
I will not write it down; it depends upon k , and also 
upon g' through the first derivatives of the radial solu-
tions of the Schrodinger equation at Rs. At first sight 
one might have thought that this could be interpreted 
as an elaborate energy- and momentum-dependent form 
factor, derivable from a pseudo potential; but this is not 
the case. The difficulty is that f APW does not vanish in 
the elementary case of an empty lattice -whereas we 
should certainly expect a pseudopotential to be zero 
when we remove the true potential to which it is sup-
posed to be equivalent. The connection with the tight 
binding formalism appears even more obscure, even 
though one can compute perfectly good d-bands by this 
method. 
In des peration, we turn to the KKR method of Korrin-
ga and of Kohn and Rostoker. This is called the Green 
function method because it was originally derived in 
that somewhat abstract language, but it really depends 
upon a self-consistency argument; as the Bloch wave 
proceeds through the crystal lattice, and encounters 
the various atomic spheres, it suffers scattering or dif-
fraction - but this diffraction must be exactly what is 
needed to reproduce the wave and keep it on the move 
without loss. Again , I will spare you from the algebra, 
and merely report that, as in the APW method, one 
uses the radial solutions of the Schrodinger equation in 
FIGURE 7. 
Scattered waves recombining as plane waves in KKR 
method. 
each atomic sphere and plane waves outside. The 
result is yet another set of linear equations- this time 
for the coefficients of the mixture of solutions of various 
angular momentum in the sphere: 
In this formula, the energy g' is K2, and TJI (K) is the 
phase shift that would have been produced by the 
atomic sphere in scattering a plane wave of this energy. J
The "structure constants" BLu(K,K) depend on the 
energy and momentum of the state being studied, but 
otherwise can be laboriously computed from the geo-
metrical structure of the lattice. 
This does not look very much like either of our previ-
ous formulae. Indeed , from the pseudopotential point )
of view it looks quite wrong, for when we a pply the 
empty lattice test we make YJI tend to zero, which 
causes co t TJI to blow up. In fact these equations need 
<-
to be turned upside down if we are to understand them 
physically [Ill The algebra is again a bit heavy, and 
depends essentially on some of the analytic properties 
of the structure constants, each of which is in fact a 
sum over reciprocal lattice vectors of products of spher-
ical harmonics and Bessel functions etc. The result is 
a set of algebraic equations of the form of (3), with the 
following expression for the "matrix elements of the 
pseudopotential" : 
r KKR __ 47rN 
(2/+1 ) 
,jl(l k-g IR.)j,(l k-g ' IR.,) p (cose , ) 
, -
L I 
tan TJ l 
1 . ( R ) 12 
I 
gg 
gg 
K 
}I K 
s 
(6) 
where 
(7) 
246 
------------------
--
l In thi formula , jl and TJI are spherical Bessel fun ctions, 
and PI (cos()!I!1') is the ordinary Legendre polynomialfor 
i the angle bet ween vectors k - g and k - g'. 
r 
This formula is highly instructive, for a number of 
reasons. 
I 
(i) 
Consider an empty lattice, for which TJI = O. 
) 
Then TJ'I will also vanish, and with it tan TJ'I. 
> 
) 
l 
I 
> 
> 
Thus fUll' is a genuine pseudopotential, which 
goes to zero with the true potential. 
(ii) When TJI is small, the difference between, say 
tan TJ 'I and sin TJI exp (iTJ/) is negligible. Ignor-
ing the ratios of spherical Bessel functions, filii' 
looks just like a scattering amplitude for the ef-
fect of our given potential on a single plane 
wave. This is good physics: the crystal is made 
up of an assembly of objects, each of which scat-
ters the Bloch wave into itself. 
(iii) 
A strong potential, with man y dee p bound 
states may, nevertheless, have quite small phase 
shifts, so may behave like a weak pseudopote n-
tial. Thus, the principle of subtracting away the 
divergences due to the bound states a mounts to 
simply represe ntin g each phase shift as the 
smallest possible angle, modulo (7T). This is a 
well· known properly of phase shifts. 
(i v) 
As shown by Lloyd [12], this form of matrix 
element can be derived from a simple model 
potential. We merely put a delta fun ction singu· 
larity of potential over the surface of the sphere 
of radius R., of strength to match the phase shift 
TJI outside, for each value of l. 
(v) 
The connection with the APW formula was 
discovered by Morgan [13]. Suppose we write 
r AI'n' (0) for the values of the APW matrix ele· 
ments in an empty la tti ce. Then 
fAl'W = P,KR + fAI'W(O). 
(8) 
The APW matrix elements have these extra parts to 
them, which do not really contribute to the band struc· 
). ture, and which do not vanish for any value of L, even 
for empty space. One can even derive f APW from a 
model potential [12] , but this is much more com-
/' plicated in form than the one for fKKlI and does not 
vanish in empty space. 
FI GU RE 8. 
PseudofJotential for I'HII. 
These properties of this new form of pseudo potential 
suggest that it should be much easier than the APW 
method to use in practice for simple metals, where we 
need only introduce small phase shifts for a fe w values 
of angular momenta. We may also use th e computa-
tional device of "folding" the determina nt for large 
values of g- g ', as if we were treatin g the diffraction 
from distant zone boundaries as a small perturbation 
[14]. This form is also said to be the best for conver-
gence of the Born series in the Weinberg sense [10] , 
whatever that may imply. But the whole question ofthe 
relative computational efficiency of these methods and 
their minor variants is quite complicated; all I would 
say here is that the effort of comparing them is made 
much more fruitful when we understand the basic 
algebraic connections. 
One furth er mystery needs c larification. Let us recall 
that the basic algebraic equations (3) are for the pur-
pose of discovering the coeffi cients f3u in so me expan-
sion of the wave function in the appropriate plane 
waves. Thus, if we had been using f ··I/'1I" in these equa-
tions, we should have been writing 
~Jk = L:; f3 gcpA I'1I' (k + g) 
where cpAI'W (k + g) is augmen ted plane wave having 
the form exp {i(k +g)· r } outside of the atomic sphere. 
Now it turns oui. [13] that the KKR equations also sup-
pose that the wave function has been expanded in aug-
mented plane waves - but since the matrix elements (8) 
are different in these equations the coeffici ents f3u will 
be different. In other words, the Bloch function t/JI;, 
which is supposed to be a unique solution to our band 
structure proble m, has two entirely different represe n-
tations in terms of the same set of basic functions. 
This is permissible, because in fact we are only com-
bining APW's to satisfy the Schrodinger equation 
outside the spheres; the part within each sphere is au-
tomatically determined by its adjustment to the boun-
dary condition [15] . It is well known that a periodic 
function defined over only part of the unit cell can be 
Muffin tin 
well 
Interstitial 
region 
FIGURE 9. 
Flinctioll defined as Bloch wave in interstitial region may 
have arbitrary forrn in Inliffin-tin well. 
247 
represented by many Fourier expansions, depending on 
what properties it is allowed to have in the excluded re-
gion. The APW and KKR expansions both represent ~Jk 
correctly - yet they are not made up of exactly the same 
combinations of simple plane waves in the interstitial 
regions. This point is perhaps worth emphasizing 
because in either case we have a very explicit represen-
tation of the wave function of the Bloch state, in a form 
that is quite convenient for calculations of electron-
electron interactions, self-consistency of potentials, 
and optical, x-ray, photoemission, and positron-
annihilation matrix elements, etc. 
It has some times been held against the APW & KKR 
methods that they can only be used for a "muffin-tin 
potential" - i.e. for a periodic lattice of spherically 
symmetric wells with "empty space" in between. But 
this is not an absolute restriction. Suppose there really 
is a significant non constant potential 'Yi in the intersti-
tial region. Then we can take this into account by ad-
ding to ryy' the corresponding Fourier component 
'Yi (g - g' ) of this potential- made explicit by being 
given a constant value across the mouths of the muffin-
tin wells [16]. Thus, the level which I call the "muffin-
tin zero" [17] cuts across the equipotential surfaces, 
producing muffin-tin wells with bound states, which are 
eliminated by a pseudopotential device, and ranges of 
weak potential hills through which the valence elec-
trons easily tunnel, and which can be represented 
adequately by their Fourier transforms. If we go 
further, and suppose that this interstitial potential had 
been produced by the superposition of screened Cou-
lomb potentials, or charge clouds, carried by the in-
dividual atoms, then we can imagine 'Yi analysed into 
these spherically symmetrical constituents arranged in 
a lattice, and reassign these to the corresponding muf-
fin-tin wells, whose deep potentials have by now been 
replaced by a model potential or pseudo potential. In 
other words, we arrive back precisely at the sort of 
analysis implied by figure 2 or figure 3: the effect of the 
atoms on the electrons is equivalent to diffraction by an 
T'\(l(\ 
(0) 
o 
Vi (g_gl) 
° AA~
rgg, 
FIGURE 10. Lattice potential (a) dissected into an interstitial 
potential and muffin-tin wells. 
(a) i!i!il(-
(b) - ~ I~I~ I ( 
k) ~ 
(d) ~" 
(e) 
FIGURE 11. 
Overlapping patentials (a), summed to make lattice 
potential (b) , dissected inta an interstitial potential and muffin-
tin weLls (c), redef ined as pseudopotentiais and overlapping ex-
ternal ports (d) , and recombined as pseudo-atom potentials (e). 
assembly of screened model potentials, whose outer 
fields may, within reason, be superposed without hin-
drance. Thus we could use rl\I\R + 'Yi as the form factor 
in any calculation where model potentials are em-
ployed, e.g. resistivity of liquid metals, lattice dy-
namics, etc. 
This final demonstration of the equivalence of all 
three methods of band structure - OPW, APW and 
KKR - in the case of simple metals and semiconductors 
is very satisfactory, but I am now worried about one 
; 
<-
general point. Suppose we have a very anisotropic lat-
tice -for example , the chain structure of Te, or the 
layer structure of graphite. The separation of the poten-
tial into muffin-tin wells and an interstitial potential 
must be done at a level below the lowest barriers 
between the atoms - for example, at the level of the 
potential half way between neighbors along a chain. But 
this may leave very high hills in the interstitial potential ,.
between the chains or layers - and the unwillingness of 
the electron to tunnel through such hills may not be 
well expressed by an expansion in plane waves in this 
region. Perhaps this is not a serious point after all; but 
I mention it to show that we are now gaining confidence 
to attack the electronic structure of more complex 
molecular crystals, a field which has up to now been 
dominated by an army of theoretical chemists wielding 
innumerable linear combinations of atomic orbitals - a 
248 
) 
FIG URE 12. 
Potentials in a crystal of long chain molecules: electrons 
occupy the valleys containing muffin-tin wells, separated by 
high potential hills. 
weapon whose fundamental effi cacy I now take leave 
>to doubt. 
4. Resonance Bands 
> 
What about d-bands, which can be computed numer--
ically by the APW and KKR method, but whose empiri-
> caJ description has usually been handled by the tight 
binding formula? The answer to this question is per-
haps one of the most elegant results of the recent 
> theory. Let us proceed from, say (5), the original KKR 
equations, which are not unlike the tight-binding equa-
tions (4), in that the index L, labelling the unknown 
coefficients, refers to various spherical harmonics, or 
I 
( 
, , , , , , , , 
I , , 
components of angular momentum_ We might ask, for 
exam pIe, what would ha ppen to the phase shift YJ I (K) if 
the e nergy happened to coincide exactl y with a bound 
state ?fl. of the atomic potentiaL To answer this ques-
tion in general , we should need to stud y the theory of 
scattering in the unphysicaJ regions where ?f lies below 
the muffin-tin zero, making K pure imaginary; but it 
turns out that a factor like ?fL - ?f then appears in 
cot YJ I(K) just as we might expect. Now look at our 
formula (6) for the KKR pseudopotential in the recip-
rocal lattice representation: if cot YJ'I were to vanish, 
at any energy, then tan YJ' I would become infinite, and 
everything would go wrong_ Thus, if YJ ' I should ever go 
through 7r/2 the band structure would be seriously 
affected_ 
Now this is a familiar situation in the general theory 
of scattering by atoms, molecules or nuclei: the phase 
shift YJI goes through 7r/2 in the positive energy region 
whenever there is a " resonance" of angular momen-
tum_ Thus, if the atomic or ionic potential has suc h a 
resonance, this will give rise to significant band effects 
in this neighborhood_ There is a standard theory of s uc h 
phenomena, whic h tells us that we may write 
W 
tan YJI - ---
?f - ?fl 
(9) 
for the phase shift of a resonance of width W cente red 
on the energy ?fl _ It is easy to show, using (6), that this 
has the effect of introd ucing a band of states of about 
this width, at about this energy, in the nearly-free-
electron spectrum [11]. 
This argument can be carried further. Starting from 
the KKR formulae and making syste matic transforma-
tions and approximations, Heine [18] showed how one 
could separate out a particular resonance te rm , and 
keep this in the angular momentum representation, 
with indices m ,m' for the different components of l, 
while reproducing a typical pseudopotential expression 
in the reci procal lattice representation g,g' . The matrix 
of these equations can thus be written in the form 
ygm 
------------------------------~------------------------------
* 
"Illig 
, , , , , , , , , , , 
(10) 
249 
'/ 
/ 
/ 
____ /----- }w 
k 
FI GURE 13. 
Resonance band crossing nearly free band. 
Without the submatrices Yllm et c., this would factorize 
into a nearl y-free-electron, pseudopotential matrix, 
such as we might expect to find in a simple metal with 
an s-p band, together with an ordinary tight binding 
matrix, corresponding to the overlapping and mixing of 
the 5 degenerate d-levels of the free atom. The coeffi-
cients Yum et c. then describe the hybridization of these 
two systems of states, which must necessarily occur 
when these bands cross one another. 
As it happens (but not accidentally!) an empirical 
" rnodel Hamiltonian" of just this form had already been 
proposed for transition and noble metals [19J before it 
was deduced directly from the KKR equations. We can 
now, therefore, justify this type of expression in princi-
ple, and even calculate the various coefficients directly 
from the atomic potentiaL In fact there are now several 
different versions of these equations, of varying compu-
tability, convergence and analytical simplicity [20J but 
all essentially equivalent of Heine's formula [5 ,I8J . 
This reinterpretation of the tight-binding formalism, 
and its unification with the other band structure 
methods is very pleasing, but to my mind there is a 
greater gain. Let us ask how resonances actually arise? 
For an ordinary one-electron potential, we need to think 
of the effects of the centrifugal barrier term l(l+ 1)/r2 in 
the radial Schriidinger equation, which becomes impor-
tant for l=2. A bound d-state is really constrained to 
avoid the nucleus by this " potential". Now lower the or-
dinary potential at the outer edges of the atom: the ef-
fect may be to leave a potential dip within the core, 
where a "virtual", long-li ved level could still exist, even 
though, eventually, it wo uld have to decay as the elec-
tron tunnelled out into free space. Thus, the original 
bound d-state has become a d-resonance; if the poten-
tial barrier is sufficiently thick, the resonance will be 
sharp; it is not surprising that the language of over-
lapping bound states applies to the bands produced in 
such cases. 
From this picture we can learn a lot about the gross 
features of the density of states of the metal. We see, 
LCL+I ) /r 2 
F IGURE 14. How a bound state of the atom becomes a resonance 
level of the muffin-tin weLL (See [/ 7]). 
for exa mple, that although the little peaks and dips of 
the d-band can be derived from general tight-binding 
theory, especially when aided by group theory, the 
width of this complex of bands will depend chiefly on 
the width of the resonance, which is governed in turn 
by the potential barrier produced by the centrifugal 
force in the outer part of each muffin-tin welL Again, 
the actual position of this band will be determined 
mainly by the energy of the original d-state from which 
it derives - and this is fixed on a scale relative to, say, 
some deep state of the core. On this scale, however, the 
position of the ordinary conduction band does not de-
pend on any atomic orbitals, but is determined mainly 
by the muffin-tin zero, which can only be calculated 
correctly by taking very careful account of screening, 
correlation energy, overlaps of potential, et c. We thus "
discover the reason for a well-known difficulty in band 
structure calculations - that the width of the d-band, 
and its position relative to the Fermi level is very sensi-
tive to the model, and cannot apparently be calculated 
with the precision we would like. 
n':tJ.~tp.~r:r.:~P!7 d band 
'tMTZ 
F IGURE 15. 
How the position of the d-band within the conduction 
band depends on the muffin-tin zero (See [J 7]). 
250 
)-
I 
5. Some Thoughts in Disorder 
Now that we understand the electronic structure of 
crystaLline soLds so very well, we are tempted to attack 
disordered materials-liquids, alloys, amorphous and 
glassy substances. This campaign has been actively 
I 
waged now for about a decade, but I am not sure that it 
), has yielded many great prizes. The major difficulty, of 
course, is that we must abandon Bloch's theorem, 
I 
which reduces the complexity of the problem in the per-
> fect lattice by a divisor of the order of 1023• Without 
l, crystal momentum as a good quantum number, we 
flounder about in a mixture of approximate algebra and 
( incomplete intuition, hoping to find some clearcut con-
I cepts that will guide the interpretation of com plicated 
experiments on messy materials. 
It is true that the spectrum of the disorde red linear 
array is now well understood [21] - and turns out to be 
much more spiky than one would have guessed from 
sim pie statistical considerations. Some of these fea-
tures may persist in three-dimensional systems, but un-
fortunately the mathematical methods used in the one-
di mensional case seem ill-adapted to generalization. In 
partic ular, real solid systems have two properties that 
cannot be simulated at all by a linear c hain. In three 
dimensions, a localized defect or impurity can be 
avoided by a detour, so that it does not present an ab-
solute barrier to an incident particle or excitation. In 
three dimensions, also we may have "structural dis-
order", which is no longer topologically equivalent to 
any regular lattice, whereas in a linear chain the mere 
succession of atoms prescribes an ordering, however 
> wildly we vary the properties of the individual potential 
wells. 
Let me give two examples of simple cases where our 
1, 
present theory is inadequate. It is obvious enough that 
I a disordered tran sition metal- e.g. liquid iron - should 
have a d-band arising from the d-resonance, just as in 
> any crystalline phase of about the same atomic volume 
[22J. The mathematical theory of such a band is still 
rather uncertain [23J, but there is no doubt about the 
physics. Suppose, however, that we make an alloy-
e.g_ of Ag and Au - whose constituent atoms have their 
resonance at different energies; how far apart would 
'1 these energies need to be to give us two distinct d-
bands, and how would this depend on the relative con-
centrations and relative ordering of the constituents? 
The model can be made extremely elementary- equal 
numbers of A and B type atoms, with a single bound s-
state on each, substituted at random on a regular lattice 
;> with a constant overlap integral V between nearest 
neighbors_ Some highly respected statistical theories 
which rely upon defining an average propagator in 
such a medium , seem to insist that the bands will be 
drawn out into a continuous broad spectrum as the two 
levels move apart; others would allow a s plit to occur 
when the spacing is rather larger than the width of 
either band [24J. I feel sure, myself, that the latter pre-
diction is correct, but we have still a great deal to do be-
fore we can calculate the width of each band the shape 
of the tails into the gap, and the nature of any levels in 
these regions. How far, for example, do these bands de-
pend upon the possibilities of "percolation", from one 
atom to another of the same type, through large 
distances - a property that depends peculiarly on the 
dimensionality of the lattice and the relative concentra-
tions of the components? 
Another contradiction between mathematical theo-
ries and physical intuition occurs in the case of 
_ or~ 
A 
B 
A 
B 
FIGUnE 16. 
Does a mixed crystal have one bound bal1d or two ~ 
Localized 
t BL __ 
~ 
Non locoliH ~ ... "'''' 
-' 
Locoliztd 
£ 
w_ 
O·~:~
_ ---------------1-------------------
--
-fBr---_ 
FIGUnE 17. 
Regions of localized and l1ol1·localized states for an 
"equiconcentratioll alloy". 
00.00 
••• 0. 
.0.00 
0 •••• 
.000. 
FIGUnE 18. A percolation chain in an equiconcentration alloy. 
251 
amorphous semiconductors. Let it be granted, for the 
sake of argument, that amorphous Ge and Si are 
"tetrahedral glasses"; each atom has four neighbors, 
arranged more or less in the regular tetrahedral orienta-
tion, just as in the regular diamond lattice, but the con-
nectivity of the structure has been altered in a random 
way, so that there is no long-range order. From the 
point of view of a chemist, this system is a single 
covalently bond-ed molecule: the saturation of all the 
bonds implies that some energy of excitation is 
required to create a carrier, so we should expect the 
material to be a semiconductor. The substantial gap in 
the optical spectrum of amorphous Ge supports this 
reasonable interpretation. But suppose we were to treat 
this by the conventional pseudopotential procedure, as-
signing a model potential to each atom and then calcu-
lating the diffraction effect on a free electron gas. In the 
absence of long-range order, there would be no strong 
Bragg reflections from well-defined lattice planes, and 
thus no proper band gaps at the zone boundaries, etc.; 
from the point of view of solid-state theory, this materi-
al ought to be a metal. This antinomy needs to be 
resolved if we are to understand the theory of disor-
dered systems - or even the theory of the chemical 
bond. There is some evidence - as yet merely qualita-
tive [27] - that the diffraction approach can be made 
to give a band gap if one takes into account the higher-
order particle correlations. Thus, a glass differs from a 
liquid in that three neighboring atoms may have a 
strong tendency to be oriented so as to make a good 
bond angle; this is a form of short-range order, implying 
a strong constraint on the three-and four-body statisti-
cal distributions of atoms. At the same time, the rela-
tionship between the localized molecular orbitals of the 
chemical bonds and the delocalized "Bloch states" of 
the crystal or amorphous solid needs to be clarified 
[28]. But these are only two of the numerous unsolved 
problems in this field. 
The above account of the band structure problem is 
obviously very sketchy and incomplete - especially in 
the total neglect of all electron-electron effects. We 
shall obviously learn much more about it as this con-
ference proceeds. But I think it is good to look back and 
see what progress has been achieved - and even better 
to look forward to whole Alps of ignorance still to be I
.! 
surmounted. 
6. References 
[1] Electrons and Phonons: (Oxford, Clarendon Press 1960). 
[2] Methods in Computational Physics: Vol. 8: Energy 
Bands of Solids: Edited by B. Alder, S. Fernbach, M. Roten· 
berg (New York: Academic Press 1968). 
[3] liman, J. M., Advances in Physics, 13,89 (1964). 
<
[4] Harrison, W. A. , Pseudopotentials in Metals (New York: 
Benjamin 1966). 
[5] Heine, V., The Physics of Metals (ed. ]. M. liman: Cam· 
bridge, University Press, 1969) Chap. l. 
[6] Herman, F., R. L. Kortum, C. D. Kuglin, J. P. Van Dyke and S .
.....
Skillman in Ref. 1, p. 193. 
[7] Heine, V. and I. V. Abarenkov, Phil. Mag., 9,451, (1964). 
[8] Shaw, R. W. and W. A. Harrison, Phys. Rev. 163,604 (1967). 
R. W. Shaw, Phys. Rev. 174,769 (1968). 
[9] Ashcroft, N, W. , J. Phys. C.l, 232 (1968). 
[10] Rubio, ]. and F. Garcia·Moliner, Proc. Phys. Soc. 91,739; 92, 
206 (1967). J. B. Pendry, J. Phys. C.l, 1065 (1968). 
[11] liman,]. M. , Proc. Phys. Soc. 86,337 (1965). 
[12] Lloyd, P., Proc. Phys. Soc. 86, 825 (1965). 
[13] Morgan, G. ]., Proc. Phys. Soc. 89,365 (1966). K. H. Johnson, 
Phys. Rev. 150,429 (1966). 
[14] Lawrence, M.]. , Thesis, Bristol University (1969). 
[15] Slater,]. c., Phys. Rev. 145,599 (1966). 
[16] Scholsser, H. C. and P. M. Marcus, Phys. Rev. 131, 2529 
(1963). F. Beleznay and M. J. Lawrence, J. Phys. C. 1, 1288 
(1968), 
[17] liman, j.'M., Proc. Phys. Soc. 91,701 (1967). 
[18] Heine, V. , Phys. Rev. 153, 673 (1967). 
'( 
[19] Hodges, L. and H. Ehrenreich, Phys. Letters 16,203 (1965). 
F. M, Mueller, Phys. Rev. 153,659 (1967). 
[20] Hubbard,]., Proc. Phys, Soc. 92,921 (1967). R. L. Jacobs, ]. 
Phys. C. 1,492 (1968). 
[21] See, e.g. ]. Hori, Spectral Properties of Disordered 
Chains and Lattices (Oxford: Pergamon Press 1968). 
[22] Anderson, P. W. and W. L. McMillan, Teoria del mag-
netisino nei metalli di transizione: Verenna Summer 
School XXXVII (1967). 
[23] Lloyd, P., Proc. Phys. Soc. 90,207,217 (1967). G. ]. Morgan,]. 
Phys. C. 2,1446, 1454 (1969). 
[24] liman ,]. M. ,]. Phys. C.2, 1230 (1969)(II). 
[25] liman,]. M. , ]. Phys. C. 2,1532 (1968) (I). D. F. Holcomb and 
]. ]. Rehr(to be published). 
[26] raue, ]. , R. Grigorivici and A. Vaneu, Phys. Stat. Solid 15, 
627 (1966). 
[27] Fletcher, N. H., Proc. Phys. Soc. 91,724; 92, 265 (1967). J. M. 
liman ,]. Phys. C. (1969) (III). 
[28] Anderson, P. W., Phys. Rev. Letters 21 ,13, (1968), 
(Paper 74A2-596) 
252 
