Remembering Zwicky 
Fritz Zwicky-Scientific Eagle 
An active and extraordinary scientist, still full of ideas and 
personal drive, Fritz Zwicky, professor of astrophysics 
emeritus, died suddenly on February 8. It is difficult to 
write a brief, conventional memoir about so unconventional 
a man. Fritz classified scientists into two categories, eagles 
and low-fliers; a low-flier like myself recognized clearly 
that Fritz was the high-flier. He pursued an extraordinary 
range of personal interests: international charities, city- 
planning, mountain climbing, new explosives, exploding 
stars, crystals and dying stars, and, especially galaxies. He 
always saw the Universe in his own original way; he 
loved the extraordinary objects it contained, and he 
explained them in his own fashion, sometimes wrong but 
never dull. He leaves, after nearly 50 years at Caltech, 
many loyal friends, scientists and public figures; his wife 
since 1947, Anna Margaritha; daughters Margrit and 
Barbara (of Berne and Pasadena) and a married daughter, 
Franziska Pfenninger (of Zurich). 
Born in Varna, Bulgaria, a Swiss national all his life, he 
received his PhD from the Federal Institute of Technology 
in Zurich in 1922. He came to work at Caltech on the the- 
oretical physics of crystals as a research fellow of the 
(Rockefeller) International Education Board, served as 
assistant and then associate professor of physics 1927- 
1941, and became aprofessor of astrophysics in 1942. He 
was a member of the staff of the Mount Wilson and Palomar 
Observatories till his retirement in 1968, and a pioneer 
observer on Palomar where he realized the importance of, 
and exploited, the wide-angle schmidt telescopes for 
discovery of unusual types of stars and galaxies. 
Caltech graduates will remember his course in Analytical 
Mechanics, required for the PhD in physics." Astronomers 
*See E&S, February 1974, p. 29. 1 can vouch for a further part of 
the story-explosive 
events occurring in the Registrar's Office 
when Fritz wished to record his first perfect grade for a non- 
existent student. 
ENGINEERING AND SCIENCE 
He climbed many scientific mountains, 
some with great success, many 
for the first time 
will remember his advanced seminar, which covered the 
Universe and admitted "only students, assistants, faculty 
and visiting research personnel. . . who have the time, 
inclination and ability to engage in active, constructive 
work. . . . " Faculty wives and secretaries will remember 
his charitable activities, including an annual display in our 
board room of children's knitwear destined for schools for 
war-orphaned children. Although Zwicky had few formal 
students in later years, he retained a strong influence on 
recent scientific developments. 
He became one of the founders (with Theodore von 
Karman, Clark Millikan, and others) of Aerojet Engineer- 
ing, where he served as director of research 1943-49; he 
was research consultant at Aerojet-General and Hycon till 
1960. He held many patents on unusual concepts and 
devices in jet propulsion-air, 
water, and earth-borne. 
When he visited Japan and Germany for the U.S. Air Force, 
his strong interest in human causes led him to individual 
acts of charity long remembered. He had a strong interest 
in the Pestalozzi Foundation, was trustee and president of 
the American branch, and received its gold medal in 1955. 
He organized a lengthy project for reconstruction of war- 
stricken libraries; for years I struggled with Zwicky (always 
an adrninistrator-baiter) to remove the many tons of books 
on their way to the Orient or Europe. For many technical 
services, and for his good works, he received the Medal 
for Freedom in 1949 from President Truman. 
He was awarded the Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical 
Society in 1973 for "his many distinguished contributions 
to the understanding of the constituents of the Galaxy 
and the Universe." The medal carries the motto Quicquid 
Nitet Notandurn [Whatever shines is to be noticed], a 
phrase peculiarly suited to Zwicky's approach to 
astronomy. Zwicky's response was equally apt-"I 
heard 
as a boy that there will always be an England, a place 
where debatable gentlemen will be recognized. I hope you 
have not made a mistake this time." 
Zwicky wrote over 300 articles, 10 books, and held 25 
patents. From 1933 on he had a philosophical interest in 
morphological research, a systematic approach to science 
and technology; he was founder and president of the Society 
for Morphological Research, and recently a Zwicky 
Foundation was established in Glarus. He had a strong 
classical background in thermodynamics and statistical 
physics. These two threads, combined with a strong 
personality and bold mind, led him to contribute to astro- 
physics in a unique way. Lacking the repressions of many, 
he felt that if a "morphological box"-i.e., 
a possibility- 
existed, nature would have filled it and scientists should 
discover it. This characteristic pattern is found in many of 
his fields of study. 
From 192 1 to 1937 he studied secondary structure in 
crystals, cooperative phenomena, and the theory of cosmic 
rays; by 1928 he was interested in, and doubtful about, 
relativity; in 1934 he cooperated with Walter Baade of 
the Mount Wilson Observatory staff in the discovery of 
supernovae. He attempted to explain them as a collapse to 
the neutron-star state (1 934), and as producing cosmic 
rays (1934). Both the discovery of the supernovae and the 
theoretical links to neutron stars (only two years after the 
neutron was discovered) are extraordinary feats. A super- 
nova explosion releases energy close to what the sun radiates 
in 10'' years! Neutron-star physics was, in fact, put on a 
sound theoretical basis by 1937 by Oppenheimer and 
Volkoff. And rotating neutron stars probably do accelerate 
cosmic rays; the Baade-Zwicky mechanism used dectro- 
static fields. With many collaborators, Zwicky started a 
supernova patrol which discovered most of those now 
known, finding 100 himself. Baade and Rudolph 
Minkowski explored and classified their spectra, still an 
active topic of study and debate. Zwicky carried the idea 
of collapse under gravity much further, contemplating 
"pygmy stars7' (which do not exist) and "object Hades" 
(black holes, which probably do exist). Several threads 
of his work thus appear-interest 
in extreme types of 
objects; speculative, approximate theory based largely on 
classical models; and willingness to undertake systematic, 
very large, and long observing programs. 
In studies of galaxies, which he began in 1929 with a note 
on the possibility d a gravitational drag on light, Zwicky 
combined a serious devotion to discovery and cataloging 
their properties with criticism of the expanding universe 
theory. He was constructively concerned about the 
applicability of the conventional definition of a galaxy as a 
large, closed system of a hundred billion stars-why 
not 
a billion or a million or ten stars? Why should not very 
dense galaxies exist? Could they be found? Look with the 
schrnidt telescope! He studied interacting galaxies of 
strange shape, the forms of clusters of galaxies, searched for 
16 
MARCH-APRIL. 1974 
intergalactic matter and intergalactic stars. 
One important result was the six-volume catalog of 
galaxies and clusters of galaxies, prepared with collabora- 
tors, which will be of permanent importance to extra- 
galactic astronomy. The "compact"-i.e., 
relatively dense, 
high-surface brightness-galaxies 
have become of special 
importance with the discovery by Sandage, Schmidt, and 
others d the quasars, and of their large redshift; Zwicky 
made lists of compact galaxies, published a large, useful 
catalog, and had another in preparation. 
Violent events in the nuclei of galaxies (which may vary in 
light in a few days) and explosive phenomena in Seyfert 
nuclei have been a major concern of astronomers and 
observers of the last decade. The trend of recent studies of 
galactic nuclei has been to reinforce our knowledge of 
high-energy events of still mysterious nature. It is clear 
that Zwicky's intuition of the importance of implosion- 
explosion events was a valuable one. In a sense he was a 
pioneer of high-energy astrophysics. The strange shapes of 
interacting galaxies interested Zwicky in his search for 
intergalactic matter. Here, the recent discovery of X-rays 
from clusters of galaxies suggests that he had an early 
insight into still another important field. 
With Milton Humason, he found the first "faint blue stars," 
48 hot objects far from the galactic plane-objects 
on 
which I have worked, with pleasure, for many years. 
Closer to home, Zwicky was interested in research in space 
by 1946; he attempted to launch arti6cial meteors from a 
rocket, and claimed to have shot the first object out of the 
gravitational field of the earth; he helped found the 
International Academy of Astronautics and lectured on 
legal problems of the use of space. 
Zwicky, as a young man, was a good mountain climber. 
&e was an extraordinarily live person. He climbed many 
scientific mountains, some with great success, many for 
the first time. 
-Jesse 
L. Greenstein 
Lee A. DuBridge Professor oj Astr~physics 
Zwicky : Humanist 
and Philosopher 
The great majority of Fritz Zwicky's publications were 
in the field of astronomy. Most of the remainder were 
about his researches in solid state physics and jet 
propulsion technology. But Zwicky himself always felt 
that his greatest contributions were in philosophy, 
specifically in epistemology-in 
the development of new 
methods of thought and action. He wrote in 1971 : "I feel 
that I have finally found the philosopher's stone in what 
I call the morphological outlook and method." 
Giving us an insight into how he came to feel this way, 
Zwicky said in addressing the Pestalozzi Foundation of 
America, of which he served as president of the board 
of trustees: "After pursuing a dozen or so various 
activities ranging from mountain climbing and pro- 
fessional shorthand to physics, astronomy, engineering, 
languages, higher education, national and international 
politics, and mutual aid with fair success, I still did not 
feel satisfied. . . . It was difficult to account for the lack 
of satisfaction until it occurred to me . . . that no stereo- 
type activity in the books of the past corresponds to my 
personal genius. Its nature is such that it could become 
fully alive only through the creation of a new profession- 
the morphologist." 
This is not the occasion to review the details of the 
morphological method. Suffice it to say that the morpho- 
logical approach sought to be integrative, systematic, and 
trans-scientific, pushing consciousness to the limits of the 
conceivable. Zwicky believed that if only we could free 
ourselves from our pedestrian patterns of thought and 
learn to think morphologically, the future could be shaped 
by our images-however 
bold-rather 
than by the 
inertias of existing institutions and investments. For 
Zwicky, the really revolutionary paradigm of morphology 
consisted in the replacement of one solution by all 
solutions, one path by all paths, one system by all systems. 
Only after the complete spectrum of possible solutions, 
theories, or systems is developed can the full energies of 
their mutual tensions become available to us. 
Zwicky7s "method of morphological construction" passed 
William James's test for great innovative ideas: "First 
the new idea is mocked as ridiculous and absurd, then it 
ENGINEERING AND SCIENCE 
is admitted to be valid but overrated and of no particular 
significance, finally it is decided that the idea had been 
known long ago and that everybody had thought of it 
himself." So it was with morphology. 
Zwicky possessed that necessary concomitant of great- 
ness, the generation in others of a strong positive or 
negative response. Very few people were merely indiffer- 
ent to him. His evocation of bi-modal responses was in 
part due to his phenomenal percipience. Those who see 
further or deeper are not universally admired. 
Another cause was Zwicky's frequent distrust of those in 
the upper echelons: "Unfortunately many people, and in 
particular professional men, are impressed only by specific 
accomplishments in science, engineering, hance, politics 
and so on, which lead to fame or to material and spiritual 
'success' of one kind or another. Such men are a great 
obstacle to humanity in its march toward the realization 
of its inherent genius." 
Zwicky felt that it was important to unhorse the pompous. 
He felt that all professors and executives should stay in 
touch with reality by periodically cleaning the wash rooms. 
He set the example by doing this himself. It would please 
Zwicky to say that "that bastard Chairman Mao" stole 
this aspect of the cultural revolution from him. 
One of Zwicky's humanitarian activities was his organi- 
zation of the Committee for Aid to War-Stricken Scientific 
Libraries. In order to establish closer scientific human 
relations, together with a small handful of volunteer 
assistants, Zwicky collected and distributed over a million 
dollars worth of scientific periodicals and books, sending 
them to university and other libraries that had been 
destroyed in the war-first 
to allied countries, later to 
former enemy countries. Zwicky devoted his weekends for 
several years to this task, personally carrying the heavy 
cartons of journals, cataloging, wrapping, and mailing. 
But Zwicky had a second purpose in mind in organizing 
the Library Aid Committee. He said, "A common suppo- 
sition is that activities d this kind require for their 
successful realization large organizations and considerable 
funds." Zwicky wanted to disprove this. He felt that the 
revitalization of democracy depended on "more initiative 
on the part of every individual as such." The book project 
was completed "without recourse to any funds except for , 
a few dollars for wrapping paper, a card index, and some 
expenses for driving a car for the purposes of collecting 
the material." 
Zwicky's point was that there are enough men and women 
of good will to make such projects a success if only they 
are pushed with determination. Availability of funds is 
not a prerequisite. He felt that such projects as the book 
distribution do more for establishing ties of confidence 
between different nations and races than can be achieved 
by speechmaking, legislation, or high-sounding efforts at 
international cooperation. 
Zwicky was concerned with a second type of energy crisis, 
the drying up of spiritual energy: "There exists today no 
subject which would excite the imagination of men in a 
positive way, stimulating a constructive and happy life. 
The universal appeals of religion, art, political freedom, 
and science have faded to the vanishing point." 
Zwicky's perception of the collapse of imaging power and 
its import for the Western World came two decades before 
other futurists finally woke up to its significance. In 1946, 
he wrote: "The world of today is in a state of disorder 
which is in conspicuous contrast to the avowed purposes 
of man . . . the teachings of science, of education, and of 
religion seem to have become lost in an elaborate system 
of hypocrisy in which there is little relation between words 
and actions." 
This was one of the earliest recognitions of the corruption 
of our culture through the distortion of language. 
If a single theme dominates Zwicky's humanistic writings, 
it is the importance of unfettered individual creativity 
and effort. This viewpoint may not be shared by those who 
feel everything worthwhile that remains to be discovered 
or developed will require sizable federal appropriations. 
Zwicky briefly went the grant and contract route but 
decided that the loss of the essence of creativity that was 
implicit in the federal funding system precluded its ever 
leading to any really basic discoveries. He returned to his 
original premise: The world's hopes lie in individual free 
agents, men and women of goqd will who can come 
together and work when the need be, but who form no 
permanent organizations or institutions. 
One might wonder why a person of Zwicky's creative 
stature never attracted large numbers of followers. 
Discipleship was inconsistent with Zwicky's basic views. 
He held that everyone was a genius and that each 
person's life task was to find his own genius, not to follow 
some other genius. "Most individuals just never seem to 
realize that they possess unique potentialities and 
capabilities not to be matched by anybody else and that 
the penalty for not realizing one's genius is frustration 
and unhappiness." 
Our present civilization is built on, and for, only a few 
types of geniuses. This is why so many are frustrated and 
unhappy. This malignancy will remain at the core of 
society until some way is found of restructuring so as to 
allow each person to discover his own innate genius. 
Whether Zwicky's genius was to hear the beat of different 
drummers or whether it was the acuity to hear the 
fainter drummings of the same cosmic drummer that we 
all hear in part, his passing removes from our midst a 
creative source of great originality. With his departure 
the world becomes more homogenized and more mediocre; 
humankind loses a portion of its freedom and its dignity. 
All who knew Zwicky would agree in the appropriateness 
of applying to him that eloquent eulogy first uttered by 
Winston Churchill on learning of the death of Rupert 
Brooke, which was later used at Churchill's own funeral: 
Certainly, we shall not see his like again, and 
these are times when this world has a desperate need 
for Zwicky's particular type of genius. 
-Albert 
G .  Wilson 
Director 
Sociely for Morphological Research 
Zwicky on Zwicky 
Theodore von Karmun was not only a brilliant scientist; 
he UMS also a man who knew his Zwicky, as indicated in 
this brief excerpt from a 1971 interview with Zwicky by 
R. Cargill Hall, historian at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 
I think I was instrumental in talking Millikan into 
getting Von Karman here permanently in 193 1-32 or so, 
and we were really old friends. In all my attempts to get 
physics over into astronomy, engineering over into astron- 
omy, and so on, he supported me heavily. While he was 
Director of the Scientific Advisory Board on the Air Force 
(on my standing with my colleagues I would have never been 
on that), he insisted that I too should be on it. So, he pushed 
that through, and I am indebted to him for that, and also 
later on for having pushed me into the International 
Academy of Astronautics, and so on. And it would have 
been quite impossible if all the hierarchy in power would 
have had their say, because they can not really admit a 
non-conformist like myself. On the other hand, he had his 
little jokes with me. He thought I was treating people too 
abruptly, too roughly, and it would be better not to be that 
rough; but to commemorate this abrasiveness, he said, 
"Now we have an occasion to get you into history, and we 
must devise a unit for the roughness of airplane wings, 
the surfaces of missiles, and so on. The proper thing will 
be to name this unit a Zwicky." But then on second 
thought, he said, "There is no such thing as a whole Zwicky 
except you-that's 
far too excessiveso the practical unit 
will be a micro-Zwicky!" 
ENGINEERING AND SCIENCE 
